# Extracted PDF text — 2026-07-16 — part 7/9
# papers Puls2020_FrontCellDevBiol_NeuroD1+AstrocyteToNeuron+SCI .. Shivdasani2021_Science_regeneration
# anchor per paper: ===== <note-stem> =====

===== Puls2020_FrontCellDevBiol_NeuroD1+AstrocyteToNeuron+SCI =====
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 16 December 2020
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.591883
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
1
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883
Edited by:
Friederike Klempin,
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular
Medicine, Germany
Reviewed by:
Philip John Horner,
Houston Methodist Research Institute,
United States
Paul Lu,
University of California, San Diego,
United States
*Correspondence:
Gong Chen
gongchen@jnu.edu.cn
Hedong Li
hedli@augusta.edu
†These authors share ﬁrst authorship
‡These authors share
senior authorship
§Present address:
Hedong Li,
Department of Neuroscience &
Regenerative Medicine, Medical
College of Georgia at Augusta
University, Augusta, GA, United States
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Stem Cell Research,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental
Biology
Received: 05 August 2020
Accepted: 25 November 2020
Published: 16 December 2020
Citation:
Puls B, Ding Y, Zhang F, Pan M, Lei Z,
Pei Z, Jiang M, Bai Y, Forsyth C,
Metzger M, Rana T, Zhang L, Ding X,
Keefe M, Cai A, Redilla A, Lai M,
He K, Li H and Chen G (2020)
Regeneration of Functional Neurons
After Spinal Cord Injury via in situ
NeuroD1-Mediated
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion.
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 8:591883.
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.591883
Regeneration of Functional Neurons
After Spinal Cord Injury via in situ
NeuroD1-Mediated
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion
Brendan Puls 1†, Yan Ding 1†, Fengyu Zhang 1, Mengjie Pan 1, Zhuofan Lei 1, Zifei Pei 1,
Mei Jiang 1, Yuting Bai 1, Cody Forsyth 1, Morgan Metzger 1, Tanvi Rana 1, Lei Zhang 1,
Xiaoyun Ding 1, Matthew Keefe 1, Alice Cai 1, Austin Redilla 1, Michael Lai 1, Kevin He 1,
Hedong Li 1*‡§ and Gong Chen 1,2*‡
1 Department of Biology, Huck Institutes of Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA,
United States, 2 Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macau Institute of CNS Regeneration, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China
Spinal cord injury (SCI) often leads to impaired motor and sensory functions, partially
because the injury-induced neuronal loss cannot be easily replenished through
endogenous mechanisms. In vivo neuronal reprogramming has emerged as a novel
technology to regenerate neurons from endogenous glial cells by forced expression
of neurogenic transcription factors. We have previously demonstrated successful
astrocyte-to-neuron conversion in mouse brains with injury or Alzheimer’s disease by
overexpressing a single neural transcription factor NeuroD1. Here we demonstrate
regeneration of spinal cord neurons from reactive astrocytes after SCI through AAV
NeuroD1-based gene therapy. We ﬁnd that NeuroD1 converts reactive astrocytes
into neurons in the dorsal horn of stab-injured spinal cord with high efﬁciency
(∼95%). Interestingly, NeuroD1-converted neurons in the dorsal horn mostly acquire
glutamatergic neuronal subtype, expressing spinal cord-speciﬁc markers such as Tlx3
but not brain-speciﬁc markers such as Tbr1, suggesting that the astrocytic lineage
and local microenvironment affect the cell fate after conversion. Electrophysiological
recordings show that the NeuroD1-converted neurons can functionally mature and
integrate into local spinal cord circuitry by displaying repetitive action potentials and
spontaneous synaptic responses. We further show that NeuroD1-mediated neuronal
conversion can occur in the contusive SCI model with a long delay after injury, allowing
future studies to further evaluate this in vivo reprogramming technology for functional
recovery after SCI. In conclusion, this study may suggest a paradigm shift from
classical axonal regeneration to neuronal regeneration for spinal cord repair, using in
vivo astrocyte-to-neuron conversion technology to regenerate functional new neurons
in the gray matter.
Keywords: spinal cord, NeuroD1, astrocyte, neuronal conversion, in vivo reprogramming

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
INTRODUCTION
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating central nervous
system (CNS) disorder and often leads to loss of motor
and sensory functions below the injury site, even paralysis
depending on the severity of the injury (Adams and Hicks, 2005).
The pathophysiological process after SCI is rather complex,
resulting in neuronal loss, neuroinﬂammation, demyelination,
and Wallerian degeneration of the axons (Norenberg et al.,
2004). Reactive astrogliosis is common to CNS injury, and
particularly severe after SCI. Resident astrocytes react to injury-
induced cytokines and dramatically upregulate the expression of
a number of proteins such as the astrocytic marker GFAP and
the neural progenitor markers Nestin and Vimentin (Sofroniew,
2009). These reactive astrocytes also become proliferative and
hypertrophic in cell morphology. In the acute phase of SCI,
reactive astrocytes play important roles in repairing the blood-
spinal cord barrier and restricting the size of the primary injury
(Okada et al., 2006; Herrmann et al., 2008). However, in the
sub-acute or chronic phase, reactive astrocytes constitute the
major component of the glial scar, a dense tissue structure
that is inhibitory to axonal regeneration (Silver and Miller,
2004). Therefore, for decades, substantial eﬀort has been made
to overcome the glial scar and promote regrowth of severed
axons through the injury site (Filous and Schwab, 2017). On
the other hand, the spinal neurons that are lost during and
after the injury need to be replaced in order to rebuild the local
neuronal circuits. In this regard, stem cell transplantation has
been reported to achieve certain success (Tuszynski et al., 2014;
Lu et al., 2017), however the identity of transplanted cells and
restoration of functional circuitry in the injury site still require
further investigation (Goldman, 2016).
In vivo neuronal reprogramming has recently emerged as
a novel technology to regenerate functional new neurons
from endogenous glial cells by overexpressing neurogenic
transcription factors in the CNS (Grande et al., 2013; Niu
et al., 2013; Guo et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2015, 2020; Gascon
et al., 2016; Li and Chen, 2016; Barker et al., 2018; Lei et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020). In the injured spinal
cord, a combination of growth factor treatment and forced
expression of the neurogenic transcription factor Neurogenin 2
(Ngn2) has been reported to stimulate neurogenesis from neural
progenitors (Ohori et al., 2006). However, these newly generated
neurons suﬀer from poor long-term survival. More recently,
the transcription factor Sox2 has been shown to reprogram
astrocytes into proliferating neuroblasts, which require further
treatment with a histone deacetylase inhibitor, valproic acid
(VPA), to diﬀerentiate into mature neurons (Su et al., 2014). With
additional treatment of neurotrophic factors, Sox2-converted
neurons can express several neuronal subtype markers, but
predominately VGluT, a marker for glutamatergic neurons
(Wang et al., 2016).
Our group has previously demonstrated that the neurogenic
transcription factor NeuroD1 can reprogram reactive astrocytes
into functional neurons in the stab-injured brain and in a mouse
model for Alzheimer’s disease (Guo et al., 2014). Following
studies demonstrated that NeuroD1-mediated in vivo astrocyte-
to-neuron conversion can reverse glial scar back to neural tissue
(Zhang et al., 2020) and repair the damaged motor cortex
after ischemic stroke (Chen et al., 2020). More recently, by
combining NeuroD1 and Dlx2 together, we have demonstrated
that astrocytes in the striatum of R6/2 mouse model for
Huntington’s disease can be converted into GABAergic neurons
(Wu et al., 2020). The major goal of the current study is to
determine whether NeuroD1 can reprogram reactive astrocytes
into functional neurons in the injured spinal cord. Using
adeno-associated virus (AAV) for gene delivery and a Cre-
Flex system with GFAP promoter to target reactive astrocytes
speciﬁcally, our results indicate that NeuroD1 can mediate direct
astrocyte-to-neuron conversion with high eﬃciency in both stab
and contusive SCI models. The NeuroD1-converted neurons
preferentially acquire glutamatergic phenotype in the dorsal horn
and express neuronal subtype markers speciﬁc to the spinal
cord such as Tlx3. Patch clamp recordings further demonstrate
that the NeuroD1-converted neurons can functionally mature
and integrate into spinal cord circuitry. Interestingly, combining
NeuroD1 together with Dlx2 also generates more GABAergic
neurons in the spinal cord, similar to that discovered in the brain.
Together, our results indicate that NeuroD1-mediated neuronal
conversion opens an avenue to treat SCI with internal glial cells
through AAV-based gene therapy that may regenerate a diversity
of neuronal subtypes for functional repair.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal Use
GAD-GFP mice (Tg[Gad1-EGFP]94Agmo/J) and wild-type
C57BL/6 mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory and
bred in house. Mice of 2–4 months old (both male and female)
were used. Mice were housed in a 12 h light/dark cycle and
supplied with suﬃcient food and water. All animal use and
studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee (IACUC) of the Pennsylvania State University. All
procedures were carried out in accordance with the approved
protocols and guidelines of National Institute of Health (NIH).
Retrovirus and AAV Production
Retroviral vectors expressing GFP and NeuroD1-GFP under
the CAG promoter (pCAG) were previously described (Guo
et al., 2014). Retrovirus packaging, puriﬁcation and titering were
performed as previously described (Guo et al., 2014). The viral
titers were determined by serial dilution to be ∼1 × 107 genome
copy (GC)/ml.
For AAV-mediated gene expression, the Cre-Flex system was
applied to target transgene expression speciﬁcally to reactive
astrocytes using the human GFAP (hGFAP) promoter. To
generate pAAV-hGFAP::Cre vector, the hGFAP promoter was ﬁrst
ampliﬁed from pDRIVE-hGFAP plasmid (InvivoGen) by PCR
and inserted into pAAV-MCS (Cell Biolab) between the MluI
and SacII sites to replace the CMV promoter. The Cre gene
coding fragment was then similarly subcloned from phGFAP-
Cre (Addgene plasmid #40591) and inserted into pAAV MCS
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
2
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
between the EcoRI and SalI sites. To construct pAAV-FLEX
vectors expressing transgenes, the coding sequences of NeuroD1,
mCherry or GFP were ampliﬁed by PCR from the corresponding
retroviral constructs. The NeuroD1 fragment was fused with
either P2A-mCherry or P2A-GFP and subcloned into the pAAV-
FLEX-GFP vector (Addgene plasmid #28304) between the KpnI
and XhoI sites. All plasmid constructs were conﬁrmed by
sequencing. The AAV-CamKII-GFP plasmid was purchased from
Addgene (#64545). For AAV production, HEK 293T cells were
transfected with the pAAV expression vectors, pAAV9-RC vector
(Cell Biolab), and pHelper vector (Cell Biolab) to generate AAV
particles carrying our transgenes. Three days after transfection,
the cells were scraped in their medium and centrifuged. The
supernatant was then discarded and the cell pellet was frozen
and thawed four times, resuspended in a discontinuous iodixanol
gradient, and centrifuged at 54,000 rpm for 2 h. Finally, the virus-
containing layer was extracted, and the viruses were concentrated
using Millipore Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filters. The viral titers
were determined using the QuickTiterTM AAV Quantitation Kit
(Cell Biolabs) and then diluted to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 ×
1010 GC/ml for injection (except for our GFAP-Cre virus, diluted
to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 × 108 GC/ml).
Laminectomy, Injury, and Stereotaxic Viral
Injection
Mice
were
anesthetized
by
intraperitoneal
injection
of
ketamine/xylazine (80–120 mg/kg ketamine; 10–16 mg/kg
xylazine). A laminectomy was then performed at the T11–T12
vertebrae to expose dorsal surface of the spinal cord, and a stab or
contusion injury was performed. The stab injury was conducted
with a 31-gauge needle at the center of the exposed surface,
0.4 mm lateral to the central artery with a depth of 0.4 mm, while
the contusion injury was generated with a force of 45 kdyn on
an Inﬁnite Horizon Impactor (IH-0400, Precision Systems and
Instrumentation) directly at the center of the exposed surface.
For conversion after stab injury, 1.0 µL of AAV (1 × 1010
GC/ml) was injected using a 50 µl Hamilton syringe with a
34-gauge injection needle at a rate of 0.05 µL/min at the same
coordinates immediately after the stab injury, while retrovirus
(1 × 107 GC/ml) was injected at 4 days post stab injury. For
conversion after contusive injury, AAV (1 × 1010 GC/ml) was
injected at 10 days or 16 weeks following contusion injury and at
1 mm away from the injury site with a depth of 0.4–0.8 mm. The
viral injection needle was kept in place for 3 min after injection
to prevent drawing out the virus during withdrawal. The surgical
area was then treated with antibiotic ointment and the skin was
clipped for a week to allow the skin to re-suture. The mice were
kept on a heating pad and treated with Carprofen for pain relieve
via subcutaneous injection (5 mg/kg) on the day of surgery and
drinking water (10 mg/kg) for 3 days after surgery and closely
monitored for 1 week to ensure full recovery of health.
Electrophysiology
Mice were sacriﬁced at deﬁned time points by anesthetization
with 2.5% Avertin and decapitation. The spinal cord segment
was then removed from the spine into cutting solution (125 mM
NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.3 mM MgSO4, 26 mM NaHCO3, 1.25 mM
NaH2PO4, 2.0 mM CaCl2, and 10 mM glucose adjusted to pH
7.4 and 295 mOsm/L and bubbled for 1 h with 95% O2/5%
CO2) cooled on ice, where it was encased in an agarose
matrix (Sigma) and cut into 300 µm thickness slices using
a VT3000 vibratome (Leica). Slices were then incubated for
1 h in holding solution (92 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.25 mM
NaH2PO4, 30 mM NaHCO3, 20 mM HEPES, 15 mM glucose,
12 mM N-Acetyl-L-cysteine, 5 mM Sodium ascorbate, 2 mM
Thiourea, 3 mM Sodium pyruvate, 2 mM MgSO4, and 2 mM
CaCl2, adjusted to pH 7.4 and 295 mOsm/L and bubbled
continuously with 95% O2/5% CO2) at room temperature before
patch-clamp recording in standard ACSF (125 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM
KCl, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 26 mM NaHCO3, 1.3 MgSO4, 2.5 mM
CaCl2, and 10 mM glucose adjusted to pH 7.4 and 295 mOsm/L
and bubbled for 1 h with 95% O2/5% CO2). Both native and
converted cells were recorded by whole-cell recording using
standard inner solution (135 mM K-gluconate, 10 mM KCl,
5 mM Na-phosphocreatine, 10 mM HEPES, 2 mM EGTA, 4 mM
MgATP, and 0.5 mM Na2GTP, adjusted to pH 7.4 and 295
mOsm/L) with the membrane potential held at −70 mV. Typical
values for the pipette and total series resistances were 2–10 and
20–60 M, respectively. Data were collected using the pClamp 9
software (Molecular Devices) by sampling at 10 kHz and ﬁltering
at 1 kHz. Data were then analyzed and plotted with the Clampﬁt
9.0 software (Molecular Devices).
Immunohistochemistry,
Immunocytochemistry, and Microscopy
After perfusion, the target region of the spinal cord (∼0.5 cm in
length) was surgically dissected, ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde
(PFA) in PBS for 1 day, dehydrated in 30% sucrose solution for 1
day, and sectioned into 30 µm coronal or horizontal slices using
a Leica CM1950 cryostat. The slices were collected serially in
24-well plates so that distance from the injury site could later
be ascertained. The samples were then stored at 4◦C in 0.02%
sodium azide (NaN3) in PBS to prevent bacterial degradation.
Spinal cord slices were chosen for immunohistochemistry based
on infection of the dorsal horn by inspecting the reporter protein
(mCherry or GFP) in the storage solution under a ﬂuorescent
microscope. For the stab injury experiments, care was taken to
select coronal slices at least 100 µm from the injury site to ensure
tissue integrity. On the ﬁrst day of staining, samples were washed
in PBS three times for 5 min per wash, permeablized with 2%
Triton X-100 in PBS for 20 min, and blocked using a 5% normal
donkey serum (NDS) and 0.1% Triton-X in PBS for 2 h to reduce
non-speciﬁc binding of the antibodies. The samples were then
incubated with primary antibodies diluted in the same blocking
buﬀer at 4◦C for two nights to allow thorough penetration of
the antibodies. On the third day, the samples were recovered to
room temperature, washed in PBS three times for 5 min per wash,
and incubated with secondary antibodies diluted in blocking
buﬀer for 1 h. Finally, the samples were washed in PBS three
more times for 10 min per wash and mounted on glass slides
with coverslips using anti-fading mounting solution (Invitrogen).
The immunostained samples were examined and imaged using
Olympus FV1200 and Zeiss LSM 800 laser confocal microscopes.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
3
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
Z-stacks were collected for the in vivo images for the whole
thickness of the samples and maximum intensity and z-stack
projections were used for image preparation and analysis.
Quantiﬁcation and Data Analysis
As a result of our carefully selected injection coordinates
described above, infected cells were mostly found in the dorsal
horn of the spinal cord, Rexed laminae 1-6 (Rexed, 1954). For
most of the quantiﬁcation, including cell conversion and NeuN
acquisition, cells were counted if they appeared in any part of this
region. For quantiﬁcation based on cell subtype (Figures 3, 4),
cells were only counted if they appeared in Rexed laminae 1-3,
centered about the substantia gelatinosa, a region dominated by
small, excitatory interneurons and easily demarcated due to its
high cell density (Santos et al., 2007). This region was chosen for
its ease of demarcation and so that a consistent local population
of neuronal subtypes could be expected from sample to sample.
Quantiﬁcation was performed on collected images using the z-
stacked images as a guide and the layered stacks to check the
vertical dimension. Strict background cutoﬀs for positive signals
were calculated for each channel as three times the average
background intensity for the relevant tissue and antibody. Cells
were binned by presence (i.e., above the background cutoﬀ)
or absence (i.e., below the background cutoﬀ) for each marker
in question, using the viral ﬂuorophore (mCherry or GFP)
to identify infected cells and DAPI to conﬁrm each cell for
counting. To estimate the total number of converted neurons
per infection for our contusion experiments, we multiplied the
average number of NeuN+ neurons among the infected cells per
horizontal section, calculated from one dorsal, one central, and
one ventral section, by the total number of horizontal sections
per sample. While this might over estimate the number of cells,
it gives a rough estimate of the number of converted neurons
in the infected areas. All quantiﬁcation was performed on three
biological replicates per data point and is reported as the means
and standard deviations of the three replicates.
RESULTS
NeuroD1 Reprograms Reactive Astrocytes
Into Neurons in the Injured Spinal Cord
We previously demonstrated that expressing NeuroD1 in reactive
astrocytes after brain injury can directly convert astrocytes into
neurons (Guo et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). In
this study, we investigated whether such in vivo direct conversion
technology can regenerate functional new neurons in injured
spinal cord. To target the dividing reactive astrocytes after injury,
we employed retroviruses that mainly express ectopic genes in
dividing cells but not in neurons, which cannot divide. We
injected NeuroD1-expressing retroviruses at 4 days post-stab
injury (dpi), when many dividing reactive astrocytes have been
detected (Chen et al., 2008; Hong et al., 2014), and analyzed
samples at 1, 3, and 6 weeks post-injection (wpi) (Figure 1A).
In this study, we chose the spinal cord dorsal horn as our major
region of interest because it is composed of both excitatory and
inhibitory neurons and is critical to aﬀerent sensory information
processing (Figure 1B). We are currently investigating motor
neuron regeneration in the spinal cord ventral horn in a
separate study. We ﬁrst explored the cell types infected by our
control CAG::GFP retroviruses. At 1 wpi, we found that the
control GFP retroviruses infected a mixture of glial cell types
including reactive astrocytes (GFAP+ and some GFAP+/Olig2+),
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) (Olig2+), and microglia
(Iba1+) (Figures 1C,D), but not NeuN+ neurons (Figure 1D).
In contrast, cells infected by the CAG::NeuroD1-GFP retrovirus
showed an increasing number of NeuN+ cells with neuronal
morphology over time (Figure 1E), and quantitatively reached
93.5% at 6 wpi (Figure 1F), indicating a successful glia-to-neuron
conversion in the injured spinal cord.
While retrovirus has the advantage to target only dividing
glial cells for conversion, avoiding non-dividing neurons, such
advantage also limits its capability to convert non-dividing glial
cells into neurons. In order to move our in vivo reprogramming
technology toward clinical settings in the future, we adopted an
AAV gene delivery system in which the transgene expression is
controlled by an astrocyte-speciﬁc GFAP promoter to target both
dividing and non-dividing glial cells (Figure 2A). Speciﬁcally,
we used a Cre-Flex gene expression system, which contains
two AAV vectors, with one encoding GFAP-Cre and the other
encoding the transgene in reverse form ﬂanked by double
LoxP sites (FLEX vector) (Atasoy et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2015;
Chen et al., 2020). Thus, when the two AAVs are co-injected
into the spinal cord, Cre recombinase will be expressed in
the infected reactive astrocytes and turn on the transgene
expression in FLEX vector by ﬂipping the transgene sequence
into the correct form for transcription (Figure 2B). We ﬁrst
conﬁrmed the speciﬁcity of the Cre-Flex AAV system in the
spinal cord by co-injecting AAV GFAP::Cre and AAV FLEX-
CAG::mCherry (or::GFP) into the stab-injured dorsal horn.
The control virus infected cells were mostly GFAP+, NeuN−
astrocytes at 4 wpi (Figure 2C). Next, we co-injected AAV
GFAP::Cre
with
AAV
FLEX-CAG::NeuroD1-P2A-mCherry
into the stab-injured dorsal horn. In contrast to the control
AAV,
the
NeuroD1-mCherry
infected
cells
were
mostly
NeuN+/GFAP−neurons with clear neuronal morphology at 4
wpi (Figure 2D). NeuroD1 overexpression in the infected cells
was conﬁrmed by immunostaining (Supplementary Figure 1).
Interestingly, besides NeuN+/GFAP−converted neurons, we
also observed many NeuroD1-AAV-infected cells at 2 wpi with
co-immunostaining of both GFAP+ and NeuN+ (Figure 2E),
suggesting a potential intermediate stage during astrocyte-
to-neuron
conversion.
We
termed
these
GFAP+/NeuN+
cells induced by NeuroD1 expression in astrocytes as “AtN
transitional cells.” We did not observe any such transitional
cells in the control mCherry-infected spinal cord after injury,
suggesting that AtN conversion does not happen following
neural injury but can be induced by ectopic expression of
transcription factors such as NeuroD1. Quantitative analysis
revealed that the control AAV-infected cells were mostly
GFAP+ astrocytes by 8 wpi (Figure 2F, left red bar), whereas
NeuroD1 AAV-infected cells showed a progressive increase
in the percentage of neurons (NeuN+/GFAP−, blue bar
in Figure 2F) from 2 to 8 wpi, reaching ∼95% at 8 wpi
(Figure 2F, right blue bar). Note that at 2 wpi, over 60%
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
4
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
FIGURE 1 | Neuronal conversion induced by NeuroD1-expressing retroviruses after stab injury in the spinal cord dorsal horn. (A) Experiment paradigm. (B) Schematic
illustration of dorsal horn injury and viral injection, together with an actual viral infection image. Coordinates are 0.4 mm lateral of the central artery and 0.4 mm below
the tissue surface. Stab injury was performed with a 32-guage needle followed by stereotaxic injection at the injury site. Scale bar, 500 µm. (C) Three main types of
proliferating glial cells at 1 wpi after injection of control retrovirus expressing GFP alone: astrocytes (GFAP), OPCs (Olig2), and microglia (Iba1). Scale bar, 50 µm. (D)
Quantiﬁcation based on staining for control retrovirus GFP at 1 wpi. Bars show the mean and standard deviation of three replicates. (E) NeuroD1-GFP-infected cells in
the dorsal horn at 1, 3, and 6 wpi after retroviruses expressing NeuroD1-GFP. NeuroD1-GFP-infected cells gradually acquired more and more NeuN signal. Arrows
show example NeuN+ cells. Scale bar, 500 µm. (F) Quantiﬁcation based on staining for retroviruses expressing NeuroD1-GFP. Bars show the mean and standard
deviation of three replicates.
of NeuroD1-infected cells were GFAP+/NeuN+ transitional
cells (green bar in Figure 2F), which gradually decreased at 4
wpi and 8 wpi together with a decrease of GFAP+ astrocytes
(red bar in Figure 2F) among the NeuroD1-infected cell
population. Further analysis showed that neither transitional
cells nor converted neurons exhibited signiﬁcant cell death
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
5
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
suggesting that apoptosis does not play a signiﬁcant role
during
the
NeuroD1-mediated
cell
conversion
process
(Supplementary Figure 2).
Comparing
to
Ngn2-mediated
or Ascl1-mediated AtN conversion (Gascon et al., 2016), less
apoptosis was detected during NeuroD1-mediated conversion
process, which may suggest that diﬀerent transcription factors
act through diﬀerent signaling and metabolic pathways to carry
out cell conversion.
NeuroD1 Converts Dorsal Spinal
Astrocytes Into Tlx3+ Glutamatergic
Neurons
After demonstrating astrocyte-to-neuron conversion in the
spinal cord, we next investigated which subtypes of neurons
were generated through NeuroD1-mediated conversion. The
dorsal horn of the spinal cord contains two main neuronal
subtypes: glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons (Abraira and
Ginty, 2013). During spinal cord development, two transcription
factors, Tlx3 and Pax2, appear to play critical roles in determining
cell fate speciﬁcation in the dorsal horn (Cheng et al., 2005;
Huang et al., 2008). Interestingly, by examining AAV NeuroD1-
GFP-infected cells in the dorsal horn at 8 wpi, we found that
the majority of NeuroD1-converted neurons were Tlx3+ (62.6
± 3.3%), suggesting a majority glutamatergic neuronal subtype
(Figure 3A). In contrast, only a small percentage of NeuroD1-
converted neurons in the dorsal horn were Pax2+ (8.8 ± 1.3%),
suggesting a minority GABAergic neuronal subtype (Figure 3A).
Because AAV might infect a small proportion of neurons
(Figure 2F, control), we further examined retrovirus NeuroD1-
GFP-infected cells in the dorsal horn at 6 wpi and found
that, similar to our AAV experiments, the retrovirus NeuroD1-
converted neurons were mainly Tlx3+ (50.3 ± 17.0%), with a
minority being Pax2+ (16.4 ± 4.3%) (Figure 3B; quantiﬁed in
Figure 3C). These results suggest that the majority of NeuroD1-
converted neurons in the dorsal horn of spinal cord are Tlx3+
neurons, with a small proportion being Pax2+ neurons.
We further conﬁrmed the neuronal subtypes after NeuroD1
conversion using AAV CaMKII-GFP to identify glutamatergic
neurons and GAD-GFP transgenic mice to identify GABAergic
neurons. When co-injecting AAV GFAP::Cre and Flex-NeuroD1-
mCherry together with AAV CaMKII::GFP (Dittgen et al.,
2004), we observed 89.5 ± 5.2% (n = 3) of GFP+ cells co-
expressing Tlx3+, conﬁrming that these Tlx3+ neurons are
indeed glutamatergic (Figure 3D). Many NeuroD1-mCherry
converted
neurons
were
also
colocalizing
with
CaMKII-
GFP (Figure 3D), suggesting that they were glutamatergic
neurons. When injecting AAV GFAP::Cre and Flex-NeuroD1-
mCherry in GAD-GFP mice (Ma et al., 2006), in which
GABAergic neurons are genetically labeled with GFP, we did
not observe GAD-GFP co-expression with Tlx3+ (n = 3),
as expected. Indeed, in the dorsal horn of spinal cord in
uninjured and untreated mice, we observed that the CaMKII-
GFP co-stained consistently with endogenous Tlx3+ while
GAD-GFP co-stained with Pax2+ (Supplementary Figure 3).
Therefore, the majority of NeuroD1-converted neurons in the
dorsal horn of the spinal cord are glutamatergic neurons,
consistent with our ﬁndings in the mouse cortex (Chen et al.,
2020).
Dlx2 Combined With NeuroD1 Increases
the Conversion of Dorsal Spinal Astrocytes
Into Pax2+ GABAergic Neurons
Having generated a majority of glutamatergic neurons using
NeuroD1 alone in the spinal cord, we further investigated
whether it’s possible to increase the proportion of GABAergic
neurons by combining NeuroD1 with other transcription
factors. In a separate study on Huntington’s disease, we
have discovered that combining NeuroD1 and Dlx2 together
can successfully convert striatal astrocytes into GABAergic
neurons (Wu et al., 2020). Dlx2 is a transcription factor that
has been reported to play a signiﬁcant role in GABAergic
neuron speciﬁcation and maturation during brain development
(Anderson et al., 1999; McKinsey et al., 2013; Victor et al.,
2014; Yang et al., 2017; Pla et al., 2018). Therefore, we
injected a 1:1 ratio of AAV5 FLEX-NeuroD1-mCherry and
AAV5 FLEX-Dlx2-mCherry in combination with AAV5-GFAP-
Cre (Figure 4; n = 3). We ﬁrst conﬁrmed the co-expression of
NeuroD1 and Dlx2 with immunostaining after viral infection
(Figure 4A). Immunostaining experiments demonstrated that
many NeuroD1+Dlx2-converted neurons were Tlx3+ or Pax2+
neurons (Figure 4B). Quantitative analysis revealed that 32.5 ±
2.1% of NeuroD1+Dlx2-converted neurons were Pax2+ neurons
(Figure 4C), a 5-fold increase compared to that generated by
NeuroD1 alone (6.3%; p = 0.05, Kruskal-Wallis H-test). The
percentage of Tlx3+ neurons generated by NeuroD1 + Dlx2
was 56.2 ± 3.4% (Figure 4C). Importantly, the GABAergic
identity of our NeuroD1+Dlx2-converted neurons was further
conﬁrmed in GAD-GFP mice, where we observed co-localization
of NeuroD1+Dlx2-converted neurons were both Pax2+ and
GAD-GFP+ (Figure 4D; n = 3; 4 wpi). These results suggest
that the ratio of newly converted Tlx3+ vs. Pax2+ neurons in
the dorsal horn of spinal cord can be determined through the
combinations of NeuroD1 and Dlx2 transcription factors.
NeuroD1-Converted Neurons Express
Region-Speciﬁc Neuronal Subtype
Markers
While NeuroD1-converted neurons appear to be mainly
glutamatergic neurons in both the mouse cortex and spinal
cord, we further investigated whether they are the same type
of glutamatergic neurons or not. For this purpose, we injected
the same AAV GFAP::Cre and AAV FLEX-NeuroD1-mCherry
into the mouse M1 motor cortex and the spinal cord, and then
performed a serial immunostaining using both cortical neuronal
markers (FoxG1 and Tbr1) and spinal neuronal markers (Tlx3
and Pax2) at 4 wpi (Figure 5). The majority of NeuroD1-
infected cells were converted into neurons in both the brain
and the spinal cord at 4 wpi (Figures 5A,C). Strikingly, when
we compared the neuronal subtypes resulting from NeuroD1-
mediated conversion in the brain vs. the spinal cord side-by-
side, a distinct pattern emerged: the converted neurons in the
mouse cortex acquired cortical neuron markers such as FoxG1
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
6
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
FIGURE 2 | Neuronal conversion using AAV9 NeuroD1 viruses after stab injury in the spinal cord dorsal horn. (A) Experiment paradigm. (B) AAV9 GFAP::Cre and
AAV9 FLEX-NeuroD1-mCherry system (abbreviated elsewhere as AAV9 ND1-mCh). GFAP promoter restricts infected cells to astrocytes. Control virus replaces the
NeuroD1 transgene with an additional mCherry. (C) Infected astrocytes in the dorsal horn at 4 wpi after control AAV9 mCherry injection. Arrows and inset show an
example of mCherry-infected GFAP+ astrocyte. Scale bar, 50 µm. (D) AAV9 NeuroD1-mCherry-infected cells became converted neurons in the dorsal horn at 4 wpi
after viral injection. Arrows and inset show an example of NeuroD1-mCherry-labeled NeuN+ cell. Scale bar, 50 µm. (E) A transitional cell (arrows and inset) captured
during astrocyte-to-neuron conversion process that shows both GFAP+ and NeuN+ signals at early time point of 2 weeks after NeuroD1-mCherry infection. Scale bar,
50 µm. (F) Quantiﬁcation data based on GFAP and NeuN staining for control or NeuroD1-infected cells at different time points (2, 4, and 8 wpi). Bars show the mean
and standard deviation of three replicates. Infected cells at 2 wpi are mostly transitional, staining positive for both NeuN and GFAP. By 4 wpi, NeuroD1-infected cells
are mostly converted neurons, staining positive for only NeuN.
(66.1 ± 14.3%) and Tbr1 (17.1 ± 1.9%), but not spinal neuron
markers such as Tlx3 (0%) or Pax2 (0%) (Figures 5A,B); in
contrast, the converted neurons in the spinal cord acquired spinal
neuron markers Tlx3 (46.4 ± 2.2%) and Pax2 (4.2 ± 0.3%),
but not cortical neuron markers FoxG1 (0%) or Tbr1 (0.6 ±
0.5%) (Figures 5C,D). Morphologically, the converted neurons
in the brain resembled cortical pyramidal neurons with larger
cell bodies (Figure 5A), while those in the spinal cord resembled
dorsal horn interneurons with smaller cell bodies (Figure 5C).
The relative lower percentage of Tbr1+ cells among the converted
neurons in the cortex suggest that the newly converted neurons
may not be mature enough at 4 wpi and may take longer time to
fully acquire their neuronal identity. These distinct diﬀerences in
the neuronal identity after conversion by the same transcription
factor in the brain vs. the spinal cord suggest that the glial cell
lineage, here cortical lineage vs. spinal lineage, as well as the local
environment may exert an important inﬂuence on the resulting
subtypes of converted neurons.
NeuroD1-Converted Neurons Are
Physiologically Functional
To
test
the
functionality
and
circuit-integration
of
NeuroD1-converted
neurons,
we
performed
patch-clamp
electrophysiological
recordings
of
native
and
converted
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
7
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
FIGURE 3 | Subtypes of NeuroD1-converted neurons in the spinal cord dorsal horn. (A) Tlx3 (glutamatergic) and Pax2 (GABAergic) subtype staining for converted
neurons in the dorsal horn at 8 wpi after AAV9 NeuroD1-GFP injection. Z-projection targets an example of Tlx3+ neuron. Scale bar, 50 µm. (B) Tlx3 and Pax2 subtype
staining for converted neurons in the dorsal horn 6 wpi after retrovirus ND1-GFP injection. Z-projection targets an example of Pax2+ neuron. Scale bar, 50 µm. (C)
Quantiﬁcation based on subtype staining after AAV9 ND1-GFP (8 wpi) or retrovirus ND1-GFP (6 wpi) conversion. Control data is based on NeuN+ cells in uninjured,
untreated tissue. Bars show the mean and standard deviation of three replicates. Kruskal-Wallis H-tests show no signiﬁcant difference in % of Tlx3+ or Pax2+ neurons
between the non-injured control and the retrovirus ND1-GFP groups (p > 0.05). Kruskal-Wallis H-tests show no signiﬁcant difference in % of Tlx3+ neurons (p > 0.05)
but a signiﬁcant difference in % of Pax2+ neurons between the non-injured control and the AAV9 ND1-GFP groups (*p < 0.05). (D) AAV9 ND1-mCherry and
CaMK2-GFP co-injection showed strong (89.5 ± 5.2%; n = 3) co-labeling of CaMK2 for converted Tlx3+ neurons at 4 wpi. Z-projection targets an example of Tlx3+,
CaMK2+ neuron. Scale bar, 50 µm.
neurons on spinal cord slices from mice sacriﬁced at 8–10 wpi
(Figure 6A). The converted neurons could generate repetitive
action potentials (Figure 6B) and displayed large Na+ and K+
currents (Figure 6C). Moreover, we detected robust spontaneous
EPSCs from the NeuroD1-converted neurons (Figure 6D).
Quantitatively, we found that the NeuroD1-converted neurons
showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in Na+ currents (Figure 6E)
and spontaneous EPSCs from their neighboring native neurons
(Figure 6F). Immunostaining with a series of synaptic markers
including SV2 and VGlut1/VGlut2 further conﬁrmed that the
NeuroD1-converted neurons were surrounded by numerous
synaptic puncta with many of them directly innervating the
neuronal soma and dendrites (Figures 6G,H, cyan and yellow
dots). Finally, cFos, an immediate early gene that is typically
activated by neuronal activity during functional tasks, was clearly
detected in some of the NeuroD1-converted neurons, indicating
that they were functionally active in the local spinal cord circuits
(Figure 6I). Altogether, our results demonstrate that NeuroD1
can reprogram reactive astrocytes into functional neurons in the
dorsal horn of the injured spinal cord.
NeuroD1-Mediated Cell Conversion in the
Contusive SCI Model
To move closer toward clinical situations, we evaluated
NeuroD1-mediated neuronal conversion in the contusive SCI
model. Compared with stab injury, contusive injury creates a
much more severe injury environment, which could aﬀect the
eﬃciency of neuronal conversion and the survival of converted
neurons. We therefore performed two experiments to test our
AAV GFAP::Cre and Flex-NeuroD1-GFP system after contusive
SCI: one short-delay injection to test our treatment as a response
to acute injury (Figure 7) and one long-delay injection to
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
8
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
FIGURE 4 | Combining Dlx2 together with NeuroD1 generated more GABAergic neurons in the spinal cord dorsal horn. (A) Immunostaining conﬁrmed the
overexpression of both NeuroD1 and Dlx2 at 4 wpi following AAV5 NeuroD1-mCherry + AAV5 Dlx2-mCherry infection (1:1 ratio of 1 × 1010 GC/ml AAV5
NeuroD1-mCherry and 1 × 1010 GC/ml AAV5 Dlx2-mCherry mixed 9:1 with 1 × 109 GC/ml AAV5 GFAP-Cre for a ﬁnal titer of 5 × 109 GC/ml AAV5
NeuroD1-mCherry, 5 × 109 GC/ml Dlx2-mCherry, 1 × 108 GC/ml AAV5 GFAP-Cre; 1 µL of virus mixture injected per mouse). Scale bar, 50 µm. (B) Tlx3 and Pax2
staining for converted neurons in the dorsal horn at 4 wpi after NeuroD1 and Dlx2 infection. Z-projections target example of Tlx3+ or Pax2+ neurons. Scale bar,
50 µm. (C) Quantitative comparison of Tlx3 and Pax2 subtype staining between neurons converted by NeuroD1 alone (4 wpi) or NeuroD1 + Dlx2 (4 wpi). Bars show
the mean ± S.D. (n = 3 replicates). Kruskal-Wallis H-tests show signiﬁcant differences in % Tlx3+ and % Pax2+ between the two groups (*p < 0.05). (D)
Co-immunostaining showing co-localization of NeuroD1+Dlx2-converted neurons (mCherry+) together with Pax2 and GAD-GFP at 4 wpi (n = 3). Z-projection targets
an example of converted neuron being Pax2+ and GAD+. Scale bar, 50 µm.
test our treatment as a response to chronic injury (Figure 8).
The advantage of the short-delay experiment is to maximize
infection rate by taking advantage of the post-injury proliferation
of reactive astrocytes, while the advantage of the long-delay
experiment is to maximize the neuronal survival after conversion
by allowing injury-induced neuroinﬂammation to taper down
and minimize the secondary eﬀects of the contusion injury.
In our short-delay experiment, viral injection was conducted
at 10 days post-contusive injury and tissues were collected at
6 weeks post-viral infection (Figure 7A). Viral injections were
performed 1 mm away from the contusion site to avoid the injury
core (Figure 7B). The injury core is apparent after contusion
and is characterized by the loss of NeuN+ neuronal cell bodies
(Figure 7C, labeled by ∗). Viral injection at 10 days post-
contusion resulted in many GFP+ cells surrounding the injury
core in both control GFP and NeuroD1-GFP groups (Figure 7C),
indicating good infection rate and survival of the AAV-infected
cells in the contusive SCI model. On the other hand, the AAV
NeuroD1-GFP infected cells showed a dramatic morphological
diﬀerence from the control GFP group (Figure 7C). As illustrated
in the enlarged images in Figure 7C, the GFP infected cells in
the control group showed typical astrocytic morphology and
colocalization with GFAP signal (magenta), but rarely showed
any colocalization with the neuronal marker NeuN (red). In
contrast, NeuroD1-GFP infected cells were often colocalized
with NeuN but rarely colocalized with GFAP (Figure 7C),
indicating successful neuronal conversion. Quantitatively, we
counted the total number of converted neurons to be ∼2,000 cells
surrounding the lesion core areas (Figure 7D). The eﬃciency
of NeuroD1-mediated neuronal conversion in the short-delay
experiment as measured by NeuN immunoreactivity was ∼55%
(Figure 7E), while the remaining cells were mostly GFAP+
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
9
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
FIGURE 5 | Region-speciﬁc subtypes of NeuroD1-converted neurons in the brain vs. the spinal cord. (A) Subtype staining for converted neurons in the cortex 4 wpi
after AAV9 NeuroD1-mCherry injection. Arrows show examples of cells positive for each subtype. Scale bar, 50 µm. (B) Quantiﬁcation based on subtype staining in
the cortex for AAV9 NeuroD1-mCherry samples (4 wpi). Bars show the mean ± S.D. (n = 3 replicates). (C) Subtype staining for converted neurons in the spinal cord
dorsal horn 4 wpi after AAV9 NeuroD1-mCherry injection. Arrows show examples of cells positive for each subtype. Scale bar, 50 µm. (D) Quantiﬁcation based on
subtype staining in the spinal cord for AAV9 NeuroD1-mCherry samples (4 wpi). Bars show the mean ± S.D. (n = 3 replicates).
(Figure 7F). In contrast, the GFP-infected cells were mostly
GFAP+ astrocytes and rarely NeuN+ neurons (only 3.9% NeuN+
in GFP group) (Figures 7E,F).
In our long-delay experiment, viral injection was conducted
at 4 months post-contusive injury, when glial scar has been
well formed after contusion, and tissues were collected at
10 weeks post-viral infection (Figure 8A). As in the short-
delay experiment, the injury core was apparent after contusion
and characterized by the loss of NeuN+ signal (Figure 8B,
labeled by ∗). In the control AAV GFP alone group, the viral
infected cells were mainly S100b+ astrocytes (Figure 8C), but
rarely showed any NeuN+ signal (Figure 8D, top row). In
contrast, the majority of NeuroD1-GFP infected cells were
converted into NeuN+ neurons (Figure 8D, bottom row;
quantiﬁed in Figure 8E). The NeuroD1-mediated conversion
eﬃciency reached >95% (Figure 8E). We observed mature
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
10
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
FIGURE 6 | Functionality of NeuroD1-converted neurons in the spinal cord dorsal horn. (A) Representative image of a NeuroD1-converted neuron for patch-clamp
recording in spinal cord slices. (B) Sample action potentials of a converted neuron. (C) Sample Na+ and K+ currents of a converted neuron. (D) Sample EPSCs of a
converted neuron. (E) Na+ current amplitudes for converted and native neurons. Student’s two-tailed T-test shows no signiﬁcant difference between the two groups
(p > 0.5). (F) EPSC amplitudes and frequencies for converted and native neurons. Student’s two-tailed T-tests show no signiﬁcant difference between the two groups
(p > 0.5). (G) Synaptic SV2 and VGluT1 puncta observed on converted neurons in the dorsal horn at 8 wpi after AAV9 NeuroD1-GFP injection. Arrows and inset show
puncta on the soma and processes. Scale bar, 50 µm. (H) Synaptic SV2 and VGluT2 puncta on converted neurons in the dorsal horn 8 wpi after AAV9 NeuroD1-GFP
injection. Arrows and inset show puncta on the soma and processes. Scale bar, 50 µm. (I) Integration of converted neurons into local network in the dorsal horn 8 wpi
after AAV9 ND1-GFP injection. Activated neurons indicated by c-Fos staining were only a small subset of all neurons. C-Fos staining was performed at 2 h after mouse
exercised for 15 min on a running wheel.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
11
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
FIGURE 7 | NeuroD1 converts reactive astrocytes into neurons around the injury core with a short delay of viral injection after contusive SCI. (A) Experimental design
showing viral injection at 10 days post a contusive SCI (30 Kdyn force). Spinal cords were analyzed at 6 weeks post viral infection. (B) Schematic drawing shows viral
injection position: 1 mm anterior of the contusion site, 0.4 mm lateral of the central artery, and from 0.8 mm to 0.4 mm below the tissue surface. (C) Many infected cells
survived around the injury core (indicated by *) and showing distinct cellular morphology between the two groups. Immunostaining of the neuronal markers GFAP and
NeuN indicates successful neuronal conversion from reactive astrocytes by NeuroD1-GFP. Scale bars, 1 mm at overview, 50 µm at low-mag, 20 µm at high-mag. (D)
Quantiﬁed number of converted neurons per infection (i.e., the average number of both GFP+ and NeuN+ cells per horizontal section calculated from one dorsal, one
central, and one ventral section, and then multiplied by the total number of horizontal sections per sample). Kruskal-Wallis H-test shows a signiﬁcant difference
between the two groups (n = 3 for each group; p = 0.05). (E) Quantiﬁed NeuN+ signal at 6 wpi. Kruskal-Wallis H-test shows a signiﬁcant difference between the two
groups (n = 3 for each group; p = 0.05). (F) GFAP staining shows a signiﬁcant decrease in the number of astrocytes after NeuroD1 conversion at 6 wpi.
Kruskal-Wallis H-test shows a signiﬁcant difference between the two groups (n = 3 for each group; p = 0.05).
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
12
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
FIGURE 8 | NeuroD1-mediated neuronal conversion with a long delay of viral injection after contusive SCI. (A) Experimental design showing viral injection at 16 weeks
after a contusive SCI (30 Kdyn force). The spinal cords were analyzed at 10 weeks post viral infection. (B) Many infected cells survived around the injury core
(indicated by *) and showing distinct cellular morphology between the two groups. Scale bar, 1 mm. (C) Co-expression of the astrocyte marker S100b in control AAV
GFP-infected cells. Scale bar, 50 µm. (D) Immunostaining of the neuronal marker NeuN indicates successful neuronal conversion from reactive astrocytes by
NeuroD1-GFP with high efﬁciency. Scale bar, 50 µm. (E) Quantiﬁed neuronal conversion efﬁciency (95.6 ± 5.1%) at 10 wpi. Kruskal-Wallis H-test shows a signiﬁcant
difference between the two groups (n = 4 for the NeuroD1-GFP group and n = 3 for the GFP group; p = 0.034). (F) Co-expression of NeuroD1 protein in the
NeuroD1-GFP-infected cells. Scale bar, 20 µm. (G) Co-expression of synaptic marker SV2 on the NeuroD1-GFP+ cells. (H) Co-expression of the neuronal activity
marker c-Fos in the NeuroD1-GFP+ cells. Scale bar, 20 µm. (I) Co-expression of the glutamatergic subtype marker Tlx3 in NeuroD1-GFP+ neurons in the spinal cord
dorsal horn. Arrows show an example Tlx3+ cell. Scale bar, 20 µm.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
13
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
neuronal morphology including longer and more branching
processes at this late time point and conﬁrmed NeuroD1
overexpression in the NeuroD1-GFP infected cells (Figure 8F).
Furthermore, NeuroD1-converted neurons at 10 wpi were
surrounded by many synaptic puncta (SV2) with some of
them directly innervating the soma and dendrites (Figure 8G,
yellow dots). We also identiﬁed c-Fos+ cells among NeuroD1-
converted neurons (Figure 8H), indicating that they were able
to integrate into the local spinal cord functional circuitry.
Lastly, some of the NeuroD1-converted neurons in the contusive
SCI model at 10 wpi showed glutamatergic subtype through
expression of Tlx3 in the dorsal horn (Figure 8I), consistent
with our stab injury model. Altogether, these results indicate
that NeuroD1 overexpression can reprogram reactive astrocytes
into functional neurons after contusive SCI under both acute
and chronic treatment conditions, with higher conversion
eﬃciency achieved after glial scar formation. This clinically
relevant model can be used in future studies to further
test functional improvement after SCI using in vivo cell
conversion technology.
DISCUSSION
In this study, we have demonstrated in diﬀerent SCI models
that overexpression of NeuroD1 in the reactive astrocytes can
convert them into Tlx3-positive glutamatergic neurons in the
dorsal horn of injured spinal cord. Other ongoing studies
are also testing diﬀerent transcription factors to reprogram
spinal astrocytes into GABAergic neurons or motor neurons
in the ventral horn. Using AAV Cre-Flex system, we eﬃciently
reprogrammed reactive astrocytes after stab injury in the dorsal
horn of spinal cord into functional neurons that integrate into the
local synaptic network. Importantly, we also observed eﬃcient
NeuroD1-mediated neuronal conversion in a contusive SCI
model making this technique a potential intervention to treat
SCI by regenerating functional new neurons in the gray matter.
The NeuroD1-converted neurons in the dorsal horn of injured
spinal cord were Tlx3+ glutamatergic spinal neurons, but not
Tbr1+ cortical neurons, indicating regional speciﬁcity of in vivo
reprogramming. The fact that the same neural transcription
factor NeuroD1 can convert cortical astrocytes into cortical
neurons and spinal astrocytes into spinal neurons may hold the
key to region-speciﬁc neural repair by using internal glial cells
for neuroregeneration. In contrast, transplantation of external
cells does not have this advantage of intrinsic cell lineage
with region-speciﬁcity.
AAV Gene Delivery System for Neuronal
Conversion
We have accomplished successful NeuroD1-mediated neuronal
conversion with retroviral vectors in this study and previous
studies (Guo et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2020). However, since
retrovirus particles are relatively large, limiting the viral titer, and
since retrovirus only infects proliferating cells, the viral injection
timing is conﬁned to a narrow time window after the injury
during which glial cell proliferation is increased. In contrast,
because AAV infects both proliferating and quiescent cells, the
AAV injection depends less on timing and can be performed
in both acute and chronic injury conditions. Additionally, AAV
has passed clinical trials and elicits little immune response when
applied in vivo (Zaiss et al., 2002; High and Roncarolo, 2019).
AAV particles are small and can be prepared at very high titer,
therefore high dosage of conversion factors can be achieved
when multiple AAV particles infect a single cell. Consistent
with this, we observed a slower neuronal conversion when a
lower titer of AAV-NeuroD1 was injected in the injured spinal
cord (unpublished observation). Since certain serotypes of AAV
can cross the blood-brain-barrier (BBB), intravenous delivery of
conversion factors has made it possible to reach a broader area
of the CNS (Foust et al., 2009; Chan et al., 2017). Following
our earlier report of eﬃcient conversion of reactive astrocytes
into functional neurons by NeuroD1 through retroviral infection
(Guo et al., 2014), intravenous injection of AAV9 expressing
NeuroD1 has been reported to infect a small but signiﬁcant
number of resting astrocytes in the striatum and convert them
into neurons (Brulet et al., 2017). On the other hand, our
intracranial injection of AAV9 expressing NeuroD1 in stab injury
model (Zhang et al., 2020) and ischemic injury model (Chen
et al., 2020) have both resulted in high conversion eﬃciency,
suggesting that reactive astrocytes after injury are more likely
converted into neurons than the resting astrocytes. Consistent
with this hypothesis, our results in this study also support
that reactive astrocytes in injured spinal cord can be eﬀectively
converted into neurons with ∼95% eﬃciency, regardless of
retrovirus or AAV delivery system. Compared to the high
eﬃciency of astrocyte-converted neurons in the NeuroD1 group,
we did observe a small percentage (typically <5%) of neurons
labeled by GFP in the control group (Figure 8E). This might be
due to the fact that AAV can infect both neurons and astrocytes
eﬃciently. While we have used GFAP promoter to restrict the
transgene expression in astrocytes, it is known that promoters
usually are not 100% speciﬁc, and GFAP promoter can have low
activity in neurons especially under injury condition.
The high eﬃciency of astrocyte-to-neuron conversion is the
major reason why we target astrocytes among glial cells for in vivo
conversion. Importantly, we have demonstrated in the mouse
cortex that after astrocyte-to-neuron conversion, the remaining
astrocytes can proliferate and replenish themselves (Zhang et al.,
2020). Unlike killing reactive astrocytes which has been reported
to make injury worse (Anderson et al., 2016), we demonstrated
that converting reactive astrocytes into functional new neurons
signiﬁcantly ameliorated the glial scar in the brain, leading to a
reversal of glial scar back to neural tissue (Zhang et al., 2020).
Another practical reason for targeting astrocytes is that among
glial cells including astrocytes, NG2 cells (OPCs), and microglia,
AAV preferentially infect astrocytes, with much less infection
rate on NG2 cells or microglia. AAV-based gene therapy so far
is relatively safe and preferred choice for CNS disorders, and
FDA has approved a series of clinical trials using AAV. In order
to develop AAV-based gene therapy for the treatment of CNS
disorders, we selected astrocytes as our preferred target for in vivo
cell conversion. Of course, other glial cells such as NG2 cells and
microglia might have their own advantage for some particular
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
14
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
purpose (Guo et al., 2014; Heinrich et al., 2014; Torper et al.,
2015; Pereira et al., 2017; Matsuda et al., 2019).
Distinct Functions of NeuroD1 During
Neuronal Conversion
Neuronal conversion can be achieved by several neurogenic
transcription factors (Li and Chen, 2016). Besides NeuroD1,
Sox2, Ngn2, and Ascl1 have all been reported to convert glial
cells into neurons (Grande et al., 2013; Niu et al., 2013; Guo
et al., 2014; Heinrich et al., 2014; Su et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2015;
Gascon et al., 2016). Sox2 is expressed in neural progenitors and
functions to maintain progenitor identity (Bylund et al., 2003;
Graham et al., 2003; Bani-Yaghoub et al., 2006). Therefore, it
is not surprising that Sox2-mediated neuronal conversion has
to go through a proliferation stage as shown by incorporation
of BrdU and the expression of Ki67 (Su et al., 2014). In
contrast, NeuroD1 is a neuronal diﬀerentiation transcription
factor that instructs terminal diﬀerentiation of neuroprogenitors
into neurons during early neural development (Miyata et al.,
1999; Morrow et al., 1999; Gao et al., 2009). This might partially
explain why NeuroD1 can achieve high neuronal conversion
eﬃciency (>90%) comparing to ∼6% in the case of Sox2 (Su
et al., 2014). An earlier report also showed that Ngn2-expressing
retrovirus was able to promote neurogenesis in the injured
spinal cord, but the number of newly generated neurons greatly
decreases over time even when combined with growth factor
treatment (Ohori et al., 2006). When combined with Bcl2,
an anti-apoptotic gene, Ngn2-mediated neuronal conversion
acquires a much higher eﬃciency, although the authors claim
that Bcl2 plays a role independent of apoptotic pathways (Gascon
et al., 2016). In sharp contrast, we rarely observe apoptotic cells
during and after NeuroD1-mediated conversion as determined
by TUNEL assay. The diﬀerence of cell survival in converted
neurons between diﬀerent transcription factors may be explained
by the fact that NeuroD1 is not only a conversion factor
but also a survival factor. During development, NeuroD1 is
required for survival of a variety of neuronal subtypes in
the developing and adult CNS (Miyata et al., 1999; Morrow
et al., 1999; Gao et al., 2009). This dual role of NeuroD1
during neuronal conversion and neuronal survival may explain
its higher conversion eﬃciency over Sox2 and Ngn2. Ascl1
has also been reported to induce high eﬃciency of in vivo
astrocyte-to-neuron conversion in the midbrain (Liu et al., 2015),
suggesting that Ascl1 might share certain common properties
with NeuroD1. Since long-term survival of converted neurons
is essential to their integration into local neuronal circuitry in
order to have a role in functional repair, future studies on clinical
translation must pay much attention to the total number of
newly generated neurons that can survive for years to have
eﬀective therapies.
Environmental Cues to Impact Neuronal
Conversion in Addition to Intrinsic Factors
Transcription factor-mediated in vivo neuronal reprogramming
illustrates intrinsic power to convert reactive astrocytes into
neurons. However, environmental cues also play a role in the
success of neuronal conversion (Heinrich et al., 2014) as well
as the phenotype of converted neurons (Grande et al., 2013).
In this study, we found that NeuroD1-converted neurons in
the injured mouse cortex were Tbr1+ cortical neurons, but in
the injured spinal cord the NeuroD1-converted neurons were
Tlx3+ spinal neurons. Therefore, the local environment, together
with astroglial lineage, may be essential to functional integration
of converted neurons into the local neuronal circuitry as they
mature. Together, a complete neuronal conversion would need
both intrinsic factors (transcription factors and glial lineage
factors) and extrinsic factors (local cues) to solidify the identity
of converted neurons.
Even within the spinal cord, local environment can be
drastically diﬀerent between the gray matter vs. the white matter,
with neuronal soma conﬁned to the gray matter and neuronal
axons occupying the white matter. In our experiments using
AAV, we rarely observed converted neurons in the white matter;
using retrovirus, we observed some converted neurons in the
white matter at early time points, but they rarely survived
to 6 wpi. This has been similarly observed in cell conversion
studies in the white matter (corpus callosum) of mouse brains
(Liu et al., 2020). Reasons for the lack of conversion in the
white matter in this study could include our targeted injection
technique which delivers virus precisely into the dorsal horn
of the gray matter or the lack of appropriate viral receptors in
the white matter. White matter may also lack suﬃcient trophic
factors for the survival of newly generated neurons. On the
other hand, Sox2-mediated neuronal conversion can result in
many newborn neurons located in the white matter of the spinal
cord, particularly in p21 knockout mice (Wang et al., 2016).
An interesting feature of these neurons is that they appear
as clusters, which, by providing trophic factors to each other,
could be the reason they survive. It is also possible that the
local environment in the white matter of p21 knockout mice
has been altered during Sox2-mediated neuronal conversion in
combination with BDNF and noggin. Further studies will be
required to determine the diﬀerential eﬀects of not only gray
matter vs. white matter but also dorsal horn vs. ventral horn on
neuronal conversion.
Generation of Neuronal Subtypes via
NeuroD1-Mediated Conversion
We demonstrate here that NeuroD1 converts reactive astrocytes
into primarily Tlx3-positive glutamatergic neurons in the dorsal
horn of the injured spinal cord. Interestingly, Sox2-converted
neurons in the injured spinal cord are also mainly glutamatergic
(Wang et al., 2016), raising the possibility that glutamatergic
neurons might be a default subtype of converted neurons.
On the other hand, when we combine NeuroD1 with Dlx2
together, the proportion of GABAergic neurons was signiﬁcantly
increased after conversion, suggesting that the composition of
neural transcription factors play an important role in the fate
determination after conversion. NeuroD1 overexpression itself
has been shown to inhibit GABAergic neuronal diﬀerentiation
by suppressing Ascl1 (Mash1) (Roybon et al., 2010). Our result
of NeuroD1 + Dlx2 suggests that Dlx2 can at least partially
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
15
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
antagonize the eﬀect of NeuroD1 and pushing the astrocyte
conversion more toward GABAergic neurons.
We noted that the glutamatergic neurons in the dorsal horn of
the spinal cord can be Tlx3+, BarH1+, or FoxD3+ (Bermingham
et al., 2001; Gross et al., 2002; Cheng et al., 2005; reviewed in
Lu et al., 2015). Therefore, some of the non-identiﬁed neurons
may include BarH1+ or FoxD3+ glutamatergic neurons. On
the other hand, considering the newly generated neurons were
converted from astrocytes, they may not be mature enough to
acquire deﬁnitive neuronal identity yet, or perhaps some will
not become the neurons similar to their neighbors. More studies
are required to fully characterize the neuronal identity after
conversion for much longer time, such as 4–6 months after
viral infection.
CONCLUSION
In summary, our study demonstrates that AAV NeuroD1-
based gene therapy can convert reactive astrocytes into
functional new neurons with high eﬃciency in the injured
spinal
cord.
The
AAV-NeuroD1
converted
neurons
can
functionally mature and integrate into local neural networks.
Interestingly,
NeuroD1-converted
neurons
in
the
spinal
cord dorsal horn mainly acquire a Tlx3+
glutamatergic
neuronal
subtype,
while
combining
NeuroD1
and
Dlx2
together can generate more GABAergic neurons. Our next
challenge is to further identify transcription factors that
can regenerate motor neurons in the ventral horn, and
ultimately test the beneﬁcial eﬀects of this cutting-edge in
vivo
astrocyte-to-neuron
conversion
technology
in
spinal
cord repair.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be
made available by the authors, without undue reservation.
ETHICS STATEMENT
The animal study was reviewed and approved by Penn
State IACUC.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
GC conceived the idea, supervised the entire project, discussed
the results, analyzed the data, and revised and ﬁnalized the
manuscript. HL helped with the supervision of the project,
performed some surgery experiment, discussed and analyzed the
result, and helped with the manuscript writing. BP performed
the major experiments, analyzed the data, made the ﬁgures, and
wrote the draft of the manuscript. YD performed the contusive
SCI experiments with the help from HL. BP analyzed the ﬁgure,
made the ﬁgures, and wrote part of the manuscript. All other
authors helped with the experiments and analyzed the data.
FUNDING
This work was mainly supported by Charles H. Smith
Endowment Fund for Brain Repair (GC) and Verne M. Willaman
Endowment Fund from the Pennsylvania State University
(GC), as well as a grant from National Institutes of Health
R21NS104394 (HL).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This manuscript has been released as a pre-print at bioRxiv (Puls
et al., 2019).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcell.2020.
591883/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Abraira, V. E., and Ginty, D. D. (2013). The sensory neurons of touch. Neuron 79,
618–639. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.07.051
Adams, M. M., and Hicks, A. L. (2005). Spasticity after spinal cord injury. Spinal
Cord 43, 577–586. doi: 10.1038/sj.sc.3101757
Anderson, M. A., Burda, J. E., Ren, Y., Ao, Y., O’Shea, T. M., Kawaguchi,
R., et al. (2016). Astrocyte scar formation aids central nervous system axon
regeneration. Nature 532, 195–200. doi: 10.1038/nature17623
Anderson, S., Mione, M., Yun, K., and Rubenstein, J. L. R. (1999). Diﬀerential
origins of neocortical projection and local circuit neurons: role of Dlx
genes
in
neocortical
interneuronogenesis.
Cereb.
Cortex
9,
646–654.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/9.6.646
Atasoy, D., Aponte, Y., Su, H. H., and Sternson, S. M. (2008). A FLEX switch
targets channelrhodopsin-2 to multiple cell types for imaging and long-range
circuit mapping. J. Neurosci. 28, 7025–7030. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1954-
08.2008
Bani-Yaghoub, M., Tremblay, R. G., Lei, J. X., Zhang, D., Zurakowski, B., Sandhu,
J. K., et al. (2006). Role of Sox2 in the development of the mouse neocortex.
Dev. Biol. 295, 52–66. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.007
Barker, R. A., Gotz, M., and Parmar, M. (2018). New approaches for
brain
repair-from
rescue
to
reprogramming.
Nature
557,
329–334.
doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0087-1
Bermingham, N. A., Hassan, B. A., Wang, V. Y., Fernandez, M., Banﬁ, S., Bellen,
H. J., et al. (2001). Proprioceptor pathway development is dependent on Math1.
Neuron 30, 411–422. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(01)00305-1
Brulet, R., Matsuda, T., Zhang, L., Miranda, C., Giacca, M., Kaspar, B. K., et al.
(2017). NEUROD1 instructs neuronal conversion in non-reactive astrocytes.
Stem Cell Rep. 8, 1506–1515. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2017.04.013
Bylund, M., Andersson, E., Novitch, B. G., and Muhr, J. (2003). Vertebrate
neurogenesis is counteracted by Sox1-3 activity. Nat. Neurosci. 6, 1162–1168.
doi: 10.1038/nn1131
Chan, K. Y., Jang, M. J., Yoo, B. B., Greenbaum, A., Ravi, N., Wu, W. L.,
et al. (2017). Engineered AAVs for eﬃcient noninvasive gene delivery to
the central and peripheral nervous systems. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1172–1179.
doi: 10.1038/nn.4593
Chen, Y., Miles, D. K., Hoang, T., Shi, J., Hurlock, E., Kernie, S. G., et al. (2008).
The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor olig2 is critical for reactive
astrocyte proliferation after cortical injury. J. Neurosci. 28, 10983–10989.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3545-08.2008
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
16
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
Chen, Y. C., Ma, N. X., Pei, Z. F., Wu, Z., Do-Monte, F. H., Keefe, S., et al. (2020).
A NeuroD1 AAV-based gene therapy for functional brain repair after ischemic
injury through in vivo astrocyte-to-neuron conversion. Mol. Ther. 28, 217–234.
doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2019.09.003
Cheng, L., Samad, O. A., Xu, Y., Mizuguchi, R., Luo, P., Shirasawa, S., et al.
(2005). Lbx1 and Tlx3 are opposing switches in determining GABAergic
versus glutamatergic transmitter phenotypes. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1510–1515.
doi: 10.1038/nn1569
Dittgen, T., Nimmerjahn, A., Komai, S., Licznerski, P., Waters, J., Margrie, T. W.,
et al. (2004). Lentivirus-based genetic manipulations of cortical neurons and
their optical and electrophysiological monitoring in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 101, 18206–18211. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0407976101
Filous, A. R., and Schwab, J. M. (2017). Determinants of axon growth, plasticity,
and regeneration in the context of spinal cord injury. Am. J. Pathol. 188, 53–62.
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2017.09.005
Foust, K. D., Nurre, E., Montgomery, C. L., Hernandez, A., Chan, C. M.,
and Kaspar, B. K. (2009). Intravascular AAV9 preferentially targets neonatal
neurons and adult astrocytes. Nat. Biotechnol. 27, 59–65. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1515
Gao, Z., Ure, K., Ables, J. L., Lagace, D. C., Nave, K. A., Goebbels, S., et al. (2009).
Neurod1 is essential for the survival and maturation of adult-born neurons.
Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1090–1092. doi: 10.1038/nn.2385
Gascon, S., Murenu, E., Masserdotti, G., Ortega, F., Russo, G. L., Petrik,
D., et al. (2016). Identiﬁcation and successful negotiation of a metabolic
checkpoint in direct neuronal reprogramming. Cell Stem Cell 18, 396–409.
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.12.003
Goldman, S. A. (2016). Stem and progenitor cell-based therapy of the central
nervous system: hopes, hype, and wishful thinking. Cell Stem Cell 18, 174–188.
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.01.012
Graham,
V.,
Khudyakov,
J.,
Ellis,
P.,
and
Pevny,
L.
(2003).
SOX2
functions to maintain neural progenitor identity. Neuron 39, 749–765.
doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00497-5
Grande, A., Sumiyoshi, K., Lopez-Juarez, A., Howard, J., Sakthivel, B., Aronow, B.,
et al. (2013). Environmental impact on direct neuronal reprogramming in vivo
in the adult brain. Nat. Commun. 4:2373. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3373
Gross, M. K., Dottori, M., and Goulding, M. (2002). Lbx1 speciﬁes somatosensory
association interneurons in the dorsal spinal cord. Neuron 34, 535–549.
doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00690-6
Guo, Z., Zhang, L., Wu, Z., Chen, Y., Wang, F., and Chen, G. (2014). In vivo
direct reprogramming of reactive glial cells into functional neurons after
brain injury and in an alzheimer’s disease model. Cell Stem Cell 14, 188–202.
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.12.001
Heinrich, C., Bergami, M., Gascon, S., Lepier, A., Vigano, F., Dimou,
L., et al. (2014). Sox2-mediated conversion of NG2 glia into induced
neurons in the injured adult cerebral cortex. Stem Cell Rep. 3, 1000–1014.
doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.10.007
Herrmann, J. E., Imura, T., Song, B., Qi, J., Ao, Y., Nguyen, T. K., et al. (2008).
STAT3 is a critical regulator of astrogliosis and scar formation after spinal cord
injury. J. Neurosci. 28, 7231–7243. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1709-08.2008
High, K. A., and Roncarolo, M. G. (2019). Gene therapy. N. Engl. J. Med. 381,
455–464. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra1706910
Hong, P., Jiang, M., and Li, H. (2014). Functional requirement of dicer1 and miR-
17-5p in reactive astrocyte proliferation after spinal cord injury in the mouse.
Glia 62, 2044–2060. doi: 10.1002/glia.22725
Huang, M., Huang, T., Xiang, Y., Xie, Z., Chen, Y., Yan, R., et al. (2008).
Ptf1a, Lbx1 and Pax2 coordinate glycinergic and peptidergic transmitter
phenotypes in dorsal spinal inhibitory neurons. Dev. Biol. 322, 394–405.
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.06.031
Lei, W., Li, W., Ge, L., and Chen, G. (2019). Non-engineered and engineered
adult
neurogenesis
in
mammalian
brains.
Front.
Neurosci.
13:131.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00131
Li, H., and Chen, G. (2016). In vivo reprogramming for CNS repair:
regenerating neurons from endogenous glial cells. Neuron 91, 728–738.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.08.004
Liu, M. H., Li, W., Zheng, J. J., Xu, Y. G., He, Q., and Chen, G. (2020).
Diﬀerential neuronal reprogramming induced by NeuroD1 from astrocytes
in grey matter versus white matter. Neural Regener. Res. 15, 342–351.
doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.265185
Liu, Y., Miao, Q., Yuan, J., Han, S., Zhang, P., Li, S., et al. (2015). Ascl1 converts
dorsal midbrain astrocytes into functional neurons in vivo. J. Neurosci. 35,
9336–9355. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3975-14.2015
Lu, D. C., Niu, T., and Alaynick, W. A. (2015). Molecular and cellular
development of spinal cord locomotor circuitry. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 8:25.
doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2015.00025
Lu, P., Ceto, S., Wang, Y., Graham, L., Wu, D., Kumamaru, H., et al. (2017).
Prolonged human neural stem cell maturation supports recovery in injured
rodent CNS. J. Clin. Invest. 127, 3287–3299. doi: 10.1172/JCI92955
Ma,
Y.,
Hu,
H.,
Berrebi,
A.
S.,
Mathers,
P.
H.,
and
Agmon,
A.
(2006).
Distinct
subtypes
of
somatostatin-containing
neocortical
interneurons revealed in transgenic mice. J. Neurosci. 26, 5069–5082.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0661-06.2006
Matsuda, T., Irie, T., Katsurabayashi, S., Hayashi, Y., Nagai, T., Hamazaki,
N., et al. (2019). Pioneer factor NeuroD1 rearranges transcriptional and
epigenetic proﬁles to execute microglia-neuron conversion. Neuron 101,
472–485. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.12.010
McKinsey, G. L., Lindtner, S., Trzcinski, B., Visel, A., Pennacchio, L. A.,
Huylebroeck, D., et al. (2013). Dlx1&2-dependent expression of Zfhx1b (Sip1,
Zeb2) regulates the fate switch between cortical and striatal interneurons.
Neuron 77, 83–98. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.11.035
Miyata, T., Maeda, T., and Lee, J. E. (1999). NeuroD is required for diﬀerentiation
of the granule cells in the cerebellum and hippocampus. Genes Dev. 13,
1647–1652. doi: 10.1101/gad.13.13.1647
Morrow, E. M., Furukawa, T., Lee, J. E., and Cepko, C. L. (1999). NeuroD regulates
multiple functions in the developing neural retina in rodent. Development
126, 23–36.
Niu, W., Zang, T., Zou, Y., Fang, S., Smith, D. K., Bachoo, R., et al. (2013). In vivo
reprogramming of astrocytes to neuroblasts in the adult brain. Nat. Cell Biol.
15, 1164–1175. doi: 10.1038/ncb2843
Norenberg, M. D., Smith, J., and Marcillo, A. (2004). The pathology of
human spinal cord injury: deﬁning the problems. J. Neurotr. 21, 429–440.
doi: 10.1089/089771504323004575
Ohori, Y., Yamamoto, S., Nagao, M., Sugimori, M., Yamamoto, N., Nakamura,
K., et al. (2006). Growth factor treatment and genetic manipulation
stimulate
neurogenesis
and
oligodendrogenesis
by
endogenous
neural
progenitors in the injured adult spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 26, 11948–11960.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3127-06.2006
Okada, S., Nakamura, M., Katoh, H., Miyao, T., Shimazaki, T., Ishii, K., et al.
(2006). Conditional ablation of Stat3 or Socs3 discloses a dual role for reactive
astrocytes after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 12, 829–834. doi: 10.1038/nm1425
Pereira, M., Birtele, M., Shrigley, S., Benitez, J. A., Hedlund, E., Parmar, M.,
et al. (2017). Direct reprogramming of resident NG2 glia into neurons with
properties of fast-spiking parvalbumin-containing interneurons. Stem Cell Rep.
9, 742–751. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2017.07.023
Pla, R., Stanco, A., Howard, M. A., Rubin, A. N., Vogt, D., Mortimer, N., et al.
(2018). Dlx1 and Dlx2 promote interneuron gaba synthesis, synaptogenesis,
and dendritogenesis. Cereb. Cortex 28, 3797–3815. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhx241
Puls, B., Ding, Y., Zhang, V., Pan, M., Lei, Z., Pei, Z., et al. (2019). Regeneration
of functional neurons after spinal cord injury via in situ NeuroD1-mediated
astrocyte-to-neuron conversion. bioRxiv [Preprint]. doi: 10.1101/818823
Rexed, B. (1954). A cytoarchitectonic atlas of the spinal cord in the cat. J. Comp.
Neurol. 100, 297–379. doi: 10.1002/cne.901000205
Roybon, L., Mastracci, T. L., Ribeiro, D., Sussel, L., Brundin, P., and Li, J. Y. (2010).
GABAergic diﬀerentiation induced by Mash1 is compromised by the bHLH
proteins Neu1rogenin2, NeuroD1, and NeuroD2. Cereb. Cortex 20, 1234–1244.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp187
Santos, S. F., Rebelo, S., Derkach, V. A., and Safronov, B. V. (2007). Excitatory
interneurons dominate sensory processing in the spinal substantia gelatinosa
of rat. J. Physiol. 581, 241–254. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2006.126912
Silver, J., and Miller, J. H. (2004). Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 5, 146–156. doi: 10.1038/nrn1326
Sofroniew, M. V. (2009). Molecular dissection of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar
formation. Trends Neurosci. 32, 638–647. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2009.08.002
Su, Z., Niu, W., Liu, M. L., Zou, Y., and Zhang, C. L. (2014). In vivo conversion of
astrocytes to neurons in the injured adult spinal cord. Nat. Commun. 5:3338.
doi: 10.1038/ncomms4338
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
17
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

Puls et al.
Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion in the Spinal Cord
Torper, O., Ottosson, D. R., Pereira, M., Lau, S., Cardoso, T., Grealish, S.,
et al. (2015). In vivo reprogramming of striatal NG2 glia into functional
neurons that integrate into local host circuitry. Cell Rep. 12, 474–481.
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.040
Tuszynski, M. H., Wang, Y., Graham, L., Gao, M., Wu, D., Brock, J., et al. (2014).
Neural stem cell dissemination after grafting to CNS injury sites. Cell 156,
388–389. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.01.016
Victor, M. B., Richner, M., Hermanstyne, T. O., Ransdell, J. L., Sobieski,
C., Deng, P. Y., et al. (2014). Generation of human striatal neurons by
microRNA-dependent direct conversion of ﬁbroblasts. Neuron 84, 311–323.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.10.016
Wang, L. L., Su, Z., Tai, W., Zou, Y., Xu, X. M., and Zhang, C. L.
(2016). The p53 pathway controls SOX2-mediated reprogramming in the
adult mouse spinal cord. Cell Rep. 17, 891–903. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.
09.038
Wu, Z., Parry, M., Hou, X. Y., Liu, M. H., Wang, H., Cain, R., et al.
(2020). Gene therapy conversion of striatal astrocytes into GABAergic
neurons in mouse models of huntington’s disease. Nat. Commun. 11:1105.
doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-14855-3
Yang, N., Chanda, S., Marro, S., Ng, Y. H., Janas, J. A., Haag, D., et al.
(2017).
Generation
of
pure
GABAergic
neurons
by
transcription
factor
programming.
Nat.
Methods
14,
621–628.
doi:
10.1038/
nmeth.4291
Zaiss, A. K., Liu, Q., Bowen, G. P., Wong, N. C., Bartlett, J. S., and
Muruve, D. A. (2002). Diﬀerential activation of innate immune responses
by adenovirus and adeno-associated virus vectors. J. Virol. 76, 4580–4590.
doi: 10.1128/JVI.76.9.4580-4590.2002
Zhang, L., Lei, Z., Guo, Z., Pei, Z., Chen, Y., Zhang, F., et al. (2020).
Development of neuroregenerative gene therapy to reverse glial scar
tissue back to neuron-enriched tissue. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 14:594170.
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2020.594170
Conﬂict of Interest: GC is a co-founder of NeuExcell Therapeutics Inc.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Puls, Ding, Zhang, Pan, Lei, Pei, Jiang, Bai, Forsyth, Metzger,
Rana, Zhang, Ding, Keefe, Cai, Redilla, Lai, He, Li and Chen. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
18
December 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 591883

===== Qin2020_CellDeathDiffer+axolotl =====
Cell Death & Differentiation
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41418-020-00640-8
ARTICLE
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals novel mitochondria-related
musculoskeletal cell populations during adult axolotl
limb regeneration process
Tian Qin1,2,3,4
●Chun-mei Fan1,2,3,4
●Ting-zhang Wang5
●Heng Sun2,3,4,6,7
●Yan-yan Zhao1,2,3,4
●Ruo-jin Yan1,2,3,4
●
Long Yang2,8
●Wei-liang Shen1,4,8
●Jun-xin Lin2,3,4,6,7
●Varitsara Bunpetch2,3,4,6,7
●Magali Cucchiarini9
●
Nicholas D. Clement10
●Christopher E. Mason
11,12,13,14
●Norimasa Nakamura15
●Rameah Bhonde16
●Zi Yin
2,4,6
●
Xiao Chen
1,2,3,4
Received: 13 May 2020 / Revised: 24 September 2020 / Accepted: 6 October 2020
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to ADMC Associazione Differenziamento e Morte Cellulare 2020
Abstract
While the capacity to regenerate tissues or limbs is limited in mammals, including humans, axolotls are able to regrow entire
limbs and major organs after incurring a wound. The wound blastema has been extensively studied in limb regeneration.
However, due to the inadequate characterization of ECM and cell subpopulations involved in the regeneration process, the
discovery of the key drivers for human limb regeneration remains unknown. In this study, we applied large-scale single-cell
RNA sequencing to classify cells throughout the adult axolotl limb regeneration process, uncovering a novel regeneration-
speciﬁc mitochondria-related cluster supporting regeneration through energy providing and the ECM secretion (COL2+) cluster
contributing to regeneration through cell–cell interactions signals. We also discovered the dedifferentiation and re-differentiation
of the COL1+/COL2+ cellular subpopulation and exposed a COL2-mitochondria subcluster supporting the musculoskeletal
system regeneration. On the basis of these ﬁndings, we reconstructed the dynamic single-cell transcriptome of adult axolotl limb
regenerative process, and identiﬁed the novel regenerative mitochondria-related musculoskeletal populations, which yielded
deeper insights into the crucial interactions between cell clusters within the regenerative microenvironment.
Introduction
The ability to fully regenerate damaged and lost tissues
would be of tremendous beneﬁt for clinical medicine;
however, the limited regeneration capacity of many
human tissues, including limbs, presents a formidable
clinical hurdle [1]. The axolotl is a widely used model
organism due to its powerful ability to reconstitute a fully
functional limb after amputation throughout adulthood.
After amputation, a blastema forms which is deﬁned as a
progenitor cell pool that is capable of regenerating limbs
by autonomously patterning itself to precisely replace the
lost structures [2]. Lineage tracing studies illustrated that
blastema cells originate from the mesodermal tissues
including dermal ﬁbroblasts, Schwann cells, and myo-
genic cells [3]. Meanwhile, many studies based on tran-
scriptomes
and
proteomic
analysis
provided
much
information concerning the key molecular mechanisms in
blastema formation [4–6]. The oncogenes were reported
to burst in the early stage [7] and two crucial genes cirbp
and kazald1 were discovered upregulated in blastemas [8].
Despite this accumulated knowledge, the cell populations
and their interactions that contribute to blastema con-
stitution still remain unclear.
Traditional sequencing methods using whole tissues,
mask potential cell heterogeneity within the tissue
and may add bias to be understanding of the cellular
hierarchy.
Single-cell
RNA-sequencing
(scRNA-seq)
These authors contributed equally: Tian Qin, Chun-mei Fan, Ting-
zhang Wang
Edited by I. Amelio
* Zi Yin
yinzi@zju.edu.cn
* Xiao Chen
chenxiao-610@zju.edu.cn
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Supplementary information The online version of this article (https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41418-020-00640-8) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
1234567890();,:
1234567890();,:

analysis allows unbiased and high-throughput analysis of
gene expression proﬁles from an individual cell level in
order to investigate cell population heterogeneity [9].
ScRNA-seq reveals novel cell types and reconstructs
lineage hierarchies of tissue types such as human plur-
ipotent stem cells, blood dendritic cells, neurons, and
uterus epithelium [10–14]. Recently, the scRNA-seq was
performed on axolotl to uncover the connective tissue
(CT) subpopulations with their characters and mesench-
ymal cellular diversity during regeneration [15–17].
However, the mechanism of regeneration-speciﬁc cell
populations still need further exploration.
In this study, scRNA-seq was performed on blastema
cells collected limb tissues at four regenerative stages of
adult axolotls. The transcriptome proﬁling displayed a
comprehensive axolotl regeneration cell atlas with the
reconstructed
cell
connectivity
map
and
regenerative
pseudo-temporal trajectory. We found the dynamics of the
regenerative musculoskeletal system cells and identiﬁed a
novel mitochondria-related cell population which plays a
vital energy supporting character in regeneration. All of
these provide a greater understanding of the limb regen-
eration process.
Results
Dynamic patterns of gene expression along axolotl
limbs regeneration time course
To evaluate the heterogeneity of the regenerating limb at
an individual cellular level, we performed single-cell
RNA-seq over a time course of adult axolotl limb regen-
eration. Samples were collected from the adult axolotl
regenerated distal limb tips at 3, 7, and 21 days post
amputation (3, 7, 21 dpa) which represent the early,
middle, and late stage of limb regeneration respectively,
as well as the unamputated forelimbs (0 dpa) (Figs. 1A
and S1A). These samples were isolated as single cells for
sequencing using Fluidigm C1 system with HT IFCs
(Fig. 1A) which could detect an average of 5000 genes per
cell. Our sequencing data were mapped with the axolotl
transcriptome assemblies [7, 8, 18]. After data quality
control and removal of multiple cell samples, 938 cells
were selected for further analysis (Fig. S1B, C). In order
to understand the transcriptome changes in our data dur-
ing regeneration, differentially expressed (DE) genes and
gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) analysis were per-
formed. The results revealed the marker genes of four
time points (Fig. S1D–F; Table S1), with GSEA results
revealing that 0 dpa cells were related to cartilage mor-
phogenesis, 3 dpa cells were related to functions involving
cell proliferation, and cellular immune response, while at
21 dpa, the blastema displayed the functions of endoderm
development and limb morphogenesis (Fig. S2A, B).
These results demonstrated the integral dynamic gene
patterns along regeneration and proved the reliability of
our data.
Cell heterogeneity in blastemas of different
amputation time points by single-cell proﬁling
General DE analysis probably masks the cell heterogeneity
within each time point. To identify cell types of axolotl limb
regeneration, we used Seurat package [19] implemented in
R to perform t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-
SNE) analysis, which led to consistent clustering of dif-
ferent cell types into distinct regions (Fig. 1B, C) with each
cluster possessing a unique set of signature genes (Fig. 1D,
G; Table S2). Each group has a different cell quantity
proportion at different time points (Figs. 1E, F and S3A–C).
GO analysis was performed on the upregulated genes of
each cluster (Fig. S3D). Based on these, the seven clusters
(C0–C6) were identiﬁed as the general cluster, mitochon-
dria cluster (e.g., CYTB, ATP6), CT cluster (e.g., FBN2,
MDK),
chondrocyte
cluster
(e.g.,
COL2A1,
MATN1),
inﬂammation cluster (e.g., CCL5, PTPRC), cycling cluster
(e.g., SLC2A8, PIF1), and apical epithelium cap (AEC)
cluster (e.g., KRT12, KRT8) (Fig. 1B, F). The mitochondria
cluster was shown in high proportion in cells from regen-
erating stages (3, 7, and 21 dpa) when compared to cells
from 0 dpa (Figs. 1D and S3A–C). In order to gain more
knowledge
on
this
particular
cluster,
we
removed
mitochondria-associated genes and re-evaluated the differ-
ences, because mitochondrial genes were signiﬁcantly
expressed, possibly masking other highly expressed genes.
Interestingly, the GO functions were mainly related to the
regeneration and development of neuron and stem cells as
well as regulation of programmed cell death (Fig. S3d).
These results were consistent with recent studies demon-
strating that mitochondrial activity inﬂuences the cell dif-
ferentiation and response to stress [20].
Immediately after amputation, a wound epithelium was
formed by migrating epithelial cells [21]; it would interact
with the stump tissues to form an AEC which is essential in
creating a regenerative environment for blastema [22, 23].
The AEC cluster of cells highly expressed epidermis marker
genes KRT12 and KRT8 (Fig. 1F) which represented the
AEC formed by the migrating epithelial cells. Moreover, the
GO analysis revealed that this cluster was related to
not only epidermis development but also Schwann cell and
stem cell proliferation (Fig. S3F, Table S9), which indicates
the traits of the AEC cluster including inducing the differ-
entiation
in
the
underlying
stump
tissue,
attracting
cells accumulating below and being in response to nerve
signals [24].
T. Qin et al.

To conﬁrm that the t-SNE results were capable of corro-
borating the gene expression sites in axolotl regenerative
limbs, we detected the marker genes of each cluster by
immunoﬂuorescence staining over a time course of limb
regeneration. MDK+ cells, representing the CT cluster,
mainly distributed at the basal layers at all four time points
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals novel mitochondria-related musculoskeletal cell populations during adult. . .

(Fig. S4A). PTPRC+ cells mainly distributed at the stroma
under the AEC at 3, 7, and 21 dpa, as well as subcutaneous
tissue at 0 dpa, which represented the location of the inﬂam-
mation cluster (Fig. S4B). PIF1, as the marker of the cycling
cluster, was mainly detected at the stroma in close proximity
to the AEC at 3, 7, and 21 dpa, and the subcutaneous tissue at
0 dpa (Fig. S4C). KRT8+ cells mainly located at AEC at 3, 7,
and 21 dpa, and the epidermis at 0 dpa (Fig. S4D).
The microenvironment regulation among seven cell
clusters during the regeneration process
Different cell clusters that co-existed within the same
environment, physically surrounded each other. The inter-
actions among these cell clusters may also play a part in
regulating cell state and determining cell fate. Thus, we next
constructed a connectivity map of the seven clusters for
each corresponding time point respectively in order to
reveal the potential interactions of different clusters by
using
known
ligand–receptor
pairs
[25,
26].
928
ligand–receptor pairs were detected among seven clusters in
our connectivity map (Fig. 2A).
The connectivity map revealed that the C3 (chondrocyte
cluster) had the most ligands to C6 (AEC cluster) when
compared to other clusters in all four temporal groups
(Figs. 2A and S5C). Further analysis of the ligand–receptor
pairs between C3 and C6 showed abundant extracellular
matrix (COL1A1, COL3A1, MATN1), and growth factor
(ITGB1, EGFR, BMPR2, VEGF) interactions (Fig. 2B) with
the GO terms positive regulation of cell migration and
adhesion, tissue morphogenesis, epithelial cell proliferation,
and skeletal system development (Figs. 2C and S5A). These
results imply that through releasing ECM to generate cell-
to-cell interaction, cartilage promotes the migration and
morphogenesis of AEC which contributes to the formation
of blastema. The C4 (inﬂammation cluster) had the stron-
gest connectivity at 3 dpa which indicated the vital role that
early inﬂammation has in releasing cytokines to induce cell
differentiation and triggering the blastema formation which
consistent with the previous ﬁnding [27]. Overall, the
connectivity map revealed abundant interaction information
among cell clusters which can help provided orientation for
further researches.
The mitochondria cluster supported cell division in
regenerative limbs
To conﬁrm the mitochondria activity in the regeneration
process, we detected the mitochondrion-marker TOMM20
using immunochemistry staining. The TOMM20 had the
highest expression in blastema of the 3 dpa tissues. We also
found that TOMM20 had a higher expression level in the
skin and muscle of the 3 dpa tissues compared to the 0 dpa
tissues (Fig. 3A). Additionally, TEM results of the epi-
dermis (Fig. S5D) indicated that the average number of
mitochondria per cell in regenerative tissues was sig-
niﬁcantly higher than in normal limb tissues (Fig. 3B).
These results indicated that the higher mitochondria activ-
ities in the mitochondria cluster play a key role in the
regeneration process. To recognize the functions of the
mitochondria cluster, GSEA analysis was performed and
revealed that the citrate cycle TCA cycle pathway was
upregulated in the mitochondria cluster, which points at the
reliability of the identity of the mitochondria cluster. The
cell division-associated signaling pathways including sig-
naling by ROBO receptor, G alpha1213 signaling events,
apoptotic
execution
phase,
the
energy
metabolism-
associated signalings such as signaling by RHO GTPases,
and cell death regulation-associated pathways including
Nrage signals death through JNK were upregulated in the
mitochondria cluster (Fig. 3C). These indicated that the
mitochondria cluster supported cell division and regulated
cell death in regenerative tissues.
The pseudo-temporal ordering of individual cells
from all clusters
Most
cell-state
transitions,
including
development
and
regeneration, are characterized by ﬂows of gene expression
changes. However, a heterogeneous tissue, at the same time
point of regeneration, also contained cells at different stages
during development progression. To uncover the differentia-
tion relationship of cells during the regeneration process, we
used MONOCLE algorithm that applies machine learning to
single-cell transcriptome sequencing data [28, 29]. This
method makes use of gene expression variations to deﬁne a
pseudo-temporal biological process using an unsupervised
procedure, and order cells along a reconstructed ‘trajectory’ of
regeneration called ‘pseudo-temporal ordering’.
Monocle compresses all single-cell transcription datasets
in a multidimensional space into a two-dimension space
Fig. 1 Single-cell proﬁling revealed cell heterogeneity in axolotl
limb tissues from different regeneration stage. A Schematic dia-
gram of the blastemal time course experiment. The red box on limbs
indicated the amputation location on axolotls’ limbs (upper left). The
pictures show that the amputated tissues were trypsinized to yield a
single-cell suspension (upper middle) and trapped using the Fluidigm
C1 auto prepare system (C1 high-throughput integrated ﬂuidics cir-
cuits (HT IFCs) and HiSeq systems) for the downstream single-cell
mRNA-seq experiment. B T-distributed stochastic neighbor embed-
ding (t-SNE) visualizations of all cell clusters identiﬁed using the
computational pipeline. C T- SNE visualizations of 4 days post
amputation identiﬁed using the computational pipeline. D Heatmap of
top 20 differentiated gene of seven clusters. E T-SNE distribution of
cells from each sampling stage. Red dots represent the cells from the
corresponding time point, and gray dots represent all the cells from
four stages. F The proportion of cells at each time point in each cluster.
G Violin plots of marker genes from seven cluster.
T. Qin et al.

for projection. In our data, cells within this two-dimension
space
(represented
by
dots)
are
ordered
in
the
“pseudo-temporal ordering”, with a line through all dots/cells
showing a path of the developmental trajectory/timeline. The
trajectory of seven clusters displayed a clear large central
branch,
with
few
minor
branches
emanating
from
it
(Fig. 4A–C). In this trajectory, the cycling cluster showed an
inchoate state while the chondrocyte cluster was at the end of
the central branch. The minor branch 1 and 4 mainly con-
taining AEC cells; while the minor branch 2 and 3 mainly
contained the mitochondria cluster cells (Figs. 4A and S6A).
The arrangement of cells on the pseudotime trajectory was
almost consistent with the true time except a fraction of cells
from 0 dpa located in the primitive stage of the trajectory,
suggesting that some original stem cells may still exist in
unamputated limb tissues (Figs. 4B and S6B). To investigate
the cell alterations in the musculoskeletal system in regen-
eration, we termed the marker genes, including COL2A1 for
chondrocytes, ACAN (Aggrecan) for extracellular matrix in
cartilaginous tissue, COL1A1/A2 for CTs including bone,
dermis and tendon, THBS4 for tendon cells and POSTN
(Periostin) for osteoblasts or periosteum (Figs. 4D and S6C).
Results showed that they all slightly ﬂuctuated in the early
period and then increased remarkably during the middle and
later periods. We then investigated the expressional changes
of the BMP, FGF and, TGF-β signaling pathway members
Fig. 2 Connectivity maps revealed the microenvironment regula-
tion of seven cell clusters during regeneration process. A Circle plot
depicts the total number of ligand–receptor interactions between each
subcluster in each time point post amputation. B Top receptor–ligand
expression between chondrocyte cluster and AEC cluster. C GO terms
of top receptor–ligand genes between chondrocyte cluster and AEC
cluster.
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals novel mitochondria-related musculoskeletal cell populations during adult. . .

along the pseudotime (Figs. 4D and S6C); results showed that
members of FGF and BMP families were expressed with a
rising trend. In contrast, TGF-β signaling pathway members
FOSB and ZFYVE16 increased at the later stage, while JUNB
was stably expressed with small ﬂuctuations.
To determine cellular states within regeneration, we per-
formed k-means clustering on all genes, revealed three gene
clusters according to the expressing trend of genes, hereafter
labeled cluster A to C with GO analysis, representing pseudo-
temporal
early,
late,
and
mid-late
stages,
respectively
(Fig. 4E). The results revealed that cell proliferation was
mainly at the early stage with immune response at mid-late
stage, while the maturation of cell differentiation and deter-
mination occurred during the late stage.
A continuous transcriptional transition of the
musculoskeletal system population in response to
the stimuli
The clustering results showed that the COL2A1+ cells were
included not only in C3 but also in C2 (with a lower
expression compared to C3) (Fig. S2F), which indicated
Fig. 3 The mitochondria cluster speciﬁcally existed in regenerative
limbs. A Immunostaining of TOMM20 in tendon, skin, cartilage, and
muscle of 0 dpa tissues, and blastema, skin, cartilage and muscle of 3
dpa tissues. Scale bar, 50 μm. B TEM of regenerative samples at each
time points. Scale bar, upper 2 μm, lower 0.5 μm. C The top 8 sig-
naling pathways in mitochondria cluster compared with the rest
clusters by GSEA signaling pathway analysis.
T. Qin et al.

that the COL2A1+ cells with different phenotypes persisted
throughout the whole regeneration process. To determine
the variances of gene expression in the COL2A1+ cells and
other musculoskeletal system cells in different regeneration
stage, we performed t-SNE on each time-point cells
(Fig. 5A). We attempted to identify the marker genes,
COL2A1, ACAN, COL1A1, COL1A2, THBS4, and POSTN
(Figs. 5B–E and S7D). COL1A1/2+ (including COL1A1
and COL1A2) and COL2A1+ cells had different expression
patterns during the regeneration process as reﬂected by t-
SNE plots (Fig. 5B–E). COL1A1/2+ cells were in a high
proportion (COL1A1 58%, COL1A2 72%) at 0 dpa, then the
number decreased at 3 dpa (COL1A1 20%, COL1A2 21%),
and re-increased (COL1A1 47%, COL1A2 58%) at 7 dpa;
the ﬂuctuation then stopped and the COL1A1/2+ cell
number was maintained (COL1A1 55%, COL1A2 70%) at
21 dpa (Figs. 5B–E and S7B, C). By contrast, the propor-
tion of COL2A1+ cells was high (72%) at 0 dpa, and then
Fig. 4 Pseudo-temporal ordering of individual cells. A Pseudotime
ordering of single cells using 2D PCA. Each data point represents a
single cell colored by Fig. 3A clusters age collected. B Pseudotime
ordering of single cells using 2D PCA. Each data point represents a
single cell colored by postamputation time point collected. C Pseu-
dotime ordering of single cells using 2D PCA. Each data point
represents a single cell colored Pseudotime. D Expression proﬁles of
Tendon and skeleton system marker genes, different cell signaling
pathway components, and blastema marker genes along pseudotime
ordered by seven clusters. E Heatmap shows the gene expression
dynamics during limb regeneration (left). Genes (row) are clustered
and cells (column) are ordered according to the pseudotime develop-
ment. Gene clusters A, B, and C were selected for GO analysis (right).
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals novel mitochondria-related musculoskeletal cell populations during adult. . .

sharply declined (9%) at 3 dpa and (2%) at 7 dpa, and re-
increased at (43%) 21 dpa (Figs. 5B–E and S7B, C).
Immunostaining analysis also showed that COL1 had a
higher expression level at 21 dpa in the skeleton, muscle,
skin, and blastema (Fig. S8), further supporting a mechan-
ism whereby dedifferentiation of the cells.
Fig. 5 Identiﬁcation of different lineage cells within 0–21 dpa
axolotl limbs singe-cell RNA-seq data. A t-SNE visualizations of
cells at each postamputation stage. Colors and associated numbers
represent individual clusters. t-SNE visualization of 0 dpa (B), 3 dpa
(C), 7 dpa (D), and 21 dpa (E) scRNA-seq data overlaid with
expression of the cell-type-speciﬁc markers COL2A1, COL1A2,
COL1A1, THBS4, POSTN, and ACAN. Cells are color-coded
according to expression level, ranging from low detected to the
highest detected levels (gray, yellow, orange, and red). Cluster num-
bers are as shown in (A).
T. Qin et al.

We next sought to conﬁrm the existence of the COL2A1
cell population (Fig. 5). We performed RNA FISH of
COL2A1 (Fig. 7, A middle, and B). The COL2A1+ cells
mainly located at the top of blastema under the AEC and
close to AEC at all regeneration time points. The COL2A1+
cells increased in 21 dpa regeneration, which conﬁrmed the
dynamic COL2A1 expression proﬁles generated from the
single-cell RNA-seq data (Fig. 5).
Meanwhile, the proportion of POSTN+ cells (44, 10, 22,
and 57%) and THBS4+ cells (46, 13, 12, 23%) were con-
sistent with the expression trend of COL1A1/2+ cells
(Figs. 5B–E and S7B, C), indicating that the musculoske-
letal cells may regenerate from one cell source. Conversely,
ACAN, representing the cartilaginous extracellular matrix,
showed a different expression proﬁle in that it was highly
expressed at 0 dpa (34%) then gradually decreased during
the regeneration process until 21 dpa (4% at 3 dpa, 1% at 7
dpa, 1% at 21 dpa) (Fig. 5B–E and S7B, C).
A novel subcluster in COL2+ cells
Given these results, we then extracted the COL2+ cells and
divided them into six subclusters with unsupervised Seurat
clustering methods (Fig. 6A). The subclusters 0 and 1 both
highly expressed mitochondrial genes, such as ATP6 and
COX1 (Fig. 6B, C). Notably, the subcluster 1 speciﬁcally
expressed mitochondrion genes and was fully contained in
the mitochondrion cluster in Fig. 2. The subclusters 2, 3,
and 5 were CT lineage cells with highly expressed
COL1A1. Distinctly, the subcluster 3 was labeled mature
CT with the marker gene FBN1, while the subclusters 2 and
5 were labeled with the marker genes PPRX1 and FBN2
(Fig. 6B–D), representing the CT precursors. Meanwhile, in
the COL2-CT precursors subpopulation, the subcluster 5
highly expressed axolotl upper limb development key gene
HOXA13 and HAND2 (Fig. 6B, C) and showed a strong cell
cycling process (Fig. S9A–C), which represented an
actively
proliferating
COL2+
CT
regenerative
key
subcluster.
As mitochondria showed the regenerative speciﬁcity, we
then examined whether the COL2-mito subcluster had a
regenerative supporting function for the musculoskeletal
system. The molecular complex detection (MCODE) algo-
rithm was applied on the marker genes to identify densely
connected network components in the protein–protein
interaction network (Fig. 6E, F). In the MCODE network,
mitochondrial ATP synthase subunits proteins encoded
genes (ATP5F1A, ATP5F1B, PSMC3 et al.) were strongly
connected with each other. Meanwhile, the mitochondrial
ribosomal proteins encoded genes (MRPL16/19/30) and
mRNA
splicing
pathway-associated
genes
(CPSF7,
SNRPN, and ALYREF) were separated connected together,
which demonstrated increased mitochondria and high
translation activity. GO analysis indicated that this sub-
cluster performed the energy metabolite associated func-
tions such as response to oxygen levels, and ATP metabolic
process (Fig. 6G). Moreover, this subcluster showed a
response to wounding, including granulocyte activation and
cell division. The pseudo-temporal trajectory of COL2+
cells originated by the mitochondria subcluster and bifur-
cated into two big branches (Fig. 6H); The CT precursors
subclusters (subcluster 2 and 5) were mainly located in
branch 1, and the mature CT subclusters and cartilage
subclusters (subcluster 3 and 4) mainly composed branch 2
(Fig. 6H). In this trajectory, COL1A1/2, FBN1, and OTOS
were only increasingly expressed in branch 1, while FBN2
expression was higher in branch 2 than branch 1 (Fig. 6I).
To validate the COL2-mito subcluster in the blastema,
we simultaneously performed RNA FISH probing for
COL2A1 and immunoﬂuorescence of TOMM20 to identify
their location within the regeneration (Fig. 7). TOMM20
has a highest expression in 3 dpa blastema and mainly
located at AEC, which is corresponding to previous results
(Figs. 1B, 3A, B and 7A, right). At the top of the blastema,
the tissue under AEC, and the blastema center, COL2A1+
cells and TOMM20+ cells all have overlapping parts,
which indicated the COL2-mito subcluster location in
blastema (Fig. 7A). COL2A1+ cells are also detected
in the cartilage of 0 dpa samples overlapping a spot of
TOMM20+ cells, signifying the location of the 0 dpa part
in the COL2-mito subcluster (Fig. 7B, C).
Discussion
In this study, we applied scRNA-seq analysis and provided
single-cell transcriptomics that examined the gene expres-
sion level of individual cells in axolotl limbs from the early
to late stages of regeneration. We computationally identiﬁed
seven cell clusters in unamputated and regenerated limbs,
including a chondrocyte cluster contributing to blastema
forming by ECM, and a novel mitochondria cluster sup-
porting the regeneration process. We deﬁned the dediffer-
entiation and re-appearing process of COL1A1/2+ and
COL2A1+ populations after amputation, and described how
the COL2-mito subcluster supported the musculoskeletal
system regeneration by providing energy.
Chondrocytes as the origin of bone cells play an important
role in skeletal system development [30]. Previous studies on
axolotl limb regeneration model showed that the majority
cartilagenous skeleton contributes to cartilage regeneration
after amputation [3]. In our research, the chondrocyte cluster,
through secreting ECM, displayed a strong ligand–receptor
interaction with the AEC clusters, contributing to regenera-
tion. The ECM proteins are known to contribute to the
structural formation of the matrix during tissue repair and
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals novel mitochondria-related musculoskeletal cell populations during adult. . .

development in mammal models [31]. Meanwhile, ECM
proteins also were displayed to regulate heart regeneration in
zebraﬁsh model [32]. In view that the role of ECM during
axolotl limb regeneration was comparatively rarely explored,
our results demonstrated that the ECM act as a novel medium
for cartilage contributing to limb regeneration.
Fig. 6 ScRNA-seq analysis
revealed COL2-mito
subcluster in COL2A1+ cells
during the regeneration
process. A T-distributed
stochastic neighbor embedding
(t-SNE) visualizations of
COL2A1+ cells subclusters
identiﬁed using the
computational pipeline. B
Heatmap of top 10 differentiated
gene of six subclusters. C Violin
plots of subclusters’ marker
genes. D Feature Plot of CT
marker genes’ expression in
individual cells. E Volcano plot
of the differentiation gene
expression of COL2-mito
subcluster and the other
subclusters. F The
protein–protein interaction
network analyzed by the
molecular complex detection
(MCODE) algorithm. G −Log p
values for each GO term are
shown as histograms. Bars
color-coded according to −Log
p value, ranging from low
detected to the highest detected
levels (yellow and red). H
Pseudotime ordering of single
cells using 2D PCA. Each data
point represents a single cell
colored by cluster in A (left),
ampution time points (middle),
and pseudotime (right). I
Expression proﬁles of skeleton
system marker genes, different
cell signaling pathway
components, and blastema
marker genes along pseudotime
ordered byseven clusters in (A).
T. Qin et al.

The importance of COL2 in regeneration is now more
evident. In our results, COL1+/COL2+ cells (0 dpa)
expressed decreased COL1A1/A2 and COL2A1 at the early
regeneration stage, and re-increased COL1A1/A2 at 7 dpa
with a delayed re-increased COL2A1 expression. Previous
studies have demonstrated that chondrocyte dedifferentia-
tion is characterized by the upregulation of type I collagen
and downregulation of type II collagen, changing chon-
drocytes into ﬁbroblast-like cells in vitro [33]. Combining
the previous studies that the expression of the COL1A1/2 is
Fig. 7 Location of COL2-mito subcluster during the regeneration
process. A Location of COL2-mito subcluster at 3, 7, and 21 dpa. The
left part is the entire sample staining by DAPI. The middle part is
representative RNA in situ hybridization probing for COL2A1 of
blastemas from three locations at 3, 7, and 21 dpa. The right part is the
immunoﬂuorescence of TOMM20 antibody of blastemas from three
locations at 3, 7, and 21 dpa. The middle and right parts labeled by
number 1, 2, 3 are corresponding to the red boxes labeled by 1, 2, 3 at
the left part, and 1, 2, 3 respectively represent the top of blastema,
AEC with subcutaneous tissues, and blastema center. The positive
positions are labeled by asterisks. B Representative RNA in situ
hybridization probing for COL2A1 in 0 dpa samples. C The immu-
noﬂuorescence of TOMM20 on 0 dpa samples. Scale bars, 100 μm (A,
B, and C).
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals novel mitochondria-related musculoskeletal cell populations during adult. . .

earlier than COL2A1 during limb regeneration [34, 35] and
the chondrocytes would dedifferentiated during digits
regeneration [36], the downregulation of COL2A1 in
COL1+/COL2+ cells may represent the dedifferentiation
and trans-differentiation during regeneration that trans-
formed into a primitive state, as the origin of the muscu-
loskeletal system. Our data provided novel evidence for the
dedifferentiation and re-differentiation process of the mus-
culoskeletal system from a single-cell level, and may pro-
vide valuable clues in the understanding of musculoskeletal
system regeneration.
Indeed, previous studies on regeneration have revealed
the links between energy metabolism and transcription rate
[37, 38], in addition to clarifying the role of the mito-
chondria in as well as their roles on the modulation of stem
cell differentiation, niche adhesion, and teratoma formation
[20, 39]. Meanwhile, the distinct mitochondrial proﬁle
subpopulation contained in tumor cells was termed as the
cancer stem cells [40, 41]. So that, the mitochondrial
population maybe not only a cell differentiation state, but
also an independent cell population that exists during
regeneration. In regeneration, some types of cells act as
niche support for stem cells such as nerves [42]. In our
results, the mitochondria cluster as a speciﬁc regenerative
cell cluster demonstrated a high translation rate and stem
cell functions. This indicated that axolotl limb regeneration
relied on a particular cell cluster with a quantity of mito-
chondria to offer enough energy intermediated for stress
reaction, cell differentiation, and tissue remodeling and the
COL2-mitochondria subpopulation perform such functions
in musculoskeletal system regeneration. Furthermore, the
chondrocyte dedifferentiation is known to respond to
aspects of the microenvironment, such as oxidative stress
[43]. These data demonstrated that axolotl limbs could
generate population cells with the large amount of mito-
chondria after amputation, not only to deliver energy for a
plethora of cellular activities but also to mitigate the oxi-
dative stress which arises in successfully regenerated limbs.
It is possible that these dynamics may be relevant for the
clinical treatment of tissue regeneration.
The recent scRNA-seq researches on axolotl exposed the
CT clusters with their characters, mesenchymal cellular
diversity, and epithelial to mesenchymal transition during
regeneration [15–17]. The identiﬁcation and dynamic ana-
lysis results of the CT cluster and epidermis cluster from
Gerber et al. and Leigh et al. were consistent with our
analysis of CT cluster and AEC cluster in our research, thus
further supporting the reproducibility of our experimental
procedure.
In addition to the axolotl limb model for regenerative
researches, several mammalian regeneration models have
also been studied [44, 45]. In axolotl regeneration, the
immune responses to amputation and some signaling
pathways are similar to the mouse digit tip model [46, 47].
In contrast, the axolotl relies on the cartilaginous skeleton
for regeneration rather than direct ossiﬁcation as in mouse
digit tip regeneration [48]. Additionally, the importance of
mitochondria in stem cells and liver regeneration in mam-
mals [49, 50] is similar to the function of our mitochondria
cluster in axolotl limb regeneration—an until-now undis-
covered parallel which may offer further elucidation into
energy metabolism in regeneration. Our results revealed
novel insights into the regeneration biology which occurs in
the axolotl and other species, hopefully directing future
functional studies.
Material and methods
Axolotl husbandry, surgery, and cell isolation
All animal experiments were performed with the approval
of the Zhejiang University Ethics Committee (ZJU11602).
We established an axolotl colony (Ambystoma mexicanum)
with the axolotls obtained from the Guilin Salamander
Breeding Base. The adult axolotls were randomly selected
for experiments. For all surgical procedures, the animals
were anesthetized with 0.03% ethyl 3-aminobenzoate until
they were unresponsive to a tail pinch stimulus. We
amputated juvenile axolotl right forelimbs at the upper limb
level. The 0 dpa cells were harvested from 1 mm of adult
upper forelimbs. The 3 and 7 dpa cells were harvested from
1 mm proximal to the regenerative distal tissues (n = 4).
After dissection, tissues were ﬁnely chopped in DMEM and
digested in dissociation solution(C/T, 0.5 ml collagenase
2% + 10 ml, trypsin) at 37 °C then centrifuged at 1600 rpm.
The precipitation was re-suspended to obtain a concentra-
tion of approximately one million cells per milliliter.
C1 single-cell mRNA sequencing
Blastema and non-regenerating limb stump cells at 5 × 105
cells/ml were loaded onto two 17–25 μm C1 Single-Cell
Auto Prep integrated ﬂuidic circuits (Fluidigm) and cell
capture was performed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Individual capture sites were inspected under a
light microscope to conﬁrm the presence of single cells.
Empty capture wells and wells containing multiple cells or
cell debris were discarded for quality control. A SMARTer
Ultra Low RNA kit (Clontech) and an Advantage 2 PCR
Kit (Clontech) were used for cDNA generation. An
ArrayControl RNA Spots and Spikes kit (with spike num-
bers 1, 4, and 7) (Ambion) was used to monitor technical
variability, and the dilutions used were as recommended by
the manufacturer. The concentration of cDNA for every
single well was determined by Qubit™dsDNA HS Assay
T. Qin et al.

Kit. Multiplex sequencing libraries were generated using
the TruePrepTM DNA Library Prep Kit V2 and the Nextera
XT Index Kit (Illumina). Libraries were pooled and sub-
jected to sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Illumina).
Bulk RNA-seq library construction
We used mRNA Capture Beads (VAHTS mRNA-seq v2
Library Prep Kit for Illumina, Vazyme) to extract mRNA
from total RNA. PrimeScript™Double Strand cDNA
Synthesis Kit (TaKaRa) was used to synthesize double-
stranded cDNA from puriﬁed polyadenylated mRNA tem-
plates. We used TruePrep DNA Library Prep Kit V2 for
Illumina (TaKaRa) to prepare cDNA libraries for Illumina
sequencing.
Data analysis pipeline
We mainly referred to the transcriptome from Bryant’s
research [8] and used the other two transcriptomes and one
genome as an aid. The clean reads were obtained from the
high quality region (10–60 nt) of the sequenced Illumina
raw reads, and were mapped with three de novo tran-
scriptome assemblies from previous studies containing both
axolotl and Chinese giant salamander, in addition to the
genome of Xenopus laevis [7, 8, 18] (609,180 transcripts)
through Bowtie. The methods for functional annotation
were performed according to the methods published by
Bryant [8] and we got 83,296 transcripts were ultimately
annotated. The functional annotation of de novo assembled
transcriptomes was performed by Trinotate (http://trinotate.
github.io). After data quality control and removal of 72
multiple cell samples, 938 cells with >212,000 transcripts
(15,650 genes) were selected for further analysis.
Sequencing data analysis
The differential expression genes (DE genes) were calculated
by DEseq2 R package. ScRNA-seq expression data were
analyzed with Seurat v2.0.1 (PCA, Cluster, t-SNE and clus-
ter) [19]. In brief, the Seurat object was generated from digital
gene expression matrices. In the standard preprocessing
workﬂow of Seurat, we selected 15,608 variable genes for
PCA, whereupon we performed cell cluster and t-SNE.
Marker genes of each cell cluster were outputted for GO
analysis. GOEAST (http://omicslab.genetics.ac.cn/GOEAST/)
was used to perform GO analysis. We used GSEA for GO
analysis and signaling pathway analysis. Cell clusters were
annotated with the information of marker genes and GO
analysis results. Digital gene expression matrices with anno-
tations from Seurat were analyzed by Monocle v2.3.6
(pseudotime analysis). The pseudo-temporal gene trend
heatmap was performed by placing all single cells in their
pseudotime order by compressing small branches into a larger
central branch and performed k-means clustering on all genes
(p value < 0.05). The cell–cell interactions visualized by the
connectivity map were constructed by R package Circlize
0.4.3 [51].
The count of cell–cell interactions was based on the
ligand–receptor pairings. GSEA was performed using GSEA
software. The signaling pathway analysis used the gene
sets KEGG, REACTOME and BIOCARTA (www.broa
dinstitute.org/gsea/doc/GSEAUserGuideFrame.html).
The
protein–protein interaction enrichment analysis was carried
out with the databases BioGrid, InWeb_IM, and OmniPath.
Histological examination
The harvested specimens were immediately ﬁxed in 4%
(w/v) paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline for 24
h (n = 3). The samples were then dehydrated through an
alcohol gradient, cleared, and embedded in parafﬁn blocks.
Histological sections (7 mm) were prepared using a micro-
tome and subsequently stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E), and Safranin O.
Immunostaining
Parafﬁn sections for immunohistochemistry were treated
with 0.05% Trypsin-EDTA (Gibco), 3% (v/v) hydrogen
peroxide in methanol, and 1% (w/v) BSA. Sections were
incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies for
TOMM20 (Abcam, ab78547), COL1 (Santa Cruz, sc-8784),
MDK (Afﬁnity, DF6054), PTPRC (Afﬁnity, DF6839), PIF1
(Afﬁnity, DF9256), and KRT8 (Afﬁnity, AF6097). For
immunohistochemical assays, sections were then incubated
with
secondary
antibodies
(Beyotime
Biotechnology,
China) for 2 h at room temperature. The DAB substrate
system (ZSGB-bio, Beijing, China) was used for color
development. Hematoxylin staining was utilized to reveal
the cell nuclei. For immunoﬂuorescence assays, sections
were then incubated with secondary antibodies (Invitrogen)
for 2 h at room temperature. DAPI staining was utilized to
reveal the cell nuclei (n = 3, 3 times the experiment shown
was replicated in the laboratory).
Transmission electron microscopy
The samples (tissues from 0, 3, 7, and 21 dpa axolotl limbs)
were ﬁxed and handled by standard procedures as described
previously [52]. Mitochondria were counted per 300,00×
picture and each sample was averaged from ten pictures and
analyzed at least three times. Image-Pro Plus (IPP 6.0,
Media Cybernetics, Rockville, MD, http://www.mediacy.
com.cn/cn/index/index.asp) software was used to counts the
mitochondria numbers.
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals novel mitochondria-related musculoskeletal cell populations during adult. . .

RNA FISH assay
Fluorescence-conjugated Col2a1 probes for RNA FISH
were generated in line with the protocols of Biosearch
Technologies. All RNA hybridization experiments were
performed as described in manuals of Biosearch Technol-
ogies. Treated samples were visualized by confocal micro-
scopy (FV1000, Olympus) (n = 3, 3 times the experiment
shown was replicated in the laboratory).
Statistical analysis
Assuming a onefold change in mitochondria number, with
an alpha error of 0.05%, two-tailed, the data shown are
mean ± SEM of the number of independent experiments
indicated (n). The represent experiments performed on at
least three separate occasions with similar outcomes. The
comparisons between groups were performed using a t test
using GraphPad Prism software. Statistical differences were
determined based on a P value (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and
***p < 0.001). The mitochondria were compared in quan-
titative blinded analyses.
Data availability
All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are
available in the GSA (CRA002291) or present in the paper
and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related
to this paper may be requested from the authors.
Code availability
All code follows the ofﬁcial tutorial. Relative information
may be requested from the authors.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National key
research and development program of China [2017YFA0104902]; and
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) grants
[81972099, 81871764, 82072463, 81522029, 81772418, 31570987,
81330041, 81401781, 81572157]. Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science
Foundation of China (LR20H060001). Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central Universities. Written on behalf of the AME Transla-
tional Medicine Collaborative Group. We are grateful to the Core
Facilities of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, and Bio-Ultra-
structure Analysis Lab. of Analysis Center of Agrobiology and
Environmental Sciences of the Zhejiang University for technical
assistance.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
References
1. Shieh SJ, Cheng TC. Regeneration and repair of human digits and
limbs: fact and ﬁction. Regeneration. 2015;2:149–68.
2. Brockes JP. Amphibian limb regeneration: rebuilding a complex
structure. Science. 1997;276:81–7.
3. Kragl M, Knapp D, Nacu E, Khattak S, Maden M, Epperlein HH,
et al. Cells keep a memory of their tissue origin during axolotl
limb regeneration. Nature. 2009;460:60–5.
4. Looso M, Preussner J, Sousounis K, Bruckskotten M, Michel CS,
Lignelli E, et al. A de novo assembly of the newt transcriptome
combined with proteomic validation identiﬁes new protein
families expressed during tissue regeneration. Genome Biol.
2013;14:R16.
5. Nacu E, Gromberg E, Oliveira CR, Drechsel D, Tanaka EM.
FGF8 and SHH substitute for anterior-posterior tissue interactions
to induce limb regeneration. Nature. 2016;533:407–10.
6. Haas BJ, Whited JL. Advances in decoding axolotl limb regen-
eration. Trends Genet. 2017;33:553–65.
7. Stewart R, Rascón CA, Tian S, Nie J, Barry C, Chu LF, et al.
Comparative RNA-seq analysis in the unsequenced axolotl: the
oncogene burst highlights early gene expression in the blastema.
PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9:e1002936.
8. Bryant DM, Johnson K, DiTommaso T, et al. A tissue-mapped
axolotl de novo transcriptome enables identiﬁcation of limb
regeneration factors. Cell Rep. 2017;18:762–76.
9. Lanctôt C. Single cell analysis reveals concomitant transcription
of pluripotent and lineage markers during the early steps of dif-
ferentiation
of
embryonic
stem
cells.
Stem
Cells.
2015;
33:2949–60.
10. Han X, Chen H, Huang D, Chen H, Fei L, Cheng C, et al.
Mapping human pluripotent stem cell differentiation pathways
using high throughput single-cell RNA-sequencing. Genome Biol.
2018;19:47.
11. Villani AC, Satija R, Reynolds G, Sarkizova S, Shekhar K,
Fletcher J, et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals new types of human
blood dendritic cells, monocytes, and progenitors. Science.
2017;356:1955–6.
12. Li H, Horns F, Wu B, Xie Q, Li J, Li T, et al. Classifying dro-
sophila olfactory projection neuron subtypes by single-cell RNA
sequencing. Cell. 2017;171:1206–20.e22.
13. Wu B, An C, Li Y, Yin Z, Gong L, Li Z, et al. Reconstructing
lineage hierarchies of mouse uterus epithelial development using
single-cell analysis. Stem Cell Rep. 2017;9:381–96.
14. Han X, Wang R, Zhou Y, Fei L, Sun H, Lai S, et al. Mapping
the Mouse. Cell Atlas Microwell-Seq Cell. 2018;172:1091–107.
e17.
15. Gerber T, Murawala P, Knapp D, et al. Single-cell analysis
uncovers convergence of cell identities during axolotl limb
regeneration. Science. 2018;362:eaaq0681.
16. Leigh ND, Dunlap GS, Johnson K, Mariano R, Oshiro R, Wong
AY, et al. Transcriptomic landscape of the blastema niche in
regenerating adult axolotl limbs at single-cell resolution. Nat
Commun. 2018;9:5153.
17. Li H, Wei X, Zhou L, Zhang W, Wang C, Guo Y et al. Dynamic
cell transition and immune response landscapes of axolotl limb
regeneration revealed by single-cell analysis. Protein Cell. 2020
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13238-020-00763-1.
18. Geng X, Li W, Shang H, Gou Q, Zhang F, Zang X, et al. A
reference gene set construction using RNA-seq of multiple tissues
of Chinese giant salamander, Andrias davidianus. Gigascience.
2017;6:1–7.
19. Satija R, Farrell JA, Gennert D, Schier AF, Regev A. Spatial
reconstruction of single-cell gene expression data. Nat Biotechnol.
2015;33:495–502.
T. Qin et al.

20. Schieke SM, Ma M, Cao L, McCoy JP, Liu C, Hensel NF, et al.
Mitochondrial metabolism modulates differentiation and teratoma
formation capacity in mouse embryonic stem cells. J Biol Chem.
2008;283:28506–12.
21. Roensch K, Tazaki A, Chara O, Tanaka EM. Progressive speci-
ﬁcation rather than intercalation of segments during limb regen-
eration. Science. 2013;342:1375–9.
22. Christensen RN, Tassava RA. Apical epithelial cap morphology
and ﬁbronectin gene expression in regenerating axolotl limbs. Dev
Dyn. 2000;217:216–24.
23. Endo T, Bryant SV, Gardiner DM. A stepwise model system for
limb regeneration. Dev Biol. 2004;270:135–45.
24. SINGER M, INOUE S. The nerve and the epidermal apical cap in
regeneration of the forelimb of adult triturus. J Exp Zool.
1964;155:105–16.
25. Camp JG, Sekine K, Gerber T, Loefﬂer-Wirth H, Binder H, Gac
M, et al. Multilineage communication regulates human liver bud
development from pluripotency. Nature. 2017;546:533–8.
26. Zepp JA, Zacharias WJ, Frank DB, Cavanaugh CA, Zhou S,
Morley MP, et al. Distinct mesenchymal lineages and niches
promote epithelial self-renewal and myoﬁbrogenesis in the lung.
Cell. 2017;170:1134–48.e10.
27. Godwin JW, Pinto AR, Rosenthal NA. Macrophages are required
for adult salamander limb regeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2013;110:9415–20.
28. Trapnell C, Cacchiarelli D, Grimsby J, Pokharel P, Li S, Morse M,
et al. The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are
revealed by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nat Bio-
technol. 2014;32:381–6.
29. Qiu X, Mao Q, Tang Y, Wang L, Chawla R, Pliner HA, et al.
Reversed graph embedding resolves complex single-cell trajec-
tories. Nat Methods. 2017;14:979–82.
30. Hinton RJ, Jing Y, Jing J, Feng JQ. Roles of chondrocytes in
endochondral bone formation and fracture repair. J Dent Res.
2017;96:23–30.
31. Midwood KS, Williams LV, Schwarzbauer JE. Tissue repair and
the dynamics of the extracellular matrix. Int J Biochem Cell Biol.
2004;36:1031–7.
32. Garcia-Puig A, Mosquera JL, Jiménez-Delgado S, García-Pastor
C, Jorba I, Navajas D, et al. Proteomics analysis of extracellular
matrix remodeling during zebraﬁsh heart regeneration. Mol Cell
Proteom. 2019;18:1745–55.
33. Cheng T, Maddox NC, Wong AW, Rahnama R, Kuo AC.
Comparison of gene expression patterns in articular cartilage and
dedifferentiated
articular
chondrocytes.
J
Orthop
Res.
2012;30:234–45.
34. Asahina K, Obara M, Yoshizato K. Expression of genes of type I
and type II collagen in the formation and development of the
blastema of regenerating newt limb. Dev Dyn. 1999;216:59–71.
35. Mitogawa K, Makanae A, Satoh A, Satoh A. Comparative ana-
lysis of cartilage marker gene expression patterns during axolotl
and xenopus limb regeneration. PLoS ONE. 2015;10:e0133375.
36. Tanaka HV, Ng NC, Yang YZ, Casco-Robles MM, Maruo F,
Tsonis PA, et al. A developmentally regulated switch from stem
cells to dedifferentiation for limb muscle regeneration in newts.
Nat Commun. 2016;7:11069.
37. das NRP, Jones NS, Andreu L, Gupta R, Enver T, Iborra FJ.
Connecting variability in global transcription rate to mitochondrial
variability. PLoS Biol. 2010;8:e1000560.
38. Kiryu-Seo S, Kiyama H. Mitochondrial behavior during axon
regeneration/degeneration in vivo. Neurosci Res. 2019;139:42–7.
39. Wang ZA, Huang J, Kalderon D. Drosophila follicle stem cells are
regulated by proliferation and niche adhesion as well as mito-
chondria and ROS. Nat Commun. 2012;3:769.
40. Chen H, Chan DC. Mitochondrial dynamics in regulating the
unique phenotypes of cancer and stem cells. Cell Metab.
2017;26:39–48.
41. Xie Q, Wu Q, Horbinski CM, Flavahan WA, Yang K, Zhou W,
et al. Mitochondrial control by DRP1 in brain tumor initiating
cells. Nat Neurosci. 2015;18:501–10.
42. Kumar A, Brockes JP. Nerve dependence in tissue, organ, and
appendage regeneration. Trends Neurosci. 2012;35:691–9.
43. Ashraf S, Cha BH, Kim JS, Ahn J, Han I, Park H, et al. Regulation
of senescence associated signaling mechanisms in chondrocytes
for cartilage tissue regeneration. Osteoarthr Cartil. 2016;24:
196–205.
44. Fernando WA, Leininger E, Simkin J, Li N, Malcom CA, Sathya-
moorthi S, et al. Wound healing and blastema formation in regen-
erating digit tips of adult mice. Dev Biol. 2011;350:301–10.
45. Kierdorf U, Kierdorf H. Antler regrowth as a form of epimorphic
regeneration in vertebrates—a comparative view. Front Biosci.
2012;4:1606–24.
46. Takeo M, Chou WC, Sun Q, Lee W, Rabbani P, Loomis C, et al.
Wnt activation in nail epithelium couples nail growth to digit
regeneration. Nature. 2013;499:228–32.
47. Johnson GL, Masias EJ, Lehoczky JA. Cellular heterogeneity and
lineage restriction during mouse digit tip regeneration at single-
cell resolution. Dev Cell. 2020;52:525–40.
48. Han M, Yang X, Lee J, Allan CH, Muneoka K. Development and
regeneration of the neonatal digit tip in mice. Dev Biol.
2008;315:125–35.
49. Mastrodonato M, Portincasa P, Mentino D, Rossi R, Resta L, Ferri
D, et al. Caveolin-1 and mitochondrial alterations in regenerating
rat liver. Microsc Res Tech. 2012;75:1026–32.
50. Khacho M, Clark A, Svoboda DS, Azzi J, MacLaurin JG,
Meghaizel C, et al. Mitochondrial dynamics impacts stem cell
identity and fate decisions by regulating a nuclear transcriptional
program. Cell Stem Cell. 2016;19:232–47.
51. Gu Z, Gu L, Eils R, Schlesner M, Brors B. circlize Implements
and
enhances
circular
visualization
in
R.
Bioinformatics.
2014;30:2811–2.
52. Chen X, Yin Z, Chen JL, Shen WL, Liu HH, Tang QM, et al. Force
and scleraxis synergistically promote the commitment of human ES
cells derived MSCs to tenocytes. Sci Rep. 2012;2:977.
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals novel mitochondria-related musculoskeletal cell populations during adult. . .

Afﬁliations
Tian Qin1,2,3,4
●Chun-mei Fan1,2,3,4
●Ting-zhang Wang5
●Heng Sun2,3,4,6,7
●Yan-yan Zhao1,2,3,4
●Ruo-jin Yan1,2,3,4
●
Long Yang2,8
●Wei-liang Shen1,4,8
●Jun-xin Lin2,3,4,6,7
●Varitsara Bunpetch2,3,4,6,7
●Magali Cucchiarini9
●
Nicholas D. Clement10
●Christopher E. Mason
11,12,13,14
●Norimasa Nakamura15
●Rameah Bhonde16
●Zi Yin
2,4,6
●
Xiao Chen
1,2,3,4
1
Dr. Li Dak Sum-Yip Yio Chin Center for Stem Cells and
Regenerative Medicine and Department of Orthopedic Surgery of
The Second Afﬁliated Hospital,, Zhejiang University School of
Medicine, Hangzhou, China
2
Key Laboratory of Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine
of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou, China
3
Department of Sports Medicine, Zhejiang University School of
Medicine, Hangzhou, China
4
China Orthopedic Regenerative Medicine Group (CORMed),
Hangzhou, China
5
Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology and Bioinformatics of
Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, China
6
Dr. Li Dak Sum-Yip Yio Chin Center for Stem Cells and
Regenerative Medicine, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou, China
7
Zhejiang University-University of Edinburgh Institute & School of
Basic Medicine, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou, China
8
Department of Orthopedic Surgery of the Second Afﬁliated
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou, China
9
Center of Experimental Orthopaedics, Saarland University Medical
Center and Saarland University, Kirrbergerstr. Bldg 37, D-66421
Homburg/Saar, Germany
10
Department of Orthopaedics and Trauma, Royal Inﬁrmary of
Edinburgh, Little France, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
11
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell
Medicine, New York, NY, USA
12
The HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud
Institute for Computational Biomedicine,, Weill Cornell Medicine,
New York, NY, USA
13
The WorldQuant Initiative for Quantitative Prediction, Weill
Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA
14
The Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell
Medicine, New York, NY, USA
15
Institute for Medical Science in Sports, Osaka Health Science
University, 1-9-27, Tenma, Kita-ku, Osaka, Osaka 5300043,
Japan
16
Dr. Ramesh Bhonde, Director Research, Dr. D. Y. Patil
Vidyapeeth, Pimpri, Pune 411018, India
T. Qin et al.

===== Raj2020_Neuron_ZebrafishBrain =====
NeuroResource
Emergence of Neuronal Diversity during Vertebrate
Brain Development
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Developmental atlas deﬁnes zebraﬁsh brain cell types from
embryo to juvenile
d Optimized scGESTALT CRISPR-Cas9 lineage recorder
enables higher barcode capture
d Comparison of early versus late neural progenitors identiﬁes
different landscapes
Authors
Bushra Raj, Jeffrey A. Farrell,
Jialin Liu, ..., or de Relic,
Jessica M. Leslie, Alexander F. Schier
Correspondence
bushranraj@gmail.com (B.R.),
alex.schier@unibas.ch (A.F.S.)
In Brief
The complexity and dynamics of
vertebrate brain development are poorly
understood. Raj et al. have generated a
single-cell atlas of zebraﬁsh brain
development. They document the
expansion of neuronal diversity, analyze
the transition from early to late
progenitors, and reconstruct cellular
trajectories and lineages.
Raj et al., 2020, Neuron 108, 1058–1074
December 23, 2020 ª 2020 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.09.023
ll

NeuroResource
Emergence of Neuronal Diversity
during Vertebrate Brain Development
Bushra Raj,1,2,11,* Jeffrey A. Farrell,1,3 Jialin Liu,2,4 Jakob El Kholtei,2,4 Adam N. Carte,1,4,5 Joaquin Navajas Acedo,2,4
Lucia Y. Du,2,4 Aaron McKenna,6 or de Relic,4,7 Jessica M. Leslie,1 and Alexander F. Schier1,2,4,8,9,10,*
1Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
2Allen Discovery Center for Cell Lineage Tracing, Seattle, WA, USA
3Unit on Cell Speciﬁcation and Differentiation, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA
4Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland
5Systems, Synthetic, and Quantitative Biology Program, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
6Department of Molecular and Systems Biology, Dartmouth Geisel School of Medicine, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA
7Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), 4056 Basel, Switzerland
8Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
9Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
10Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
11Lead Contact
*Correspondence: bushranraj@gmail.com (B.R.), alex.schier@unibas.ch (A.F.S.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.09.023
SUMMARY
Neurogenesis comprises many highly regulated processes including proliferation, differentiation, and matura-
tion. However, the transcriptional landscapes underlying brain development are poorly characterized. We
describe a developmental single-cell catalog of 220,000 zebraﬁsh brain cells encompassing 12 stages
from embryo to larva. We characterize known and novel gene markers for 800 clusters and provide an over-
view of the diversiﬁcation of neurons and progenitors across these time points. We also introduce an optimized
GESTALT lineage recorder that enables higher expression and recovery of Cas9-edited barcodes to query line-
age segregation. Cell type characterization indicates that most embryonic neural progenitor states are transi-
tory and transcriptionally distinct from neural progenitors of post-embryonic stages. Reconstruction of cell
speciﬁcation trajectories reveals that late-stage retinal neural progenitors transcriptionally overlap cell states
observed in the embryo. The zebraﬁsh brain development atlas provides a resource to deﬁne and manipulate
speciﬁc subsets of neurons and to uncover the molecular mechanisms underlying vertebrate neurogenesis.
INTRODUCTION
The vertebrate brain develops from a limited pool of embryonic
neural progenitor cells that cycle through rounds of prolifera-
tion, diversiﬁcation, and terminal differentiation into an exten-
sive catalog of distinct neuronal and glial cell types. A central
goal in developmental neurobiology is to investigate how
neuronal complexity arises through molecular speciﬁcation
and commitment by studying the origins and fates of cells dur-
ing development. Fundamental insights into these processes
have been gained via classic approaches using genetic
markers,
perturbations,
and
fate
mapping
(Cepko,
2014;
Kretzschmar and Watt, 2012; Ma et al., 2018; Wamsley and
Fishell, 2017; Wilson et al., 2002; Woo and Fraser, 1995; Wood-
worth et al., 2017). These approaches have recently been com-
plemented by single-cell genomics technologies in the devel-
oping nervous system, including the spinal cord (Delile et al.,
2019; Rosenberg et al., 2018), cortex (Nowakowski et al.,
2017; Zhong et al., 2018); olfactory system (Li et al., 2017), cer-
ebellum (Carter et al., 2018; Tambalo et al., 2020), retina (Clark
et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020), and whole animal
(Farnsworth et al., 2020; Farrell et al., 2018; Wagner et al.,
2018). These studies have provided transcriptome-level views
of the rich heterogeneous states that cells progress through
as they proliferate, migrate, and differentiate. Nevertheless, ex-
isting datasets are limited in their scope as they focus on spe-
ciﬁc brain regions, survey limited time points, or do not enrich
for neural cell types, thereby missing transitions and cellular
diversity. Thus, there is a need for a large-scale neurodevelop-
mental single-cell resource that proﬁles whole brain develop-
ment across a range of closely spaced embryonic and post-
embryonic stages. In addition, such an atlas would help
address fundamental questions about the dynamics of brain
development. For example, it is poorly understood how embry-
onic neural progenitors are molecularly related to post-embry-
onic neural progenitors. Furthermore, the transcriptional pro-
grams that are activated or suppressed as neural progenitors
become fate-restricted and differentiate are largely unknown.
1058
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020 ª 2020 Elsevier Inc.
ll

15 d
14 h
12 h
12 h
18 h
24 h
36 h
3 d
5 d
15 d
tSNE-1
tSNE-2
eye
forebrain
midbrain
hindbrain
neural
non-neural
neural crest
placode
mesoderm
endoderm
blood
pharyngeal
epidermal
unknown
16 h
18 h
20 h
24 h
36 h
2 d
3 d
segmentation
pharyngula
hatching
larval
8,349
8,164
9,930
10,143
12,226
9,105
10,719
15,558 17,290 31,659
28,689
61,205
5 d
8 d
5 d
A
B
C
D
E
F
Gel beads
Construct
libraries
Oil
Cells
Reagents
Cells
or
Brain + Eyes
Head
(12 h to 3 d)
(5 d to 15 d)
2 d
dlx1a
sox1a
pdyn
Lateral view
Ventral view
TVZ
ADi
VHyp
LHyp
VHyp
VHyp
VHyp
VDi
AFb
Le
Le
VHyp
*
* *
* *
*
A
P
klf17
ptgs2a
tp63
sdpra
12 h
DAPI
foxg1b
ompa
ompa
DAPI
foxg1b
ompa
DAPI
foxg1b
HC
BC/AC
PR
RGC
Figure 1. Developmental Compendium of Zebraﬁsh Head and Brain Cell Types
(A) Schematic of the developmental stages proﬁled. Red hatched line, head regions selected for enrichment of brain cells. Samples from 5 to 15 dpf were
dissected to obtain brain and eye speciﬁcally. h, hours post fertilization; d, days post fertilization
(B) Schematic of scRNA-seq using the 10X Genomics platform.
(C) Cell type heterogeneity within each stage. Clusters at each stage were assigned to a region or tissue type based on known markers and color coded to reﬂect
their classiﬁcation. tSNE implementations: Barnes-Hut (12 h to 3 d), Fourier transform (5 d and 15 d).
(D) In situ hybridization for novel markers in the trigeminal placode at 12 hpf. klf17 is expressed on the anterior polster and ventral mesoderm, delineating the
border of the embryo. Trigeminal ganglia markers ptgs2a, tp63, and sdpra (cavin2a) are expressed bilaterally (asterisks) posterior to the eye. Eyes are delineated
by dotted lines. A: Anterior; P: Posterior. Scale bar, 100 mm.
(E) In situ hybridization validation of novel marker sox1a in the hypothalamus at 2 dpf. Top panels, lateral view of brain; Bottom panels, ventral view of brain. dlx1a
and pdyn are known hypothalamic markers. Eyes are delineated by dotted lines. VHyp: Ventral Hypothalamus; TVZ: Telencephalic Ventricular Zone; ADi: Anterior
Diencephalon; AFb: Anterior Forebrain; VDi: Ventral Diencephalon; Le: Lens. Scale bar, 200 mm.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
NeuroResource
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020
1059

Here we present resources to obtain global views of neuro-
genesis, cell type heterogeneity, speciﬁcation trajectories, and
lineage relationships in the developing zebraﬁsh brain. We
generated a single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) atlas consisting
of 220,000 cells from 12 h post fertilization (hpf) to 15 days
post fertilization (dpf). We also created a new version of the
scGESTALT CRISPR-Cas9 lineage recorder (McKenna et al.,
2016; Raj et al., 2018b) with improved barcode capture and
used it to query early lineage decisions. Using the cell type atlas,
we analyzed the expansion of neuronal diversity, the loss of tran-
sitory embryonic progenitors, and the maintenance of distinct
larval progenitor states. We reconstructed cell speciﬁcation tra-
jectories of the zebraﬁsh retina and hypothalamus, revealing
gene expression cascades and distinct speciﬁcation programs.
Collectively, the zebraﬁsh brain development atlas reveals mo-
lecular and cellular changes at an unprecedented scale and res-
olution and lays the foundation for the detailed analysis of
neuronal diversiﬁcation.
RESULTS
Building a Developmental Atlas of the Zebraﬁsh Brain
with Single-Cell Transcriptomics
To reveal the landscape of cell states and cell types during brain
development, we proﬁled 223,037 cells across 12 stages of ze-
braﬁsh embryonic and larval development using the 10X Chro-
mium scRNA-seq platform. Samples spanned from 12 hpf
(shortly after gastrulation), when the embryo is undergoing early
developmental patterning, to 15 dpf, when larvae are mature,
exhibit complex behaviors, and are expected to exhibit substan-
tial cell type diversity (Figure 1A). To enrich for brain cell types,
we dissected the heads of animals from 12 hpf to 3 dpf and
the brains and eyes from 5 dpf to 15 dpf (Figure 1B). To deter-
mine cell type diversity in the head and brain of zebraﬁsh, data
from each stage was analyzed individually using Louvain clus-
tering (Figures 1C and S1). This approach identiﬁed a total of
815 cell clusters across all 12 time points (Table S1). To classify
each cluster, we compared enriched gene markers with existing
gene expression annotations in the ZFIN database and literature,
as described previously (Raj et al., 2018b). Plotting expression of
known cell type markers identiﬁed clusters corresponding to
neural progenitors (sox19a), dozens of neuron subtypes (e.g.,
elavl3, gad2, or slc17a6b), eye cells (e.g., foxg1b, lim2.4, pmela,
ca14, gnat1, or opn1mw1), radial glia (e.g., mfge8a, or s100b),
neural crest (sox10), oligodendrocytes (mbpa), blood cells
(e.g., cahz, etv2, or cd74a), cartilage (e.g., matn4 or col9a2),
pharyngeal arches (e.g., pmp22a, prrx1b, or barx1), sensory
placodes (e.g., dlx3b or six1b), and epidermal cells (e.g. epcam
or cldni), among others. As expected, cell type complexity
increased with developmental time. We validated new marker
expression across several cell types identiﬁed in our dataset,
such as sdpra in the trigeminal placode, sox1a in the hypothala-
mus, and ompa in the retina (Figures 1D–1F). Our analysis also
revealed groups of embryonic clusters that were absent or tran-
scriptionally distinct from larval clusters, suggesting that many
embryonic cell states are transitory. Several of these transitions
are known developmental changes (e.g., loss of placodes and
rhombomeres), but changes in neural progenitor cell states are
poorly understood (see below).
To enable direct comparison of cell types across our time
course, we subsetted the 12 hpf dataset to only comprise neural
populations and blood cells found in the brain, eliminating non-
relevant head cells from earlier stages, such as mesoderm, plac-
odes, and periderm. This approach resulted in an initial set of 21
clusters at 12 hpf (Figure 2A) that diversiﬁed into 98 clusters by
15 dpf (Figure 2C). Notably, most clusters could be uniquely
identiﬁed using a minimal group of 2 or 3 enriched gene markers
(Figures 2B and 2D). For example, at 12 hpf, the optic vesicle is
identiﬁed by expression of rx2 and rx3; hindbrain rhombomeres
5/6 by hoxb3a and eng2b; and ventral diencephalon by nkx2.4a
and dbx1a. Similarly, at 15 dpf, the cerebellar granule cells are
marked by expression of oprd1b and zic2a; optic tectum by
pax7a and tal1; and a new retinal cell type by kidins220a, foxg1b
(exclusively detected in retinal cells), and tbx3a. We did not ﬁnd
minimal groups of marker genes to unambiguously deﬁne
cycling progenitors, differentiating progenitors, and newly born
neurons, as many of these subtypes had similar expression sig-
natures of pan-neuronal or pan-progenitor marker genes, such
as elavl3 and tubb5 in neurons and rpl5a and npm1a in progen-
itors (Figure 2D, gray box).
At 12 hpf, the early demarcation of multiple brain regions is
already apparent, and by 15 dpf these regions expand and diver-
sify further. For example, the optic vesicle at 12 hpf is deﬁned by
one cluster and is the origin of 18 retinal cell types at 15 dpf. Simi-
larly, a single cluster of ventral diencephalon cells (expressing
shha, nkx2.4a, nkx2.1, and rx3) at 12 hpf develops into 7 major
hypothalamus cell types at 15 dpf. An exception to this diversiﬁ-
cation is the loss of rhombomeres (r1–r7) in the hindbrain (Moens
and Prince, 2002).
Tofurtherexplorebrainneuronalsubtypesat15dpf,weanalyzed
the expression of transcription factors, neuropeptides and their re-
ceptors, and genes involved in neuronal physiology such as neuro-
transmitters, transporters, receptors, and channels (Chen et al.,
2017; Pandey et al., 2018; Tiklova´ et al., 2019; Zeisel et al., 2018).
Our results indicate that nearly all identiﬁed neuron subtypes can
be distinguished from one another via the expression of individual
or combinations of genes belonging to these categories (Figures
3A–3C). Forexample,cluster2 and 84 neuronsareGABAergicfore-
brain neurons that express dlx2a and dlx5a, while cluster 84 neu-
rons additionally express six3b, gria1a, and gria2b.
We next asked if neuron clusters detected at 15 dpf are found
at earlier larval stages, when most behavioral experiments are
performed (Figure S2). 68% (23/34 clusters) and 74% (25/34
clusters) of 15 dpf neuron clusters have a closely matching coun-
terpart at 5 dpf and 8 dpf (based on enriched marker gene
expression), respectively (Figure 3D). Sampling issues might
(F) smFISH validation of novel marker ompa in horizontal cells of the retina at 5 dpf. Left panel, retina section stained with DAPI (gray), pan-retinal foxg1b (cyan)
and ompa (yellow). Strong yellow signal in photoreceptors represent autoﬂuorescence. White box, area zoomed in for the right panels. Dotted lines, horizontal cell
layer. PR, photoreceptor cells; HC, horizontal cells; BC, bipolar cells; AC, amacrine cells; RGC, retinal ganglion cells
See also Figure S1.
ll
NeuroResource
1060
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020

15 d
A
B
C
D
tSNE-1
tSNE-2
tSNE-1
tSNE-2
12 h
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
0
1
2
5
7
8
9
11
12
13
17
18
20
23
24
27
31
32
36
37
39
foxa2
aplnr2
noto
lhx4
tal1
lmo2
foxa
helt
nkx6.2
dla
srrm4
neurod1
gabra5
hoxb2a
kctd12.2
prss35
cyp26b1
gsx2
vax1
nkx2.9
nkx2.4a
sst1.2
dbx1a
fgf17
zic4
VGLL3
irx3a
hoxa2b
elavl3
ntn1b
hesx1
nr2e1
lhx5
hoxb3a
egr2b
mafba
barhl2
barhl1a
hoxa3a
hoxd4a
dmbx1a
sox21a
pax2a
gbx2
her5
eng2a
rx2
rx3
0
1
2
avg exp
pct exp
●
●
●
●
●
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
slc13a1
fabp7b
fev
tph2
bco2b
wu:fc46h12
elovl1a
apodb
tbx3a
kidins220a
stab2
mrc1a
oca2
tyrp1b
npy
sst1.1
foxb1b
havcr2
mpz
plp1b
ctss2.1
ctsl.1
grn1
ccl19a.1
slc4a1a
ba1
ponzr1
myo5b
postna
itga6b
nexn.1
dgkaa
irbpl
rtn4rl2b
prss12
egr2b
tnw
dcn
lye
krt1−19d
jam2a
rgcc
scgn
bik
agr2
grm6b
slc18a3a
shox2
phox2bb
cryaba
sparcl1
eya4
six1b
prph
sp8a
sst3
tlx3b
dlg1
uts1
ccr9a
ccl33.3
aplnra
aplnrb
sox10
ntng1a
neurod4
slc4a5
rprmb
ompa
scn4ab
fstl3
zwi
dazap1
prkcda
slc43a3b
tagln
myl9a
aoc2
ndufa4l2a
tgfbi
g0s2
pdyn
sox14
ak5l
th2
prdx1
carhsp1
fgfbp1b.1
bhmt
penka
gsx1
prox1b
ogn
col2a1a
adcyap1a
kctd12.1
gng8
pvalb7
aldoca
irx7
calb1
lhx4
soul5
ggctb
sagb
gngt1
lmo4b
cspg5b
galn
rlbp1b
rpe65a
rbp4
iﬁtm1
krtt1c19e
lgals1l1
pou4f2
sp5a
sp5l
icn2
krt97
ccl25b
rgs5a
nr2e3
crx
rcvrn2
ﬂj13639
mbpa
ppp1r14ab
kiss1
onecut1
bnc2
cntln
atoh7
hes2.2
calb2a
rbpms2a
crygn2
lim2.4
ddit3
atf5b
pvalb8
pvalb9
nme2a
gyg1b
scinla
mt2
rlbp1a
ndrg1b
vsx1
eng1b
pax2a
znf395
tfap2a
pax10
pax6b
gnat2
gngt2a
hoxb5a
hoxb5b
neﬂa
nefma
emx3
tbr1b
apoc1
ccl34b.1
elavl3
tubb5
npm1a
rpl5a
gpx1a
cahz
tfap2e
foxb1a
cdk1
kpna2
otpb
otpa
fat2
gsg1l
shha
nkx2.4a
cabp5b
rs1a
cks1b
ascl1a
penkb
kcnip1b
nrgnb
rrm2.1
atoh1c
barhl1a
lhx9
rtn4rl2a
nrgna
neurod6a
pitx2
lig1
pcna
hes6
dla
mfge8a
cx43
oprd1b
zic2a
tcf7l2
slc17a6b
dlx2a
dlx5a
pax7a
tal1
−1
0
1
2
avg exp
pct exp
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0 - optic vesicle
1 - optic vesicle
2 - midbrain
5 - mid/hindbrain boundary
7 - midbrain
8 - hindbrain r7
9 - diencephalon
20 - ventral diencepahalon
23 - ventral diencephalon,
optic stalk
24 - hindbrain r4
27 - hindbrain r3
31 - neurons
32 - ventral midbrain
36 - rostral blood island
37 - diencephalon
39 - ﬂoor plate
11 - hindbrain r5/6
12 - dorsal diencephalon
13 - telencephalon
17 - hindbrain r1/2
18 - telencephalon
0,13 - optic tectum
2,58 - ventral forebrain
4,17,73 - granule cells
5 - radial glia
6,7,14,48 - progenitors
8,40,46,67 - diencephalon
9,25 - pallium
18 - tuberculum
19,74 - cycling progenitors
21,88 - erythrocytes
24 - microglia
27,31 - hindbrain/cranial nerve
28 - cones
29 - retina progenitors
30,79 - amacrine cells
26,36 - midbrain
10,20,92 - thalamus
12 - URL progenitors
13,84 - telencephalon
15,32,35,54,70,85 - cone bipolar cells
16 - ventral progenitors
33 - muller glia
34 - cornea
37 - lens
38,62 - retinal ganglion cells
39 - retina progenitors
41 - ventral habenula
42,68,91 - oligodendrocytes
51 - torus longitudinalis
52 - rods
53 - glia
55 - purkinje cells
56,64 - dorsal habenula
57 - eye cartilage
59 - eye glia
61,63,75,93,99 - hypothalamus
65 - cornea epithelial progenitors
43 - photoreceptor precursors
44,49,66 - cornea epithelium
45,82,83 - eye cells
47,86 - eye epidermis
50 - RPE
69 - horizontal cells
71 - OPC
72 - neutrophils
76 - ganglion neurons
77 - lens epithelium
78 - hindbrain
80 - metaphocytes
97,98 - neural crest pigment cells
100 - glia progenitors
81 - myeloid cells
87,94 - pigment cells
89,90 - blood/immune cells
95 - perivascular FGP cells
96 - retina neurons
gene markers
gene markers
clusters
clusters
Figure 2. Brain Cell Type Diversiﬁcation from 12 hpf to 15 dpf
(A) tSNE plot of 12 hpf dataset. Only clusters corresponding to neural and blood cell types are shown. Inferred identities of each cluster are described.
(B) Dot plot of gene expression pattern of select marker genes (columns) for each cluster (row). Dot size indicates the percentage of cells expressing the marker;
color represents the average scaled expression level.
(C) tSNE plot of 15 dpf dataset. Inferred identities of each cluster are described.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
NeuroResource
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020
1061

have prevented the identiﬁcation of additional overlapping clus-
ters, but our data indicate a large overlap between identiﬁed cell
types from 5 to 15 dpf. These results suggest that the zebraﬁsh
brain already has considerable cell type diversity at early larval
stages. Furthermore, 97% (33/34) of 15 dpf clusters overlapped
with clusters identiﬁed in our previously described 23–25 dpf ju-
venile brain dataset (Raj et al., 2018b). Thus, by 15 dpf late larval
stage, nearly all of the brain cell types that persist into the early
juvenile stage have already been established. Notably, among
cell types that are ‘‘missing’’ or under-represented at 15 dpf
but readily detected at 23–25 dpf are cell types in the optic
tectum, cerebellum, and the torus longitudinalis, suggesting
that these structures undergo further diversiﬁcation after 15
dpf. In contrast, many cell types in the pallium, habenula (Pandey
et al., 2018), hypothalamus, and preoptic area are detected
across these stages, suggesting that they develop earlier.
In summary, we generated a zebraﬁsh brain development cell
type atlas spanning 12 stages of brain organogenesis. The com-
plete dataset can be explored using the accompanying app:
https://github.com/brlauuu/zf_brain.
Neurogenic Expansion during Brain Development
During development, cell composition shifts from predominantly
progenitor populations to more differentiated cell types (Schmidt
et al., 2013). To better characterize how differentiation varies
during neuronal development, we ﬁrst asked if our dataset
captured the two neurogenic phases (primary and secondary)
before and after 2 dpf that have been traditionally deﬁned
through histological analyses (Allende and Weinberg, 1994;
Korzh et al., 1998; Mueller and Wullimann, 2003). We considered
neural progenitors as non-differentiated neuronal precursor cells
that may or may not be proliferating and express a subset of
classical progenitor markers, e.g., sox19a, dla, s100b, and cell
cycle genes. Since the brain is undergoing substantial molecular
changes during these developmental windows, we deﬁned the
transcriptional programs and cells that exhibit these programs
as progenitor cell states. We calculated the percentage of the
dataset that corresponds to neural progenitor cells, neurons (ex-
pressing markers such as elavl3 or elavl4), or other cell types
across each time point in our dataset. Since the earlier stages
(12 hpf to 3 dpf) also contained non-brain and non-eye cell types,
we subsetted the early time points to only brain and eye cells.
With increasing developmental time, we observed a progressive
decrease in the fraction of the dataset comprising neural progen-
itor cells (from 53.8% to 18.3%) with a concomitant increase in
neurons (from 4.5% to 58%) (Figure 4A). For example, we
observed an initial increase in the number of distinct progenitor
clusters from 12 hpf to 18 hpf (early embryo stages), while the
number of neuron clusters remained low (Figure 4A, right
panels). From 20 hpf to 3 dpf (intermediate stages), the total pro-
genitor clusters decreased while neuron clusters started to in-
crease. For example, neuronal clusters expanded from 11 at
20 hpf to 23 at 36 hpf. This burst coincides with the presumed
timing of late-stage primary neurogenesis in zebraﬁsh (Mueller
and Wullimann, 2003). Notably, by 5 to 15 dpf (late larva stages),
a second expansion of neuronal populations, corresponding to
the secondary neurogenic phase (Mueller and Wullimann,
2003), had occurred (53 neuronal subtypes at 5 dpf). At 5 dpf,
we detected cell types identiﬁed as early as 36 hpf (e.g., tal1+
and gata3+ neurons in the optic tectum and tfap2e+ and barhl2+
neurons in the thalamus), as well as subtypes only observed dur-
ing the second phase, such as nrgnb+ prkcda+ neurons in the
forebrain and cone bipolar cell subtypes in the retina. Collec-
tively, our dataset captures both phases of neurogenesis and re-
veals the diversiﬁcation of neurons in multiple brain structures.
Dampening of Spatial and Developmental Signatures
during the Transition from Embryonic to Larval Neural
Progenitors
We next analyzed our dataset to determine how cell states
change during the transition from the embryonic to post-embry-
onic brain. The zebraﬁsh brain undergoes lifetime constitutive
neurogenesis due to the persistence of neural progenitor pools
distributed along the brain’s axis (Schmidt et al., 2013). However,
the embryonic origins and transcriptional programs that underlie
their development are poorly understood. Furthermore, how the
molecular identities of embryonic and post-embryonic neural
progenitor cell states compare have not been well characterized.
To address these questions, we asked how neural progenitor
gene expression signatures globally change from embryo to
larva. Based on the results described above, we deﬁned early
embryonic brain progenitors as neural cell transcriptional states
from 12 hpf to 18 hpf, intermediate stage brain progenitors as
neural cell transcriptional states from 20 hpf to 3 dpf, and larval
brain progenitors as neural cell transcriptional states from 5
dpf to 15 dpf (Figures 4B and S3). We determined the greatest
sources of variation within these populations. For embryonic
brain progenitors, we found that the top 3 principal components
comprise genes implicated
in spatial and developmental
patterning (Gibbs et al., 2017; Moens and Prince, 2002; Wilson
et al., 2002; Wilson and Rubenstein, 2000). Cells exhibit charac-
teristic anteroposterior and dorsoventral axial signatures (Fig-
ure 4C, top panel). For example, the telencephalon (anterior fore-
brain) is marked by foxg1a and emx3a expression and the
midbrain by pax2a and eng2a, and the hindbrain is segmented
into rhombomeres marked by distinct combinatorial patterns of
egr2b and hox gene expression. Furthermore, all cells are in a
highly proliferative state with strong expression of cell cycle
genes such as pcna, mki67, and cdca7a. Collectively, the
expression signatures are reﬂective of a developmental state
during which the embryo is orchestrating a rapid expansion of
neural progenitor populations concurrent with their acquisition
of positional information and overt absence of differentiation
(Schmidt et al., 2013; Stigloher et al., 2008).
In contrast, larval neural progenitors comprised two major
groups: proliferating (e.g., expressing cell cycle genes pcna
(D) Dot plot of gene expression patterns of select marker genes for each cluster. Layout is same as (B). Grey box represents generic neuronal and progeni-
tor genes.
tSNE implementations: Barnes-Hut (A), Fourier transform (C)
ll
NeuroResource
1062
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020

2
8
9
10
18
20
25
40
41
46
56
58
61
63
64
67
75
84
92
93
99
0
13
26
36
51
4
17
27
31
55
73
78
76
15 d
25 d
8 d
5 d
Forebrain
Midbrain
Hindbrain
D
A
B
C
5
eomesa
5
tbr1b
5
dlx2a
5
dlx5a
6
otpa
5
nkx2.4a
4
nkx2.1
5
fezf1
5
six6b
5
six3b
5
pitx2
4
neurod6a
6
neurod6b
4
irx1a
6
tal1
5
sox14
5
pax7b
4
sox1a
4
gata3
5
foxb1a
5
tcf7l2
5
barhl2
5
lhx9
5
barhl1a
4
pax2a
5
cebpa
5
onecut1
5
shox2
5
pou3f1
5
eng1b
4
neurod2
6
pou4f2
4
otx1b
5
pou4f1
4
isl1
5
phox2bb
5
zic5
6
zic2a
5
pax6a
5
pax6b
4
tlx3b
5
hoxb5a
4
skor1b
7
adcyap1a
7
adcyap1b
4
bdnf
7
penkb
6
kiss1
6
pnoca
8
galn
8
pdyn
8
sst1.1
8
sst3
6
sst6
7
tac1
6
cart2
5
vgf
8
npy
7
pyyb
5
adcyap1r1a
5
oprd1b
5
gad1b
6
gad2
5
slc6a1a
5
slc6a1b
5
slc32a1
4
slc17a6a
4
slc17a6b
5
slc5a7a
5
gria1a
4
gria2b
4
grin1b
4
gabrb2
4
cacng2a
4
cacng2b
4
cacng8a
4
kcnf1b
4
kcnd3
5
2
8
9 10 18 20 25 40 41 46 56 58 61 63 64 67 75 84 92 93 99
0
13 26 36 51 4
17 27 31 55 73 78 76
gsg1l
Forebrain
Neuropeptides
Receptors
Neurotransmitters
Transporters
Receptors
Channels
Clusters
Midbrain Hindbrain
Figure 3. Neuron Subtype Diversity at 15 dpf
(A–C) Violin plots of select marker gene expression in
identiﬁed brain neuron subtypes at 15 dpf. Retinal neurons
and nascent neurons are omitted from the analysis.
Cluster numbers are indicated at the bottom along with
their inferred spatial location in the brain. Cluster 76 has
unknown spatial location. Detailed cluster descriptions
are in Table S1 and can be explored interactively at https://
github.com/brlauuu/zf_brain.
(A) Expression of transcription factors.
(B) Expression of neuropeptides and their receptors.
(C) Expression of genes involved in neuron electrophysi-
ology.
(D) Matrix showing overlap of neuron subtypes identiﬁed
at 15 dpf and earlier larval (5 and 8 dpf) or later juvenile (25
dpf [Raj et al., 2018b]) stages. The cluster number at 15
dpf is shown, and an orange circle indicates that the
subtype is detected in another stage.
See also Figure S2 and Table S1.
ll
NeuroResource
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020
1063

Figure 4. Developmental Diversiﬁcation of Neurons and Progenitors
(A) Area plot of the percentage of dataset at each time point corresponding to neural progenitors, neurons, and other cell types. Right panels, total number of
clusters of progenitors and neurons at each stage.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
NeuroResource
1064
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020

and top2a) and non-proliferating (depleted expression of cell cy-
cle markers) (Figure 4D, bottom panel). Indeed, the top 3 prin-
cipal components in the larval progenitors comprised genes
that mark stem cells (PC1, PC3) and differentiation (PC2). The
non-proliferating group is subdivided into radial glia (stem cells)
and her2+ neural progenitors expressing proneural genes
insm1b and scrt2. The proliferating group is subdivided into
her2+ and scrt2- neural progenitor cells, her2 progenitors,
her2+ and neurod1+ progenitor cells, and upper rhombic lip pro-
genitors (localized to cerebellum) expressing atoh1c and
oprd1b.
Strikingly, most larval progenitors were characterized by a
reduced spatial signature (except for the cerebellar upper
rhombic lip pool), such that cells were less enriched in region-
speciﬁc transcription factors relative to embryonic progenitors
(Figure 4D, top panel). For example, radial glia exist in multiple
pools along the brain axis (Than-Trong and Bally-Cuif, 2015),
but they formed a single cluster in our dataset (marked by
expression of fabp7a, cx43, s100b, and aqp1a.1). This result
suggests that radial glia are largely transcriptionally similar.
Although some expression of region-speciﬁc transcription fac-
tors was detected in larval progenitor clusters, these signatures
were not sufﬁciently strong to resolve clusters as they were dur-
ing embryonic stages.
To explore the apparent dearth of spatial signatures further,
we calculated pairwise correlation scores for 79 transcription
factors and signaling proteins with known spatial expression
patterns in the forebrain and midbrain based on previously
described histological analysis (ZFIN) and which were identiﬁed
as gene markers for neuronal clusters in our dataset. These
genes showed strongest correlations in embryonic progenitors,
followed by intermediate stage progenitors, and were weakly
correlated in larval progenitors (Figure 4E).
Since spatial signatures are encoded by a combinatorial code
of genes with overlapping expression patterns, we asked
whether the same subsets of genes co-varied with each of the
79 spatial markers across embryonic, intermediate, and larval
neural progenitors. We found that intermediate stage progenitors
showed overlap in co-varying genes with both embryonic and
larval progenitors. For example, 44/79 genes had >40% overlap
in their top 20 co-varying genes between embryonic and interme-
diate stage progenitors, and 23/79 genes had >40% overlap be-
tween intermediate and larval stage progenitors. In contrast, we
found low overlap across embryonic and larval stages (3/79
genes had >40% overlap in their top 20 co-varying genes). Addi-
tionally, when we searched for genes that strongly co-varied with
these 79 spatial markers (Pearson correlation > 0.4), we found 38
genes during embryonic stages, 17 genes during intermediate
stages, but only 4 genes during larval stages (Figure 4F).
Taken together, these results demonstrate that intermediate
stage progenitors resemble a hybrid of early embryonic and
late larval progenitor signatures. Furthermore, the overall spatial
code between embryonic and larval progenitors are distinct, and
the embryonic spatial code involves a larger collection of genes.
An Optimized scGESTALT Lineage Recorder
A long-term goal in developmental neurobiology is to understand
the lineage relationships of neurons. As a ﬁrst step to derive line-
age relationships of the cell types identiﬁed in the brain develop-
ment atlas, we performed lineage recording experiments with
scGESTALT. This lineage recorder enables simultaneous cell
type and cell lineage identiﬁcation by combining scRNA-seq
with CRISPR-Cas9 barcode editing (McKenna et al., 2016; Raj
et al., 2018b). To enable higher recovery of edited barcodes
from single cells, we optimized the design and library preparation
of the lineage recording cassette, including barcode editing of a
transgene coding region and compatibility with the 10x platform
(see STAR Methods). To test the performance of this new
recording cassette, we barcoded early embryonic lineage rela-
tionships by injecting Cas9 protein and target guide RNAs into
1-cell embryos (Figure 5A) and then isolated four 15 dpf larval
brains. We recovered barcodes and transcriptional proﬁles of
5,794 cells total (barcode recovery rate 30%–75% compared
to 6%–28% of our previous scGESTALT version [Raj et al.,
2018b]). Edited barcodes showed no overlap between animals,
displayed a diverse spectrum of repair products that spanned
single and multiple sites, and were of varying clone sizes (Figures
5B–5D and S4A). These features closely resembled the editing
patterns obtained with our previous recorders (McKenna et al.,
2016; Raj et al., 2018b). Using the recovered barcodes and
associated transcriptomes, we reconstructed lineage trees rep-
resenting cell lineage segregations formed during early embryo-
genesis (for one example, see Figure S4B). These lineage trees
accompany our transcriptional cell type atlas and are available
to explore at https://scgestalt.mckennalab.org/.
Since the injection of editing reagents into 1-cell embryos sat-
urates editing within 4–6 h (McKenna et al., 2016), we expected
early lineage divergences to be overrepresented in our dataset.
We ﬁrst asked if our recorder captured diverse multi-lineage tis-
sue origins of the eye, which is derived from neuroectoderm, sur-
face ectoderm, and mesoderm (Figure 5E). Eye cell types were
identiﬁed as clusters that contained cells from scRNA-seq sam-
ples comprising eye tissue exclusively. Retinal cell types were
deﬁned as clusters expressing the pan-retinal marker foxg1b
(Figure 1F), whereas non-retinal cell types were depleted in
foxg1b. We performed pairwise comparisons of all eye clusters
with at least 4 independent barcodes (each with at least 2 cells).
Since <1% of all cells were captured by scRNA-seq, we asked if
(B) tSNE plot of embryonic, intermediate, and larval neural progenitors. All progenitor cells were analyzed together after subsetting from the whole dataset.
(C and D) Heatmaps of select gene expression in early embryonic (C) and late larval (D) brain neural progenitors. Top panel, genes enriched in embryonic
progenitors. Bottom panel, genes enriched in larval progenitors. TF, transcription factor. *pax6a is expressed in multiple regions
(E) Heatmap of Pearson correlation values of 79 spatial markers in embryonic, intermediate, and larval neural progenitors. Spatial markers were selected based
on existing literature. Groups of co-varying genes in the midbrain and forebrain are highlighted with dashed boxes.
(F) Plot of highly variable genes that co-vary with any of the selected 79 spatial markers in embryonic and larval progenitors. Co-variation was determined by
Pearson correlation, with several thresholds (from stringent to relaxed) displayed along the x axis.
See also Figure S3.
ll
NeuroResource
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020
1065

8
7
6
5
4
3
pA
DsRed
scGESTALT barcode
1 2
b-actin
wildtype (TL/AB)
x
edited barcode
edited barcode mRNA
Inject embryo
15 dpf
scRNA-seq
brain
+
eyes
Cas9 protein
+ sgRNA 1-8
AAAAAA
A
Fish (ZF)
Fish
(ZF) 3
4
2
1
3
4
2
1
0
1
Dissimil.
score
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
E
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
no edit
intersite
intrasite
insertion
substitution
0
2
4
6
8
10
Site
Number of edits (x1,000)
D
G
C
I
F
H
forebrain
midbrain
hindbrain
retina
retina
hindbrain
midbrain
forebrain
No segregation
Segregation
Undeﬁned
No segregation
Segregation
C9 (56,125)
C25 (48,97)
C84 (13,14)
C41 (32,41)
C64 (26,47)
C56 (27,35)
C8 (68,104)
C10 (54,103)
C40 (34,57)
C46 (28,32)
C67 (26,33)
C10 (54,103)
C20 (52,100)
C92 (7,7)
C2 (101,181)
C58 (20,26)
C61 (20,29)
C63 (22,46)
C75 (16,18)
C93 (11,11)
C36 (27,41)
C0 (104,194)
C13 (36,53)
C26 (46,66)
C51 (25,42)
C9 pallium
C25 pallium
C84 subpallium
C41 habenula
C56 habenula
C64 habenula
C8 pitx2+
C10 otpa+, tuberculum
C40 onecut1+
C46 sp5l+
C67 prkcda+
C10 thalamus
C20 thalamus
C92 thalamus
C2 hypothalamus
C63 hypothalamus
C61 hypothalamus
C58 hypothalamus
C75 hypothalamus
C93 hypothalamus
C51 torus long
C36 atf5b+
C26 nefma+
C13 optic tectum
C0 optic tectum
Dorsal
Ventral
Telencephalon
Diencephalon
Forebrain
Midbrain
Non-retina eye clusters
foxg1b+
foxg1b-
Retina clusters
C45 (29,108)
C82 (17,31)
C83 (10,14)
C47 (15,68)
C86 (24,55)
C66 (31,41)
C87 (6,12)
C34 (53,83)
C44 (48,62)
C49 (23,42)
C57 (27,30)
C65 (18,23)
C37 (46,109)
C77 (9,11)
C15 (61,92)
C28 (51,77)
C30 (61,109)
C32 (34,54)
C33 (44,74)
C35 (48,61)
C38 (52,88)
C43 (26,36)
C50 (26,35)
C52 (30,36)
C54 (37,48)
C69 (22,27)
C70 (17,18)
C79 (14,17)
C85 (15,16)
C45:cldna+
C82:krt1-19d+
C83:twist3+
C47:lgals1l1+
C86:lgals1l1+
C66:hyal4+
C87:akap12a+
C34:hgd+
C44:foxl1+
C49:iﬁtm1+
C57:col9a1a+
C65:ndufa4l1a+
C37:lim2.4+ (lens)
C77:sparcl1+
C15:cone bipolar
C28:cones
C30:amacrine
C32:cone bipolar
C33:muller glia
C35:cone bipolar
C38:RGC
C43:photoreceptor precursor
C50:RPE
C52:rods
C54:cone bipolar
C69:horizontal
C70:cone bipolar
C79:amacrine
C85:cone bipolar
Undeﬁned
No segregation
Segregation
C5 (79,129)
C6 (71,132)
C7 (61,95)
C12 (61,113)
C14 (56,96)
C16 (52,89)
C19 (61,111)
C22 (43,59)
C71 (18,21)
C74 (25,35)
C74:pif1+
C71:olig2+
(OPC)
C22:stmn1a+
C19:crabp2a+
C16:her8.2+
C14:esco2+
C12:atoh1c+
(URL)
C7:her12+
C6:cdkn1ca+
C5:cx43+
(radial glia)
Undeﬁned
No segregation
Segregation
Proportion of barcode shared with Granule cell
(jaccard index)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
C5
C6
C7
C12
C14
C16
C19
C22
C71
C74
Figure 5. Optimization of scGESTALT Lineage Recorder for Better Barcode Recovery
(A) Schematic overview of CRISPR-Cas9 lineage recording. Optimized scGESTALT comprises a barcode cassette in the 30end of DsRed transgene (single copy)
and the medaka beta-actin promoter. Embryos were injected with Cas9 protein and DsRed sgRNAs, and animals were proﬁled at 15 dpf by scRNA-seq.
(B) Pairwise comparisons using cosine dissimilarity of barcode edit patterns from four (ZF1–ZF4) edited 15 dpf larval brains.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
NeuroResource
1066
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020

there is cell-type-speciﬁc barcode enrichment greater than
expected by chance (‘‘lineage segregation’’ in Figure 5E). For
cluster pairs where we did not observe signiﬁcant lineage segre-
gation, we asked if this was due to a lack of sampling (‘‘lineage
status undeﬁned’’) or true lack of cell-type-speciﬁc barcode
enrichment (‘‘no lineage segregation’’). The latter case would
indicate that two cell types shared a more recent common
ancestor than cell types that segregated earlier. We found that
multiple retinal and non-retinal cell types segregated from each
other, as would be expected due to early separation of their tis-
sue origins. Interestingly, however, a few non-retinal cell types
(e.g., clusters 34, 44, 49) did not fully segregate from retinal
cell types, suggesting that they shared a common progenitor.
Furthermore, there was extensive lineage segregation between
various non-retinal cell types (e.g., clusters 45, 47, 86). In
contrast, we did not observe lineage segregation between the
different retinal cell types, likely due to the termination of bar-
code editing prior to terminal divisions. The exception was clus-
ter 28 (cones), which segregated from clusters 15 and 32 (cone
bipolar cells) and 28 (retinal ganglion cells). Thus, lineage splits
between retinal and non-retinal cell types and within non-retinal
subtypes preceded most splits within retinal subtypes.
Next, we asked if our recorder captured lineage divergences
between neurons across brain regions and the retina. Although
the hindbrain and retina formed distinct lineages early in devel-
opment, forebrain and midbrain neurons continued to share pro-
genitors across the same barcoding period (Figure 5F). Pairwise
comparisons of all forebrain and midbrain clusters revealed ex-
amples of emerging segregation along multiple spatial axes (Fig-
ure 5G). For example, we saw evidence of dorsal-ventral split:
cluster 9 pallium (dorsal) separated from cluster 25 sub-pallium
(ventral). Furthermore, barcode enrichments conﬁrmed rostral-
caudal splits: cluster 64 habenula separated from clusters 9
and 25 pallium (telencephalon, rostral) and clusters 0 and 13 op-
tic tectum (caudal). Overall, the lineage segregations agree with
classic fate mapping experiments (Woo and Fraser, 1995) and
correlate with the anteroposterior and dorsoventral gene expres-
sion signatures of early progenitors (Figure 4).
To query the lineage relationships of brain progenitor cell
types, we performed pairwise comparisons of progenitor clus-
ters at 15 dpf (Figure 5H). Notably, the upper rhombic lip (URL)
progenitors (cluster 12) formed a separate lineage from all pro-
genitor classes except cluster 74, a cycling progenitor subtype
expressing pif1. Since URL progenitors give rise to granule cells
in the cerebellum, we asked if the two cell types shared barco-
des. We found that the proportion of barcode overlap was high-
est between granule cells and URL progenitors (Figure 5I). The
URL progenitors formed a distinct cluster as early as 12 hpf
(cluster 9) in our transcriptional dataset. Thus, URL progenitors
become discrete in both lineage and transcriptional signature
relatively early in development.
In summary, we present an optimized scGESTALT cassette
with improved lineage barcode expression and recovery by
scRNA-seq. The barcodes display high sequence diversity,
which is important for generating large-scale distinct labels in a
developing animal. The scGESTALT transgenic line is available
as a resource for the community and can be paired with other
transgenic lines for temporal, spatial, or cell-type-speciﬁc con-
trol of barcode editing (see Discussion).
Cell Speciﬁcation Trajectories in the Retina and
Hypothalamus
With the exception of a few model systems (Clark et al., 2019;
Delile et al., 2019; Guo and Li, 2019; Holguera and Desplan,
2018; Kim et al., 2020; Tambalo et al., 2020), little is known about
gene expression cascades that accompany the development of
progenitors into terminally differentiated neurons. To address
how different neuronal populations become molecularly special-
ized, we reconstructed gene expression trajectories from 12 hpf
to 15 dpf. We ﬁrst tested our approach on the subsetted retina
dataset in which cell types expand from a single cluster at 12
hpf to 18 clusters at 15 dpf (Figure 2). UMAP embedding of the
subsetted dataset revealed progressive paths from the embry-
onic state to deﬁned cell types at 15 dpf (Figures 6A and S5A).
One outlier cluster that expressed kidins220a and whose pro-
genitor state may not have been captured in our time points
was excluded from further analysis. Although UMAP represents
continuity in the data, it does not order individual cells according
to their relative developmental time (i.e., pseudotime). Therefore,
we also used URD (Farrell et al., 2018) to construct a branching
speciﬁcation tree that represents the developmental trajectories
in the retina at a higher resolution (Figures 6B, S5B, S6A, and
(C) Chord diagram of the nature and frequency of deletions within and between target sites. Each colored sector represents a target site. Links between target
sites represent inter-site deletions; self-links represent intra-site deletions. Link widths are proportional to the edit frequencies.
(D) Type of edit at each target site within the barcode from edited ZF1–ZF4 larval brains.
(E) Heatmap of lineage relationships between non-retinal and retinal cell types in the eye. All clusters with >3 cells and all barcodes with >1 cell were used to
determine if there is enrichment of cell-type-speciﬁc barcodes across each cluster pair. Blue indicates signiﬁcant enrichment and lineage segregation. Purple
indicates no signiﬁcant enrichment and no lineage segregation. Grey indicates insufﬁcient sampling power and undeﬁned lineage status. Cluster numbers are
indicated (e.g., C45) and either cell type gene markers (e.g., cldna+) or the exact name of the cell type (e.g., cone bipolar cells) are indicated along the rows. Along
the columns, the numbers within the brackets indicate the number of barcodes and number of cells, respectively, for that cluster.
(F) Heatmap of lineage relationships between brain regions and the retina. Neuron clusters that could be pseudospatially assigned to each region were used (see
Table S1). Analysis, layout, and color code are same as in (E).
(G) Heatmap of lineage relationships between neuronal cell types in the forebrain and midbrain. Analysis, layout, and color code are same as in (E). Clusters were
assigned to a brain region (e.g., pallium, hypothalamus), and for clusters where a more precise location could not be inferred, a gene marker is indicated
(e.g., pitx2+).
(H) Heatmap of lineage relationships between brain progenitor clusters. Analysis, layout, and color code is same as in (E). Cell type marker genes are indicated
along with the cluster number. URL, upper rhombic lip
(I) Bar plot of the proportion (based on Jaccard Index) of granule cell (cerebellum neurons) barcodes that are shared with each brain progenitor cluster. Cluster
numbers are the same as in (H).
See also Figure S4 and Table S1.
ll
NeuroResource
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020
1067

S6B). Many of the major branching features agreed with the
UMAP representation. For example, the trajectories revealed
the early segregation of RPE, shared branching of photoreceptor
cells, a path toward multiple cone bipolar cell subtypes, and a
common branchpoint between amacrine and retinal ganglion
cells (RGC).
Plotting gene expression of known early regulators of eye
development and terminal cell type markers on the URD tree
supported the inferred speciﬁcation branches (Figures 6C and
S7). For example, pax6a was most enriched in the amacrine
and RGC branches, and vsx1 marked cone bipolar cells with
fezf2 marking one speciﬁc subtype. Notably, our analysis also re-
vealed previously unknown markers and characteristics of hori-
zontal and amacrine cells. Zebraﬁsh horizontal cells are
GABAergic (gad2+, gad1b+), but unlike mammals where these
cells do not express GABA membrane uptake transporters (De-
niz et al., 2011), zebraﬁsh cells expressed slc6a1l (likely a dupli-
cation of slc6a1 involved in GABA uptake from the synaptic cleft),
suggesting that they may be capable of uptake. Additionally,
whereas slc32a1 GABA transporter is expressed in mouse hori-
zontal and amacrine cells (Cueva et al., 2002), we observed re-
striction of slc32a1 to amacrine cells and slc6a1l to horizontal
cells. Finally, we detected several novel horizontal cell markers
such as ompa and prkacaa (Figure 1F).
To discover the gene expression trajectories from precursors
to differentiated retinal cell types, we used differential gene
expression approaches that characterize pseudotime-ordered
molecular trajectories. This analysis revealed known and novel
regulatory steps (Figures 6D and S8). For example, RGC speci-
ﬁcation trajectories conﬁrmed several known differentiation reg-
ulators including sox11a, sox11b, sox6, irx4a, and pou4f2
(Rheaume
et
al.,
2018).
Similarly,
known
regulators
of
Precursors
RGCs
Cones
Rods
UMAP-1
UMAP-2
12h 14h 16h 18h 20h 24h 36h
2d
3d
5d
8d 15d
12h
14h
16h
18h
20h
24h
36h
2d
3d
5d
8d
15d
Cones
Rods
Amacrine_1
RGC
Horizontal
Muller glia
RPE
Amacrine_2
CBP_3
CBP_6
CBP_5
CBP_2
CBP_1
CBP_4
A
B
Pseudotime
C
D
pou4f1
rbpms2a
sox6
rbpms2b
pou4f2
irx4a
sox11a
sox11b
prdm1a
nr2e3
six7
apln
nr2f1b
crx
isl2a
aplnra
otx5
aplnrb
RPE
Muller glia
kidins220a+
RGC
Amacrine
Cone bipolar
Cones
Rods
Horizontal
Figure 6. Cell Speciﬁcation Trajectories in the Retina
(A) UMAP visualization of retinal cell types. Retinal cells (based on clustering analysis) from 12 hpf to 15 dpf were subsetted from the full dataset and analyzed
together. Cells are color coded by stage.
(B) Cell speciﬁcation tree of zebraﬁsh retinal development. Trajectories were generated by URD and visualized as a branching tree. Cells are color coded by stage.
12 hpf cells were assigned as the root, and 15 dpf differentiated cells were assigned as tips. CBP, cone bipolar cells (6 subtypes are numbered); RGC, retinal
ganglion cells; RPE, retinal pigment epithelium
(C) Expression of select genes are shown on the retina speciﬁcation tree.
(D) Heatmaps of gene expression cascades of photoreceptor cell trajectories and retinal ganglion cell trajectories. Cells were selected based on high expression
along trajectories leading to these cell types, compared to expression along opposing branchpoints. Red, high expression. Yellow, low expression
See also Figures S5–S9.
ll
NeuroResource
1068
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020

photoreceptor differentiation such as isl2a (Fischer et al., 2011),
prdm1a (Brzezinski et al., 2010), otx5 (Viczian et al., 2003), and
crx (Shen and Raymond, 2004) were expressed early in our
photoreceptor trajectories, while known regulators of cone
versus rod fate, such as six7 (Ogawa et al., 2015), nr2f1b (Satoh
et al., 2009), and nr2e3 (Chen et al., 2005) were expressed as
those trajectories diverged. Furthermore, our analysis revealed
novel transcription factors within the gene expression cascades.
For example, we detected runx1t1, foxp1b, and mef2aa in the
RGC pathway; tfap2a in horizontal cell trajectory; and tbx3a
and tbx2a in amacrine cell branches. Interestingly, among
signaling pathways, we found that both apelin receptors (aplnra
and aplnrb) were expressed in photoreceptor progenitors, while
one of their ligands (apln) was expressed in differentiating cones;
this suggests a potential cell autonomous role for apelin
signaling in photoreceptor cells in addition to its role in prevent-
ing
photoreceptor
degeneration
via
vascular
remodeling
(McKenzie et al., 2012).
A surprising result from this analysis was that a Muller glia
pathway was detected earlier in zebraﬁsh than expected based
on studies in mouse, where these cells are detected late (Centa-
nin and Wittbrodt, 2014; Clark et al., 2019). We found a cluster of
cells as early as 20 hpf (cluster 50) that expresses markers (e.g.,
cahz, rlbp1a) that are shared with the Muller glia cluster (cluster
33) at 15 dpf (Table S1). smFISH analysis of Muller glia markers
validated their expression at 36 hpf and 2 dpf (Figure S9). Simi-
larly, in our transcriptional trajectories (Figure 6B), the Muller
glia expression program is the earliest non-epithelial retinal
program to diverge, commencing with the expression of several
her-family transcription factors (her4, her12, and her15), then
proceeding through a cascade of intermediate overlapping
expression states such as onset of fabp7a, s100a10b, and later
connexin genes that are characteristic of Muller glia fate (Fig-
ure S8). Cells from all time points can already be found in the
early part of the Muller glia branch. These observations suggest
that cells early in development transition from a naive progenitor
state to a Muller glia-like transcriptional state and do so contin-
ually during larval development.
To extend our analysis to a central brain region, we recon-
structed speciﬁcation trajectories and expression cascades
for hypothalamic neurons. These cells expanded from a single
ventral diencephalon cluster at 12 hpf to 7 clusters at 15 dpf
(Figures 7, S6C, S6D, and S10). The earliest branchpoint de-
noted segregation of prdx1+ and prdx1 cells. Committed hy-
pothalamic progenitors in the prdx1 trajectory gave rise to
neuronal precursors expressing proneural transcription factors
such as ascl1a, scrt2, insm1a, and elavl3 (early neuron fate
marker) (Figure S11). The speciﬁed cell types then matured
over time and were characterized by expression of neuronal
maturation markers such as tubb5, gap43, ywhag2, snap25a,
scg2b, and elavl4. The prdx1 group further diverged into two
major groups: nrgna+ and nrgna trajectories (Figures 7B and
UMAP-2
A
C
B
Pseudotime
GABA
tac1+
synpr+
sst1.1+
pdyn+
prdx1+
tph2+
GABA
dlx+
D
sp8a
pbx3b
dlx2b
dlx1a
hmx3a
nkx2.2a
nkx2.4a
isl1
dlx5a
rgs5b
Precursors
GABA
tac1+ synpr+
UMAP-1
prdx1+
pdyn+
tph2+
synpr+
sst1.1+
GABA
tac1+
GABA
dlx+
Figure 7. Cell Speciﬁcation Trajectories in the Hypothalamus
(A) UMAP visualization of hypothalamus cell types. Hypothalamus cells (based on clustering analysis) from 12 hpf to 15 dpf were subsetted from the full dataset
and analyzed together. Cells are color coded by stage.
(B) Cell speciﬁcation tree of zebraﬁsh hypothalamus development. Trajectories were generated by URD and visualized as a branching tree. Cells are color coded
by stage. 12 hpf cells were assigned as the root, and 15 dpf differentiated cells were assigned as tips.
(C) Expression of select genes are shown on the hypothalamus speciﬁcation tree.
(D) Heatmap of gene expression cascade of nrgna+ cell trajectories. Red, high expression. Yellow, low expression.
See also Figures S6 and S10–S12.
ll
NeuroResource
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020
1069

7C). The nrgna+ branch segregated into GABAergic tac1+, syn-
pr subtype; and GABAergic tac1+, synpr+ positive subtype
(Figure 7D). The nrgna branch subdivided into glutamatergic
pdyn+ neurons and a GABAergic branch that further resolved
to sst1.1+ and tph2+ neuron subtypes. We detected expression
of known regulators of hypothalamus development in the early
branches such as shha, rx3, nkx2.4b. We also identiﬁed new
candidate regulators in later branches including nrgna in the
synpr+ and synpr- trajectories and sox1a, sox1b and sox14 in
the pdyn+ trajectory (Figures 1E and S12). The results in the
retina and hypothalamus demonstrate that the brain develop-
ment atlas can be used to reconstruct neuronal differentiation
trajectories
and
deﬁne
the
underlying
gene
expression
cascades
Differences in Progenitor Speciﬁcation Strategies
between Retina and Hypothalamus
Pseudotime analysis represents cell trajectories in relative but
not absolute time (Bendall et al., 2014; Trapnell et al., 2014).
Therefore, comparing the developmental and pseudotime age
of cells can deﬁne whether molecular states are unique to a given
developmental stage or persist through development (Figures
6B and 7B). For example, mapping RGC and pdyn+ neurons
from different developmental stages onto the pseudotime trajec-
tory showed the expected maturation of these cell types with
developmental age (Figures S13A and S13B). In addition, even
at 15 dpf some RGC and pdyn+ neurons were still in an immature
state, consistent with the continuous growth and differentiation
in the zebraﬁsh retina and brain (Centanin and Wittbrodt, 2014;
Schmidt et al., 2013).
To systematically analyze the relationships of pseudotime
state and developmental stage, we mapped differentiated cells,
precursors, and progenitors found in different pseudotime win-
dows to their origin in developmental time. We found that the
proportion of differentiated cells increased, whereas the number
of early progenitors in both retina and hypothalamus decreased
with developmental age. In contrast, precursor cells from an in-
termediate pseudotime window were present in embryo and
larva. These precursor cells expressed genes that were an inter-
mediate of progenitor (e.g., insm1a, her4.1 in hypothalamus [Xie
and Dorsky, 2017]; hes2.2, rx2 in retina) and early differentiation
genes (e.g., tubb5, gap43 in hypothalamus; foxg1b in retina). In
addition, a second class of retinal progenitors mapped to an
earlier pseudotime trajectory but was also present from embry-
onic to late larval stages (Figures 8 and S13C). Comparison of
these progenitors between 24–36 hpf and 15 dpf identiﬁed
only 71 differentially expressed genes. The majority of these
genes (56/71) increased in all cells of the retina between these
stages, while a few (15/71) were only upregulated in the 15 dpf
group. A similar population was not detected in the hypothala-
mus. These observations suggest that as the retina grows,
some progenitor cell states observed in the embryo persist later
in development without extensive maturation.
DISCUSSION
As the brain develops, embryonic neural progenitor pools transi-
tion through many cellular states as they become more
committed, diversify into post-embryonic neural progenitors,
and undergo terminal differentiation. Although regulators and
Pseudotime
1
2
3
●
●
●
1_progenitors
2_precursors
3_neurons
12hpf - 24 hpf
36hpf - 3 dpf
5 dpf - 15 dpf
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
value
1_progenitors
2_precursors
3_neurons
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
Hypothalamus
Pseudotime
1a
1b
1b
2
3
●
●
●
●
1a_progenitor (early)
1b_progenitor (early+late)
2_precursor
3_neurons
12 hpf - 24 hpf
36 hpf - 3 dpf
5 dpf - 15 dpf
1a
1b
2
3
1a
1b
2
3
1a
1b
2
3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
value
embryo
embryo + larva
late larva
Retina
1a_progenitor (early)
1b_progenitor (early+late)
2_precursor
3_neurons
Figure 8. Progenitor Differences between Retina and Hypothalamus
Retinal and hypothalamus cells were divided into progenitor (purple), precursor (orange), and differentiated (blue) cells, as shown on the URD tree. The fraction of
cells in each of these transcriptional states was then determined for three developmental periods (12–24 hpf, 36 hpf–3 dpf, and 5–15 dpf). In the retina, cells can be
found in a progenitor state (light purple) that persists post-embryonically.
See also Figure S13.
ll
NeuroResource
1070
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020

transcriptional changes of this process have been identiﬁed
(e.g., using speciﬁc driver lines and in situ detection of select
genes), the global transcriptional networks mediating the
sequential activation and maturation of neurogenic programs
from embryo to later stages are largely unknown. To help
address this question, we used scRNA-seq to generate a zebra-
ﬁsh brain development atlas. This resource supports the identi-
ﬁcation of marker genes, the comparison of cell types, and the
dissection of cell speciﬁcation and differentiation trajectories
during vertebrate brain development.
Our data address how the transcriptional programs of neural
progenitors vary and contribute to fate restriction during devel-
opment. Different models to explain these processes have
been proposed. For example, neural progenitors of the medial
and lateral mouse ganglionic eminence, which give rise to
cortical interneurons, have been found to converge to a shared
mitotic signature regardless of their region of origin, followed
by expression of cardinal fate-speciﬁc transcription factors
post-mitotically (Mayer et al., 2018). In contrast, the spinal cord
has dedicated pools of domain-speciﬁc neural progenitors that
retain domain-speciﬁc signatures (Delile et al., 2019; Jessell,
2000; Lee and Pfaff, 2001; Sagner and Briscoe, 2019). Our re-
sults indicate that early embryonic neural progenitors in the ze-
braﬁsh brain are transcriptionally distinct from late larval neural
progenitors. These cell state changes might reﬂect develop-
mental shifts from an establishment program during gastrulation,
where strong spatial patterning cues set up regional boundaries,
to a maintenance program at late stages, where progenitors are
geographically conﬁned and express dampened regional restric-
tion signatures. Although expression of some spatially enriched
transcription factors (e.g., pax6a, eng2a, nkx2.4a) and signaling
proteins detected in embryonic progenitors are also detected
in late progenitors, the overall signatures are different, as these
factors co-vary with different sets of genes in larva relative to
embryo.
The expression of pan-progenitor markers at larval stages rai-
ses the question of how neural progenitor pools remain or
become fate restricted. There are several different scenarios
that might address this question. First, it is conceivable that em-
bryo and larva share a minimal core set of regionally restricted
transcription factors that are sufﬁcient to ensure spatial restric-
tion, despite differences in their relative expression levels and
downstream targets. Spatial genes that are highly expressed in
the embryo may be lowly expressed in the larva and be sufﬁcient
to maintain regionally restricted cell states. Second, cell-type-
speciﬁc transcription factors rather than spatially deﬁned regula-
tors might guide speciﬁcation and differentiation at these stages,
independent of positional information. Such signatures would be
difﬁcult to analyze via scRNA-seq, which is biased toward recov-
ering highly expressed genes. Third, it is also possible that re-
strictions at the genomic level, such as chromatin accessibility,
may ensure that cells maintain the signature of their spatial
origin. Fate mapping experiments of early and late neural pro-
genitors, proﬁling open chromatin states of neural progenitors,
and transcriptome analyses that recover lowly expressed genes
will provide further insight into these questions.
Our reconstruction of speciﬁcation trajectories for cell types in
the retina and hypothalamus revealed several ﬁndings. First, our
data support a multipotent progenitor model whereby multiple
differentiated cell types can be traced to common post-embry-
onic progenitors. For example, all retinal neurons can be traced
to an early pseudotime progenitor branch containing cells from
larval stages, consistent with multipotency and fate stochasticity
of zebraﬁsh retinal progenitors (Boije et al., 2015; He et al., 2012).
The early emergence of Muller glia observed in both the time
course atlas and eye trajectory reconstruction is particularly
interesting in light of clonal analyses. For example, single retinal
progenitor cells in zebraﬁsh give rise to clones comprised of neu-
rons and one Muller glia cell (Rulands et al., 2018). This observa-
tion has been interpreted as evidence for a progenitor that ﬁrst
gives rise to neurons and then differentiates into a Muller glia
cell. It is also conceivable based on our data that an early pro-
genitor has Muller glia-like properties and divides, with one
daughter expanding to give rise to retinal neurons while the other
daughter forms Muller glia. Second, our results reveal that
whereas progenitor cell types in the rest of the brain appear
molecularly distinct between the embryo and larva, there are
progenitor cell states in the eye that are maintained from the
embryo to larva (Figures 4 and 8). A subset of 15 dpf retinal pro-
genitors have similar transcriptional states as observed in the
embryonic eye. This observation raises the possibility that a sub-
set of long-term retinal progenitors may be ‘‘frozen’’ in an embry-
onic phase that could possibly underlie the multi-fate potential of
these cells. An independent study of zebraﬁsh retinal stem cells
has proposed a similar conclusion (Xu et al., 2020). Collectively,
these ﬁndings highlight differences in neurogenic programs in
the central nervous system and underscore the power of inves-
tigating multiple speciﬁcation trajectories simultaneously.
Our results also highlight differences between zebraﬁsh and
mammalian neurogenesis. For example, we detected pan-
neuronal transcriptional signatures (e.g., neurod1, ascl1a, in-
sm1a, or neurog1) in zebraﬁsh radial glia and other progenitors
at late stages of development, suggesting that neurons remain
the principal output of these cells. This is consistent with fate
mapping studies that have shown that zebraﬁsh radial glia
persist into adulthood and contribute to neurogenesis (Schmidt
et al., 2013). In contrast, radial glia progenitor cells in the devel-
oping embryonic mouse brain shift from neurogenic to glio-
genic
programs
(Mission
et
al.,
1991;
Schmechel
and
Rakic, 1979).
While developmental atlases and trajectories can help iden-
tify cellular differentiation paths, a full understanding of cell
type speciﬁcation requires lineage tracing experiments. To
catalyze such approaches, we introduced improvements to
scGESTALT through a redesigned recorder cassette for opti-
mized mRNA expression and library compatibility with the
10X Chromium scRNA-seq platform. The resulting higher re-
covery of barcodes allows more dense reconstruction of line-
age trees. Our analysis revealed differences between the timing
of segregation between different brain regions: neuronal line-
ages in the retina and hindbrain diverged earlier than those in
the forebrain and midbrain. These results complement classic
zebraﬁsh fate maps of brain compartmentalization (Woo and
Fraser, 1995) and recent analysis of clonal cells in forebrain
and midbrain (Solek et al., 2017). Furthermore, our ﬁndings
support
early
transcriptional
and
lineage
segregation
of
ll
NeuroResource
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020
1071

cerebellar upper rhombic lip progenitors relative to other clas-
ses of progenitor cells. To query additional lineage divergences
and combine with cellular trajectories, our optimized recorder
can be readily adapted for barcoding lineages at develop-
mental windows that correspond to different branches of the
speciﬁcation trees (Raj et al., 2018b) or combined with cell- or
tissue-speciﬁc Cas9 driver lines to introduce lineage labels in
populations of interest.
The resources presented here lay the groundwork for charac-
terizing lineage histories and transcriptional changes underlying
the development and diversiﬁcation of the vertebrate brain. Future
extensions include the generation of transgenic reporters to select
populations of interest and perform deeper analyses of cell type
heterogeneity and differentiation (Pandey et al., 2018). Cell spec-
iﬁcation trajectories can be extended to include additional subre-
gions of the brain to generate increasingly complex trees and
combined with other zebraﬁsh scRNA-seq datasets (Cosacak
et al., 2019; Farnsworth et al., 2020; Farrell et al., 2018; Lange
et al., 2020; Pandey et al., 2018; Tambalo et al., 2020; Wagner
et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2020) to trace complete trajectories from
gastrulation to adulthood. Finally, it will be interesting to perform
comparative studies by using our atlas in conjunction with data-
sets in other vertebrates (Hashikawa et al., 2020; La Manno
et al., 2020; Tosches et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2020).
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
B Lead Contact
B Materials Availability
B Data and Code Availability
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Zebraﬁsh husbandry
d METHOD DETAILS
B Chromogenic in situ hybridization
B Optimization of scGESTALT lineage cassette
B Processing of samples for scRNA-seq time course
B scGESTALT.2 library prep
B Bioinformatic processing of raw sequencing data and
cell type clustering analysis
B Construction of lineage trees from GESTALT barcodes
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
B Packages used
B Lineage segregation analysis between cell types
B Granule cell analysis
B Analyzing
dampened
spatial
correlations
in
pro-
genitors
B Construction and analysis of branching transcriptional
trajectories using URD
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuron.2020.09.023.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank members of the Schier lab for discussion and advice, the Bauer Core
Facility (Harvard) and the Molecular Biology Core Facility (Dana Farber Cancer
Institute) for sequencing services, the Harvard zebraﬁsh facility staff for tech-
nical support, and the Imaging Core Facility of the Biozentrum for microscopy
resources. We thank M. Shafer and J. Gagnon for comments on the manu-
script and H. Boije for comments on retinal lineages. This work was supported
by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
and 1K99HD098298 to B.R., 1K99HD091291 to J.A.F., R00HG010152 to A.M.,
R01HD85905, DP1HD094764, ERC 834788, an Allen Discovery Center grant,
and a McKnight Foundation Technological Innovations in Neuroscience Award
to A.F.S.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
B.R. and A.F.S. conceived and designed the study. B.R., J.A.F., J.L., J.E.K,
and A.F.S. interpreted the data. B.R., J.A.F., and A.F.S. wrote the manuscript.
B.R. and J.M.L. generated transgenic lines. B.R. performed scRNA-seq and
scGESTALT experiments and data processing. J.L. analyzed scGESTALT
data with assistance from B.R. and J.E.K. L.Y.D. generated violin plots of
neuron subtype diversity. J.N.A. performed chromogenic in situs. A.N.C. and
J.E.K. performed smFISH experiments. J.A.F. performed URD trajectory anal-
ysis with assistance from B.R. A.M. generated lineage trees. .R. developed
the R Shiny app for scRNA-seq data exploration.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: February 10, 2020
Revised: August 5, 2020
Accepted: September 17, 2020
Published: October 16, 2020
REFERENCES
Allende, M.L., and Weinberg, E.S. (1994). The expression pattern of two zebra-
ﬁsh achaete-scute homolog (ash) genes is altered in the embryonic brain of the
cyclops mutant. Dev. Biol. 166, 509–530.
Bendall, S.C., Davis, K.L., Amir, A.D., Tadmor, M.D., Simonds, E.F., Chen, T.J.,
Shenfeld, D.K., Nolan, G.P., and Pe’er, D. (2014). Single-cell trajectory detec-
tion uncovers progression and regulatory coordination in human B cell devel-
opment. Cell 157, 714–725.
Boije, H., Rulands, S., Dudczig, S., Simons, B.D., and Harris, W.A. (2015). The
independent probabilistic ﬁring of transcription factors: a paradigm for clonal
variability in the zebraﬁsh retina. Dev. Cell 34, 532–543.
Brzezinski, J.A., 4th, Lamba, D.A., and Reh, T.A. (2010). Blimp1 controls
photoreceptor versus bipolar cell fate choice during retinal development.
Development 137, 619–629.
Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E., and Satija, R. (2018).
Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technol-
ogies, and species. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 411–420.
Carter, R.A., Bihannic, L., Rosencrance, C., Hadley, J.L., Tong, Y., Phoenix,
T.N., Natarajan, S., Easton, J., Northcott, P.A., and Gawad, C. (2018). A sin-
gle-cell transcriptional atlas of the developing murine cerebellum. Curr. Biol.
28, 2910–2920.e2.
Centanin, L., and Wittbrodt, J. (2014). Retinal neurogenesis. Development 141,
241–244.
Cepko, C. (2014). Intrinsically different retinal progenitor cells produce speciﬁc
types of progeny. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15, 615–627.
Chen, J., Rattner, A., and Nathans, J. (2005). The rod photoreceptor-speciﬁc
nuclear receptor Nr2e3 represses transcription of multiple cone-speciﬁc
genes. J. Neurosci. 25, 118–129.
ll
NeuroResource
1072
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020

Chen, R., Wu, X., Jiang, L., and Zhang, Y. (2017). Single-cell RNA-seq reveals
hypothalamic cell diversity. Cell Rep. 18, 3227–3241.
Clark, B.S., Stein-O’Brien, G.L., Shiau, F., Cannon, G.H., Davis-Marcisak, E.,
Sherman, T., Santiago, C.P., Hoang, T.V., Rajaii, F., James-Esposito, R.E.,
et al. (2019). Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of retinal development identiﬁes
NFI factors as regulating mitotic exit and late-born cell speciﬁcation. Neuron
102, 1111–1126.e5.
Cosacak, M.I., Bhattarai, P., Reinhardt, S., Petzold, A., Dahl, A., Zhang, Y., and
Kizil, C. (2019). Single-cell transcriptomics analyses of neural stem cell hetero-
geneity and contextual plasticity in a zebraﬁsh brain model of amyloid toxicity.
Cell Rep. 27, 1307–1318.e3.
Cueva, J.G., Haverkamp, S., Reimer, R.J., Edwards, R., W€assle, H., and
Brecha, N.C. (2002). Vesicular gamma-aminobutyric acid transporter expres-
sion in amacrine and horizontal cells. J. Comp. Neurol. 445, 227–237.
Delile, J., Rayon, T., Melchionda, M., Edwards, A., Briscoe, J., and Sagner, A.
(2019). Single cell transcriptomics reveals spatial and temporal dynamics of
gene expression in the developing mouse spinal cord. Development 146,
dev173807.
Deniz, S., Wersinger, E., Schwab, Y., Mura, C., Erdelyi, F., Szabo´ , G., Rendon,
A., Sahel, J.-A., Picaud, S., and Roux, M.J. (2011). Mammalian retinal horizon-
tal cells are unconventional GABAergic neurons. J. Neurochem. 116, 350–362.
Farack, L., and Itzkovitz, S. (2020). Protocol for single-molecule ﬂuorescence
in situ hybridization for intact pancreatic tissue. STAR Protocols 1, 100007.
Farnsworth, D.R., Saunders, L.M., and Miller, A.C. (2020). A single-cell tran-
scriptome atlas for zebraﬁsh development. Dev. Biol. 459, 100–108.
Farrell, J.A., Wang, Y., Riesenfeld, S.J., Shekhar, K., Regev, A., and Schier,
A.F. (2018). Single-cell reconstruction of developmental trajectories during ze-
braﬁsh embryogenesis. Science 360, eaar3131.
Felsenstein, J. (1989). PHYLIP - Phylogeny Inference Package (Version 3.2).
Cladistics, Vol. 5 (University of Washington).
Fischer, A.J., Bongini, R., Bastaki, N., and Sherwood, P. (2011). The matura-
tion of photoreceptors in the avian retina is stimulated by thyroid hormone.
Neuroscience 178, 250–260.
Gibbs, H.C., Chang-Gonzalez, A., Hwang, W., Yeh, A.T., and Lekven, A.C.
(2017). Midbrain-Hindbrain Boundary Morphogenesis: At the Intersection of
Wnt and Fgf Signaling. Front. Neuroanat. 11, 64.
Guo, Q., and Li, J.Y.H. (2019). Deﬁning developmental diversiﬁcation of dien-
cephalon neurons through single cell gene expression proﬁling. Development
146, dev174284.
Haghverdi, L., Buettner, F., and Theis, F.J. (2015). Diffusion maps for high-
dimensional single-cell analysis of differentiation data. Bioinformatics 31,
2989–2998.
Haghverdi, L., B€uttner, M., Wolf, F.A., Buettner, F., and Theis, F.J. (2016).
Diffusion pseudotime robustly reconstructs lineage branching. Nat. Methods
13, 845–848.
Hashikawa, Y., Hashikawa, K., Rossi, M.A., Basiri, M.L., Liu, Y., Johnston,
N.L., Ahmad, O.R., and Stuber, G.D. (2020). Transcriptional and spatial reso-
lution of cell types in the mammalian habenula. Neuron 106, 743–758.e5.
He, J., Zhang, G., Almeida, A.D., Cayouette, M., Simons, B.D., and Harris,
W.A. (2012). How variable clones build an invariant retina. Neuron 75, 786–798.
Holguera, I., and Desplan, C. (2018). Neuronal speciﬁcation in space and time.
Science 362, 176–180.
Hu, Y., Wang, X., Hu, B., Mao, Y., Chen, Y., Yan, L., Yong, J., Dong, J., Wei, Y.,
Wang, W., et al. (2019). Dissecting the transcriptome landscape of the human
fetal neural retina and retinal pigment epithelium by single-cell RNA-seq anal-
ysis. PLoS Biol. 17, e3000365.
Jessell, T.M. (2000). Neuronal speciﬁcation in the spinal cord: inductive signals
and transcriptional codes. Nat. Rev. Genet. 1, 20–29.
Kim, D.W., Washington, P.W., Wang, Z.Q., Lin, S.H., Sun, C., Ismail, B.T.,
Wang, H., Jiang, L., and Blackshaw, S. (2020). The cellular and molecular land-
scape of hypothalamic patterning and differentiation from embryonic to late
postnatal development. Nat. Commun. 11, 4360.
Korzh, V., Sleptsova, I., Liao, J., He, J., and Gong, Z. (1998). Expression of ze-
braﬁsh bHLH genes ngn1 and nrd deﬁnes distinct stages of neural differentia-
tion. Dev. Dyn. 213, 92–104.
Kretzschmar, K., and Watt, F.M. (2012). Lineage tracing. Cell 148, 33–45.
La Manno, G., Siletti, K., Furlan, A., Gyllborg, D., Vinsland, E., Langseth, C.M.,
Khven, I., Johnsson, A., Nilsson, M., Lo¨ nnerberg, P., and Linnarsson, S. (2020).
Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain. bioRxiv. Published on-
line July 3, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051.
Lange, C., Rost, F., Machate, A., Reinhardt, S., Lesche, M., Weber, A., Kuscha,
V., Dahl, A., Rulands, S., and Brand, M. (2020). Single cell sequencing of radial
glia progeny reveals the diversity of newborn neurons in the adult zebraﬁsh
brain. Development 147, dev185595.
Lee, S.-K., and Pfaff, S.L. (2001). Transcriptional networks regulating neuronal
identity in the developing spinal cord. Nat. Neurosci. 4 (Suppl), 1183–1191.
Li, H., Horns, F., Wu, B., Xie, Q., Li, J., Li, T., Luginbuhl, D.J., Quake, S.R., and
Luo, L. (2017). Classifying Drosophila olfactory projection neuron subtypes by
single-cell RNA sequencing. Cell 171, 1206–1220.e22.
Lord, N.D., Carte, A.N., Abitua, P.B., and Schier, A.F. (2019). The pattern of
Nodal morphogen signaling is shaped by co-receptor expression. bioRxiv.
Published online December 30, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.30.
891101.
Ma, J., Shen, Z., Yu, Y.-C., and Shi, S.-H. (2018). Neural lineage tracing in the
mammalian brain. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 50, 7–16.
Mayer, C., Hafemeister, C., Bandler, R.C., Machold, R., Batista Brito, R.,
Jaglin, X., Allaway, K., Butler, A., Fishell, G., and Satija, R. (2018).
Developmental diversiﬁcation of cortical inhibitory interneurons. Nature 555,
457–462.
McKenna, A., Findlay, G.M., Gagnon, J.A., Horwitz, M.S., Schier, A.F., and
Shendure, J. (2016). Whole-organism lineage tracing by combinatorial and cu-
mulative genome editing. Science 353, aaf7907.
McKenzie, J.A.G., Fruttiger, M., Abraham, S., Lange, C.A.K., Stone, J.,
Gandhi, P., Wang, X., Bainbridge, J., Moss, S.E., and Greenwood, J. (2012).
Apelin is required for non-neovascular remodeling in the retina. Am. J.
Pathol. 180, 399–409.
Mission, J.P., Takahashi, T., and Caviness, V.S., Jr. (1991). Ontogeny of radial
and other astroglial cells in murine cerebral cortex. Glia 4, 138–148.
Moens, C.B., and Prince, V.E. (2002). Constructing the hindbrain: insights from
the zebraﬁsh. Dev. Dyn. 224, 1–17.
Mueller, T., and Wullimann, M.F. (2003). Anatomy of neurogenesis in the early
zebraﬁsh brain. Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 140, 137–155.
Navajas Acedo, J., Voas, M.G., Alexander, R., Woolley, T., Unruh, J.R., Li, H.,
Moens, C., and Piotrowski, T. (2019). PCP and Wnt pathway components act
in parallel during zebraﬁsh mechanosensory hair cell orientation. Nat.
Commun. 10, 3993.
Nowakowski, T.J., Bhaduri, A., Pollen, A.A., Alvarado, B., Mostajo-Radji, M.A.,
Di Lullo, E., Haeussler, M., Sandoval-Espinosa, C., Liu, S.J., Velmeshev, D.,
et al. (2017). Spatiotemporal gene expression trajectories reveal develop-
mental hierarchies of the human cortex. Science 358, 1318–1323.
Ogawa, Y., Shiraki, T., Kojima, D., and Fukada, Y. (2015). Homeobox transcrip-
tion factor Six7 governs expression of green opsin genes in zebraﬁsh. Proc.
Biol. Sci. 282, 20150659.
Pan, Y.A., Freundlich, T., Weissman, T.A., Schoppik, D., Wang, X.C.,
Zimmerman, S., Ciruna, B., Sanes, J.R., Lichtman, J.W., and Schier, A.F.
(2013). Zebrabow: multispectral cell labeling for cell tracing and lineage anal-
ysis in zebraﬁsh. Development 140, 2835–2846.
Pandey, S., Shekhar, K., Regev, A., and Schier, A.F. (2018). Comprehensive
identiﬁcation and spatial mapping of habenular neuronal types using single-
cell RNA-seq. Curr. Biol. 28, 1052–1065.e7.
Raj, B., Gagnon, J.A., and Schier, A.F. (2018a). Large-scale reconstruction of
cell lineages using single-cell readout of transcriptomes and CRISPR-Cas9
barcodes by scGESTALT. Nat. Protoc. 13, 2685–2713.
ll
NeuroResource
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020
1073

Raj, B., Wagner, D.E., McKenna, A., Pandey, S., Klein, A.M., Shendure, J.,
Gagnon, J.A., and Schier, A.F. (2018b). Simultaneous single-cell proﬁling of lin-
eages and cell types in the vertebrate brain. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 442–450.
Rheaume, B.A., Jereen, A., Bolisetty, M., Sajid, M.S., Yang, Y., Renna, K., Sun,
L., Robson, P., and Trakhtenberg, E.F. (2018). Single cell transcriptome
proﬁling of retinal ganglion cells identiﬁes cellular subtypes. Nat. Commun.
9, 2759.
Rosenberg, A.B., Roco, C.M., Muscat, R.A., Kuchina, A., Sample, P., Yao, Z.,
Graybuck, L.T., Peeler, D.J., Mukherjee, S., Chen, W., et al. (2018). Single-cell
proﬁling of the developing mouse brain and spinal cord with split-pool barcod-
ing. Science 360, 176–182.
Rulands, S., Iglesias-Gonzalez, A.B., and Boije, H. (2018). Deterministic fate
assignment of M€uller glia cells in the zebraﬁsh retina suggests a clonal back-
bone during development. Eur. J. Neurosci. 48, 3597–3605.
Sagner, A., and Briscoe, J. (2019). Establishing neuronal diversity in the spinal
cord: a time and a place. Development 146, dev182154.
Satoh, S., Tang, K., Iida, A., Inoue, M., Kodama, T., Tsai, S.Y., Tsai, M.-J.,
Furuta, Y., and Watanabe, S. (2009). The spatial patterning of mouse cone
opsin expression is regulated by bone morphogenetic protein signaling
through downstream effector COUP-TF nuclear receptors. J. Neurosci. 29,
12401–12411.
Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch,
T., Preibisch, S., Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., et al. (2012). Fiji: an
open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 676–682.
Schmechel, D.E., and Rakic, P. (1979). A Golgi study of radial glial cells in
developing monkey telencephalon: morphogenesis and transformation into
astrocytes. Anat. Embryol. (Berl.) 156, 115–152.
Schmidt, R., Str€ahle, U., and Scholpp, S. (2013). Neurogenesis in zebraﬁsh -
from embryo to adult. Neural Dev. 8, 3.
Shen, Y.-C., and Raymond, P.A. (2004). Zebraﬁsh cone-rod (crx) homeobox
gene promotes retinogenesis. Dev. Biol. 269, 237–251.
Siebert, S., Farrell, J.A., Cazet, J.F., Abeykoon, Y., Primack, A.S., Schnitzler,
C.E., and Juliano, C.E. (2019). Stem cell differentiation trajectories in Hydra
resolved at single-cell resolution. Science 365, eaav9314.
Solek, C.M., Feng, S., Perin, S., Weinschutz Mendes, H., and Ekker, M. (2017).
Lineage tracing of dlx1a/2a and dlx5a/6a expressing cells in the developing ze-
braﬁsh brain. Dev. Biol. 427, 131–147.
Stigloher, C., Chapouton, P., Adolf, B., and Bally-Cuif, L. (2008). Identiﬁcation
of neural progenitor pools by E(Spl) factors in the embryonic and adult brain.
Brain Res. Bull. 75, 266–273.
Tambalo, M., Mitter, R., and Wilkinson, D.G. (2020). A single cell transcriptome
atlas of the developing zebraﬁsh hindbrain. Development 147, dev184143.
Than-Trong, E., and Bally-Cuif, L. (2015). Radial glia and neural progenitors in
the adult zebraﬁsh central nervous system. Glia 63, 1406–1428.
Thisse, B., Heyer, V., Lux, A., Alunni, V., Degrave, A., Seiliez, I., Kirchner, J.,
Parkhill, J.-P., and Thisse, C. (2004). Spatial and temporal expression of the ze-
braﬁsh genome by large-scale in situ hybridization screening. Methods Cell
Biol. 77, 505–519.
Tiklova´ , K., Bjo¨ rklund, A˚ .K., Lahti, L., Fiorenzano, A., Nolbrant, S., Gillberg, L.,
Volakakis, N., Yokota, C., Hilscher, M.M., Hauling, T., et al. (2019). Single-cell
RNA sequencing reveals midbrain dopamine neuron diversity emerging during
mouse brain development. Nat. Commun. 10, 581.
Tosches, M.A., Yamawaki, T.M., Naumann, R.K., Jacobi, A.A., Tushev, G., and
Laurent, G. (2018). Evolution of pallium, hippocampus, and cortical cell types
revealed by single-cell transcriptomics in reptiles. Science 360, 881–888.
Trapnell, C., Cacchiarelli, D., Grimsby, J., Pokharel, P., Li, S., Morse, M.,
Lennon, N.J., Livak, K.J., Mikkelsen, T.S., and Rinn, J.L. (2014). The dynamics
and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed by pseudotemporal ordering
of single cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 381–386.
Viczian, A.S., Vignali, R., Zuber, M.E., Barsacchi, G., and Harris, W.A. (2003).
XOtx5b and XOtx2 regulate photoreceptor and bipolar fates in the Xenopus
retina. Development 130, 1281–1294.
Wagner, D.E., Weinreb, C., Collins, Z.M., Briggs, J.A., Megason, S.G., and
Klein, A.M. (2018). Single-cell mapping of gene expression landscapes and
lineage in the zebraﬁsh embryo. Science 360, 981–987.
Wamsley, B., and Fishell, G. (2017). Genetic and activity-dependent mecha-
nisms underlying interneuron diversity. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 299–309.
Wilson, S.W., and Rubenstein, J.L. (2000). Induction and dorsoventral
patterning of the telencephalon. Neuron 28, 641–651.
Wilson, S.W., Brand, M., and Eisen, J.S. (2002). Patterning the zebraﬁsh cen-
tral nervous system. Results Probl. Cell Differ. 40, 181–215.
Woo, K., and Fraser, S.E. (1995). Order and coherence in the fate map of the
zebraﬁsh nervous system. Development 121, 2595–2609.
Woodworth, M.B., Girskis, K.M., and Walsh, C.A. (2017). Building a lineage
from single cells: genetic techniques for cell lineage tracking. Nat. Rev.
Genet. 18, 230–244.
Xie, Y., and Dorsky, R.I. (2017). Development of the hypothalamus: conserva-
tion, modiﬁcation and innovation. Development 144, 1588–1599.
Xu, B., Tang, X., Jin, M., Zhang, H., Du, L., Yu, S., and He, J. (2020). Unifying
developmental programs for embryonic and postembryonic neurogenesis in
the zebraﬁsh retina. Development 147, dev185660.
Yan, W., Peng, Y.-R., van Zyl, T., Regev, A., Shekhar, K., Juric, D., and Sanes,
J.R. (2020). Cell Atlas of the human fovea and peripheral retina. Sci. Rep. 10,
9802–9817.
Yoshinari, N., Ando, K., Kudo, A., Kinoshita, M., and Kawakami, A. (2012).
Colored medaka and zebraﬁsh: transgenics with ubiquitous and strong trans-
gene expression driven by the medaka b-actin promoter. Dev. Growth Differ.
54, 818–828.
Zeisel, A., Hochgerner, H., Lo¨ nnerberg, P., Johnsson, A., Memic, F., van der
Zwan, J., H€aring, M., Braun, E., Borm, L.E., La Manno, G., et al. (2018).
Molecular architecture of the mouse nervous system. Cell 174, 999–1014.e22.
Zhong, S., Zhang, S., Fan, X., Wu, Q., Yan, L., Dong, J., Zhang, H., Li, L., Sun,
L., Pan, N., et al. (2018). A single-cell RNA-seq survey of the developmental
landscape of the human prefrontal cortex. Nature 555, 524–528.
ll
NeuroResource
1074
Neuron 108, 1058–1074, December 23, 2020

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead Contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact, Bushra
Raj (bushranraj@gmail.com).
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
PFA
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#158127, Cat#P6148
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#H1009
KOH
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#P5958
Formamide, deionized
Amresco
Cat#4170848
Proteinase K
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#3115836001
30% sucrose
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#84100
O.C.T.
Sakura
Cat#4583
poly-lysine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#P8920
Atto 647N NHS ester
Millipore Sigma
Cat#18373
Atto 550 NHS ester
Millipore Sigma
Cat#92835
Papain Dissociation System
Worthington
Cat#LK003150
Torula RNA
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#83850
20X SSC
Invitrogen/Ambion
Cat#AM9770
EnGen Cas9 NLS, S. pyogenes
NEB
Cat#M0646
Critical Commercial Assays
10X Reagents
10X Genomics
Chromium Single Cell 3¢v2 Reagent Kits
EnGen sgRNA Synthesis Kit, S. pyogenes
NEB
Cat#E3322
Deposited Data
Raw data ﬁles for scRNA-Seq
NCBI GEO
GEO: GSE158142
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Zebraﬁsh scGESTALT.2
This paper
N/A
Recombinant DNA
pT2Olactb:loxP-dsR2-loxP-EGFP
gift from Atsushi Kawakami (Yoshinari
et al., 2012)
N/A
Software and Algorithms
Cell Ranger
10X Genomics
https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-
cell-gene-expression/software/pipelines/
latest/installation
URD
Farrell et al., 2018
https://github.com/farrellja/URD
NMF modules
Farrell et al., 2018
https://github.com/YiqunW/NMF
Seurat v2.3.4
Butler et al., 2018
https://satijalab.org/seurat/
R, RStudio
RStudio
https://rstudio.com
Other
scRNA-seq resource
This paper
https://github.com/brlauuu/zf_brain
scGESTALT lineage resource
This paper
https://scgestalt.mckennalab.org/
ll
NeuroResource
Neuron 108, 1058–1074.e1–e6, December 23, 2020
e1

Materials Availability
Zebraﬁsh scGESTALT.2 transgenic line generated in this study is available via request from the Lead Contact or Alexander F. Schier.
All unique/stable reagents generated in this study are available from the Lead Contact without restriction.
Data and Code Availability
The datasets generated during this study are available at GEO: GSE158142. The processed data is available as a resource to explore
at: https://github.com/brlauuu/zf_brain. The code used in this study is available at: https://github.com/brlauuu/zf_brain and
Methods S1.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Zebraﬁsh husbandry
All zebraﬁsh work was performed at the facilities of Harvard University, Faculty of Arts & Sciences (HU/FAS). This study was approved by
the Harvard University/Faculty of Arts & Sciences Standing Committee on the Use of Animals in Research & Teaching under Protocol
No. 25–08. The HU/FAS animal care and use program maintains full AAALAC accreditation, is assured with OLAW (A3593-01), and is
currently registered with the USDA. The stages proﬁled in this study correspond to 12 hpf, 14 hpf, 16 hpf, 18 hpf, 20 hpf, 24 hpf, 36 hpf, 2
dpf, 3 dpf, 5 dpf, 8 dpf and 15 dpf. At the developmental stages proﬁled in this study, the sex of the organism is not yet determined.
METHOD DETAILS
Chromogenic in situ hybridization
Embryos were dechorionated with forceps and then ﬁxed in 4% PFA in 1X PBS (pH 7.4) overnight at 4C. After ﬁxation, embryos were
dehydrated in methanol series (0%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 100% MetOH in PBSTween 0.3% (PBST)) and stored in 100% methanol at
20C. Embryos were rehydrated by reversing the methanol series for 10 min in each step at room temperature (RT) and washed 2 3
5 min in PBST. To bleach pigment in 2 dpf ﬁsh, larvae were incubated for 10 min in bleaching solution (3% H2O2/0.5% KOH in ddH2O)
at room temperature and washed 3 3 5 min in PBST (Thisse et al., 2004). For permeabilization, 2 dpf larvae were incubated with Pro-
teinase K (10 mg/mL in PBST) for 2 min at RT and postﬁxed in 4% PFA in 1X PBS for 30 min at RT. Afterward, embryos were washed
3 3 5 min in PBST at RT, prehybridized in HYB+ solution (50% Deionized Formamide (Amresco), 5X SSC (Ambion), 0.1% Tween-20,
5mg/mL Torula RNA (Sigma) in ddH2O) for 3 hours at 69C, and hybridized overnight with the antisense probes diluted in HYB+ at
69C. The rest of the steps were performed as described previously, by hand (Navajas Acedo et al., 2019). Before imaging, embryos
were cleared using an increasing MetOH series. For imaging of 12 hpf embryos, the yolk was dissected away, and the embryos were
ﬂat mounted on a microscope slide and covered with a coverslip. Larvae were photographed on a Zeiss AxioZoom.V16.
The antisense probes were synthetized from DNA fragments ampliﬁed from TLAB zebraﬁsh cDNA using the following primers: klf17
(Fw GAAGGAAAGACTGCATCCTGAC; Rv CTGCTGTCCCAAAATAGGAGTT), ptgs2a (Fw CGAGGACTATGTTCAGCACTTG; Rv
TGCACATCGATCACAATACAAA), tp63 (Fw TGCTTTGCTAAATTGTGCTGTC; Rv ATTGCCGCTTATGAGAATCAAG), cavin2a (Fw
GAGCCTTCTCGTGCTAACAAGT;
Rv
CAGGCATTTCAGTTCAATTTCA),
sox1a
(Fw
AATCAAGACCGCGTAAAGAGAC;
Rv
TTTGGTGGAGTGTTTCTGAATG), pdyn (Fw AAGAGAACGCCATACTGAAAGG; Rv GCAGTTACGAATTGCCATGATA), dlx1a (Fw
AAGGAGGAGAGGTTCGTTTCA; Rv AGTGTGTGTCAGCAGGTGTCTT).
smFISH staining and imaging
Zebraﬁsh larvae were ﬁxed with 4% PFA (Sigma-Aldrich, P6148) in PBS overnight at 4C. They were then washed twice with PBS and
subsequently incubated in 30% sucrose (Sigma-Aldrich, 84100) in PBS overnight at 4C and then embedded in O.C.T. (Sakura, 4583)
and stored at 80C. 20 mm sections were cut with a cryostat (ThermoFisher, 957000) and captured onto poly-lysine (Sigma, P8920)
-coated #1.5 coverslips.
Single-molecule FISH probe sets were generated as previously described and coupled to either Atto 647N NHS ester (Millipore
Sigma #18373) (foxg1b, cahz) or Atto 550 NHS ester (Millipore Sigma # 92835) (ompa, rlbp1a) (Lord et al., 2019). Sectioned larvae
were afﬁxed to polylysine-coated #1.5 coverslips, and staining was carried out as previously described (Lord et al., 2019), with
each coverslip contained in a well of a plastic 6-well plate. During the probe hybridization step, coverslips were placed upside-
down onto a 100ml droplet of probe solution on Paraﬁlm (Farack and Itzkovitz, 2020). Sample mounting was performed as previously
described (Lord et al., 2019). Mounted samples were imaged on an Olympus spinSR spinning disk microscope ﬁtted with a UPLAPO
60X/1.5 oil immersion objective using 0.3mm slices.
smFISH image processing
All image processing was performed in Fiji (Schindelin et al., 2012). Rolling-ball background subtraction (radius 25 pixels) was per-
formed on smFISH channels before maximum intensity projections were produced from 30 slices (Figure 1F) or 50 slices (Figure S9)
of processed z stacks. Channels were scaled individually, maximizing for visibility.
Optimization of scGESTALT lineage cassette
In our previous iteration of scGESTALT, the barcode capture rate by scRNA-seq was 6%–28%. (Raj et al., 2018b), thereby limiting the
density of lineage tree reconstruction. To improve recovery we adapted a different transgenic cassette (Yoshinari et al., 2012) for
ll
NeuroResource
e2
Neuron 108, 1058–1074.e1–e6, December 23, 2020

===== Rangaraju2017_JNeuroinflammation+Kv1.3Microglia =====
RESEARCH
Open Access
A systems pharmacology-based approach
to identify novel Kv1.3 channel-dependent
mechanisms in microglial activation
Srikant Rangaraju1*
, Syed Ali Raza1, Andrea Pennati2, Qiudong Deng3, Eric B. Dammer1, Duc Duong3,
Michael W. Pennington4, Malu G. Tansey5, James J. Lah1, Ranjita Betarbet1, Nicholas T. Seyfried3 and Allan I. Levey1
Abstract
Background: Kv1.3 potassium channels regulate microglial functions and are overexpressed in neuroinflammatory
diseases. Kv1.3 blockade may selectively inhibit pro-inflammatory microglia in neurological diseases but the molecular
and cellular mechanisms regulated by Kv1.3 channels are poorly defined.
Methods: We performed immunoblotting and flow cytometry to confirm Kv1.3 channel upregulation in lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-activated BV2 microglia and in brain mononuclear phagocytes freshly isolated from LPS-treated mice. Quantitative
proteomics was performed on BV2 microglia treated with control, LPS, ShK-223 (highly selective Kv1.3 blocker), and LPS+ShK-
223. Gene ontology (GO) analyses of Kv1.3-dependent LPS-regulated proteins were performed, and the most representative
proteins and GO terms were validated. Effects of Kv1.3-blockade on LPS-activated BV2 microglia were studied in migration,
focal adhesion formation, reactive oxygen species production, and phagocytosis assays. In vivo validation of protein changes
and predicted molecular pathways were performed in a model of systemic LPS-induced neuroinflammation, employing
antigen presentation and T cell proliferation assays. Informed by pathway analyses of proteomic data, additional mechanistic
experiments were performed to identify early Kv1.3-dependent signaling and transcriptional events.
Results: LPS-upregulated cell surface Kv1.3 channels in BV2 microglia and in microglia and CNS-infiltrating macrophages
isolated from LPS-treated mice. Of 144 proteins differentially regulated by LPS (of 3141 proteins), 21 proteins showed
rectification by ShK-223. Enriched cellular processes included MHCI-mediated antigen presentation (TAP1, EHD1), cell motility,
and focal adhesion formation. In vitro, ShK-223 decreased LPS-induced focal adhesion formation, reversed LPS-induced
inhibition of migration, and inhibited LPS-induced upregulation of EHD1, a protein involved in MHCI trafficking. In vivo, intra-
peritoneal ShK-223 inhibited LPS-induced MHCI expression by CD11b+CD45low microglia without affecting MHCI expression
or trafficking of CD11b+CD45high macrophages. ShK-223 inhibited LPS-induced MHCI-restricted antigen presentation to
ovalbumin-specific CD8+ T cells both in vitro and in vivo. Kv1.3 co-localized with the LPS receptor complex and regulated
LPS-induced early serine (S727) STAT1 phosphorylation.
Conclusions: We have unraveled novel molecular and functional roles for Kv1.3 channels in pro-inflammatory microglial
activation, including a Kv1.3 channel-regulated pathway that facilitates MHCI expression and MHCI-dependent antigen
presentation by microglia to CD8+ T cells. We also provide evidence for neuro-immunomodulation by systemically
administered ShK peptides. Our results further strengthen the therapeutic candidacy of microglial Kv1.3 channels in
neurologic diseases.
Keywords: Microglia, Neuroinflammation, Potassium channels, Kv1.3, Proteomics
* Correspondence: srangar@emory.edu
1Department of Neurology, Emory University, 615 Michael Street, Suite 525,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© The Author(s). 2017 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
DOI 10.1186/s12974-017-0906-6

Background
Neuroinflammation is primarily mediated by microglia,
the innate immune cells of the brain. Microglia have
opposing pro- and anti-inflammatory roles that when
dysregulated, contribute to neuroinflammatory and neu-
rodegenerative disorders [1, 2]. Selective modulators of
pro-inflammatory microglia that do not affect homeo-
static and neuroprotective microglial functions may
therefore be therapeutically relevant. Kv1.3 is a voltage-
gated
outward-rectifying
potassium
channel
that
is
expressed by microglia, macrophages, and other immune
cells, wherein it regulates membrane potential, calcium
signaling, cytokine production, and proliferative re-
sponses, and is a promising therapeutic target for auto-
immune,
neuroinflammatory,
and
neurodegenerative
diseases [3–6]. Selective upregulation of Kv1.3 channels
by microglia in disease contexts has been observed in
human disease and animal models [4, 7, 8]. Pro-
inflammatory microglial functions that are mediated by
Kv1.3 channels include direct neurotoxicity, cytokine
production, and reactive oxygen species while homeo-
static functions of non-activated microglia appear to in-
volve alternative cationic channels [9, 10]. Recent studies
have shown that intracellular potassium concentration
and potassium efflux mechanisms regulate an immune
checkpoint in T cells, raising the possibility that similar
roles for Kv1.3 potassium channels in microglia may also
exist [11]. However, the molecular and signaling mecha-
nisms regulated by Kv1.3 channels in microglia, particu-
larly in pro-inflammatory-activated states, remain poorly
defined. In this study of pro-inflammatory microglial ac-
tivation, we first determined whether Kv1.3 channels are
upregulated by pro-inflammatory stimuli in microglia in
a model of acute neuroinflammation induced by lipo-
polysaccharide (LPS). We then used a systems pharma-
cology approach to identify Kv1.3 channel-regulated
proteins
in
pro-inflammatory-activated
and
resting
microglial states. These data informed in vitro and in
vivo validation studies to unravel novel molecular mech-
anisms, signaling pathways, and cellular functions that
are regulated by Kv1.3 channels.
Methods
Reagents
ShK-223, an analog of sea anemone peptide ShK, was
used as a highly selective Kv1.3 channel blocker (IC50 for
Kv1.3 25 ± 14 pM, >10,000-fold more selective for Kv1.3
than neuronal Kv1.1 and Kv1.2 channels) [12]. The dose
of ShK-223 for intravenous or intraperitoneal injections
was 100 μg/kg. Concentration used for in vitro experi-
ments was 100 nM. ShK-F6CA, a fluorescein-conjugated
ShK analog, was purchased from Peptides International
(Louisville, KY). LPS was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich
(Cat #L4391, Escherichia coli 0111:B4). Fluorophore-
conjugated monoclonal antibodies for flow cytometry
were obtained from BD Biosciences (CD11b-PeCy7 or
APC-Cy7, CD45-PerCP or PE-Cy7, ICAM1-APC, CD69-
PECy7,
pS727-STAT1-Alexa647),
eBiosciences
(CD3-
FITC,
CD8-APC,
CD95-PE)
and
Cell
Signaling
Technologies (pY701-STAT1-Alexa488).
Primary microglia isolation and cell culture
Adult (8–12-week-old) female C57BL/6 mice were eu-
thanized, and the brains were isolated following rapid
cold saline perfusion. Single cell suspensions from brain
homogenates were washed followed by Percoll-gradient
centrifugation and isolation of the mononuclear cell
fraction as previously described [13]. Brain mononuclear
cells (76–85% pure) were used for flow cytometric
studies and for in vitro CD8+ T cell proliferation experi-
ments. BV2 microglia were maintained in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle Medium (with 10% FBS).
In vivo studies
Mice
were
housed
in
the
Department
of
Animal
Resources at Emory University under standard conditions,
no
special
food/water
accommodations.
Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee approval was obtained
prior to in vivo work. Adult (8–12-week-old) female
C57BL/6 mice were treated with four once daily intraperi-
toneal doses of sterile PBS, ShK-223 (100 μg/kg), LPS
(20 μg), or LPS+ShK-223 [14]. Mice were then anesthe-
tized with isoflurane and rapidly cardiac-perfused with
cold PBS over 2 min, after which microglia were isolated
for flow studies or for in vitro T cell proliferation assays.
Gap closure assay
BV2 microglia were grown to near confluence in 12 well
plates followed by exposure to PBS, ShK-223 (100 nM),
LPS (100 ng/mL), or LPS+ShK-223. Two para-median
scratches were placed in each well and imaged using an
inverted microscope at time 0 and at 24 h and areas of
each gap at each time point were calculated (ImageJ),
and relative gap closure over 24 h was determined (n = 6
biological replicates per condition).
Transmigration assay
Fifty thousand BV2 microglia grown in serum-free
DMEM
were
added
to
the
upper
chamber
of
fibronectin-coated transwell chambers (8-μm pore size,
Costar Sigma-Aldrich #3464) in the presence of either
PBS, ShK-223 (100 nM), LPS (100 ng/mL), or LPS+ShK-
223. Separate experiments were performed to test the
effects of 100 nM ShK-186, a well-characterized selective
Kv1.3 channel blocker, on LPS-induced effects on trans-
migration. Cells were allowed to transmigrate over 24 h
into the lower chamber containing either serum-free
medium
(lacking
chemotactic
factors)
or
medium
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 2 of 20

supplemented with 10% FBS (to induce chemotaxis). Cy-
tochalasin D (50 μM) was also added to the upper cham-
ber in a separate experiment to inhibit actin-dependent
transmigration into serum-containing medium. All ex-
periments were carried out in biological triplicates.
Flow cytometry studies
Flow cytometric analyses of BV2 microglia and freshly iso-
lated primary mouse microglia as well as T cells from T
cell proliferation assays were performed using well-
characterized fluorophore-conjugated monoclonal anti-
bodies against CD11b, CD45, ICAM1, CD69, MHCI
(H2Kb), CD3, and CD8. Functional cell surface Kv1.3
channels expressed by BV2 or primary microglia were
assessed using ShK-F6CA labeling via a previously vali-
dated assay [15]. For primary mouse microglia studies,
gating strategies were employed to differentiate resident
microglia (CD11b+ CD45low) from peripherally derived
brain-infiltrating macrophages (CD11b+ CD45high) [16].
Phospho-flow cytometry was performed to detect pS727
and pY701 STAT1 phosphorylation (pY701-Alexa488 ab:
Cell Signaling, pS727-Alexa647: BD Biosciences) [17].
EHD1 was detected in separate experiments using anti--
EHD1 rabbit polyclonal Ab (1:100 [Abcam Cat#EPR4954])
followed by 1:500 Anti-rabbit DyLight-549 (Jackson La-
boratories)
after
cells
were
fixed
(Fixation
buffer,
eBioscience
#00822249)
and
permeabilized
(Permeabilization buffer eBioscience #00833356). Blocking
with 10% horse serum and appropriate control experi-
ments (unstained cells, cells treated with secondary Ab
only) were performed. Compensation experiments were
performed prior to each experiment using compensation
beads (OneComp eBeads Thermo-Fisher Sci. #01111141).
Samples were analyzed on a BD FACSCanto II flow
cytometer, and data were collected with CellQuest soft-
ware and analyzed with FlowJo software (Version 10).
Phagocytosis assay
The ability of BV2 microglia and freshly isolated primary
microglia to phagocytose red-fluorescent polystyrene 1-
μm
microspheres
(Thermo-Fisher
FluoroSpheres
Cat#F13083) was assessed. Cells were exposed to 2.5 μL
of the beads (≈200 beads per cell) for 30 min at 37 ° C,
followed by washing and flow cytometry [18]. Fluores-
cence of single microspheres was determined by running
beads in isolation and proportion of cells that phagocy-
tosed at least one bead was determined and compared
across the treatment groups. BV2 cells were exposed to
PBS, LPS, ShK-223, or LPS+ShK-223. Similarly, primary
microglia were isolated from the brains of mice treated
with four daily IP doses of PBS, LPS, ShK-223, or LPS
+ShK-223, followed by flow cytometric analysis after la-
beling with anti-CD11b and anti-CD45 fluorophore-
conjugated antibodies.
Reactive oxygen species assay
Freshly isolated brain mononuclear cells from mice
(treated with PBS, LPS, ShK-223 or LPS+ShK-223) were
incubated
with
5
μM
dichlorofluorescein
diacetate
(DCFDA, Thermo-Fisher #D399) for 30 min, washed in
PBS and then analyzed by flow cytometry. DCFDA is a
cell-permeant dye that is de-acetylated by cellular ester-
ases to a non-fluorescent compound which is then
oxidized by hydroxyl, peroxyl, and other reactive oxygen
species (ROS) to a green fluorescent compound that can
be
measured
by
fluorescence
microscopy
or
flow
cytometry.
Immunofluorescence microscopy
BV2 cells were grown on glass coverslips and exposed to
LPS, ShK-223, or LPS+ShK-223 for 24 h, washed twice
with PBS and then treated with ShK-F6CA (100 nM) for
30 min, then fixed using 4% formaldehyde for 15 min. In
separate experiments, BV2 cells were incubated with
anti-EHD1
rabbit
polyclonal
antibody
(Abcam
Cat#EPR4954) as well. Following fixation, the cells were
washed and permeabilized with 2 mL 0.1% Triton X-100
in PBS for 15 min on ice. Cells were washed thrice
followed by image acquisition on an immunofluores-
cence microscope (Microscope: Olympus BX51 and
camera: Olympus DP70). Cells were also incubated with
anti-CD14-PE
antibody
and
co-localization
between
ShK-F6CA and anti-CD14 labeling was determined by
immunofluorescence microscopy and image processing
using ImageJ software.
Mass spectrometry sample preparation
Samples were prepared essentially as described (CITE
CELLS SYSTMES) with slight modifications [19]. BV2
microglia were grown to 75% confluence and then
exposed to PBS, LPS (100 ng/mL), ShK-223 (100 nM),
or LPS+ShK-223 for 24 h and then harvested. Each cell
pellet was individually homogenized in 300 μL of urea
lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NaHPO4, pH 8.5), in-
cluding 3 μL (100× stock) HALT protease and phosphat-
ase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce). All homogenization was
performed using a Bullet Blender (Next Advance) ac-
cording to manufacturer protocols and as previously
published [20]. Briefly, each cell pellet was added to
Urea lysis buffer in a 1.5-mL Rino tube (Next Advance)
harboring 750 mg stainless steel beads (0.9–2 mm in
diameter) and blended twice for 5-min intervals in the
cold room (4 °C). Protein supernatants were transferred
to 1.5-mL Eppendorf tubes and sonicated (Sonic Dis-
membrator, Fisher Scientific) three times for 5 s with
15 s intervals of rest at 30% amplitude to disrupt nucleic
acids and subsequently vortexed. Protein concentration
was
determined
by
the
bicinchoninic
acid
(BCA)
method, and samples were frozen in aliquots at −80 °C.
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 3 of 20

Protein homogenates (100 μg) were diluted with 50 mM
NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of less than 2 M urea
and then treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 25 °C
for 30 min, followed by 5 mM iodoacetimide (IAA) at 25 °C
for 30 min in the dark. Protein was digested with 1:100
(w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 25 °C for 2 h and fur-
ther digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega)
at 25 °C. Resulting peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak
C18 column (Waters) and dried under vacuum. For LC-
MS/MS analysis, derived peptides were re-suspended in
100 μL of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluor-
oacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile). Peptide mixtures (2 μL) were
separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch,
Germany) fused silica column (25 cm × 75 μM internal
diameter (ID); New Objective, Woburn, MA) by a Dionex
Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano and monitored on a Fusion
mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose,
CA). Elution was performed over a 2 h gradient at a rate
of 400 nL/min with buffer B ranging from 3 to 80% (buffer
A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in
acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer cycle was pro-
grammed to collect at the top speed for 3-s cycles. The
MS scans (400–1600 m/z range; 200,000 AGC; 50 ms
maximum ion time) were collected at a resolution of
120,000 at 200 m/z in profile mode and the HCD MS/MS
spectra (0.7 m/z isolation width; 30% collision energy;
10,000 AGC target; 35 ms maximum ion time) were de-
tected in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to ex-
clude previous sequenced precursor ions for 20 s within a
10 ppm window. Precursor ions with +1 and +8 or higher
charge states were excluded from sequencing.
MaxQuant for label-free quantification and data analysis
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.5.2.8
with Thermo Foundation 2.0 for RAW file reading cap-
ability, as previously published [20]. The search engine
Andromeda was used to build and search a concatenated
target-decoy IPI/Uniprot mouse reference (downloaded
Aug
14,
2015).
Protein
methionine
oxidation
(+15.9949
Da)
and
protein
N-terminal
acetylation
(+42.0106 Da) were variable modifications (up to five
allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned a fixed car-
bamidomethyl modification (+57.0215 Da). Only fully
tryptic peptides were considered with up to two misclea-
vages in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance
of ±10 ppm was applied prior to mass accuracy calibra-
tion and ±4.5 ppm after internal MaxQuant calibration.
Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass
of 6000 Da, a minimum peptide length of six residues,
and 0.6 Da Tolerance for ion trap (IT) HCD MS/MS
scans. Co-fragmented peptide search was enabled to
deconvolute multiplex spectra. The false discovery rate
(FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site
decoy fraction were all set to 1%. Quantification settings
were as follows: re-quantify with a second peak finding
attempt
after
protein
identification
has
completed;
match full MS1 peaks between runs; a 1.5-min retention
time match window was used after an alignment func-
tion was found with a 20 min RT search space. The
label-free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant
[21, 22] was used for protein quantitation. Volcano plots
were plotted with ggplot2 packages in R. Proteins with
>25% overall missing data or more than one missing
data point per treatment group were excluded from
analysis.
Statistical and gene ontology pathway analysis
One-way ANOVA (p ≤0.05) was used as the first thresh-
old for differences across treatment groups. Then, a
two-tailed Student’s t test was performed comparing the
LPS and control groups and proteins that showed statis-
tically significant (p ≤0.05), and at least 1.25-fold change
in both directions were identified. Within these LPS-re-
gulated proteins, pairwise comparisons between LPS-
and
LPS+ShK-223-treated
groups
were
performed
(threshold p ≤0.05). A less-stringent approach (p value
≤0.10) for all comparisons described was also taken.
Proteins which had expression altered by ShK-223 treat-
ment without LPS were also identified by performing
pairwise comparisons between the control and ShK-223
groups (p ≤0.05 and at least 1.25 fold change in either
direction). Gene ontology (GO) analyses were performed
using the following lists of proteins (list 1: All LPS-regu-
lated proteins with reversal by ShK-223; list 2: LPS-
upregulated proteins with reversal by ShK, list 3: LPS-
downregulated proteins with reversal by ShK, list 4:
ShK-upregulated
without
LPS,
and
list
5:
ShK-
downregulated without LPS) with the background of all
sequenced mouse proteins in the entire dataset (3141
proteins). Functional enrichment was determined using
the GO-Elite (v1.2.5) package [20, 23]. The set of total
proteins identified was used as the background. Z-score
determines
overrepresentation
of
ontologies
in
a
module, and permutation P value was used to assess the
significance of the Z-score. For these significantly changed
proteins, a Z-score cutoff of 1.96, with p value cutoff of
0.05 with a minimum of three proteins per category were
used as filters in pruning the ontologies. Circle plots were
plotted with circlize package in R software and exploratory
pathway analyses were performed using the most highly
enriched GO terms in each list using canonical pathway
analysis in Metacore (Thomson-Reuters) [24]. This manu-
ally curated database captures high-quality experimental
evidence
from
peer-reviewed
literature
and
through
curating interactions, omics-disease relationships, and
constructing canonical pathways from these omics experi-
ments and allows reduction of high dimensional data into
a systems biology context.
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 4 of 20

OT-1 CD8+ T cell proliferation assay by CFSE dilution
Ovalbumin (Ova 257-264)-specific CD8-positive T cells
were isolated from the spleen of adult OT-1 mice using
standard protocols for T cell enrichment (EasySep Kit
#19751, Stemcell Tech). T cells were labeled with CFSE
(CellTrace™Cat# C34554) and 100,000 cells were co-
cultured with 20,000 Ova-loaded microglia (2 μg/mL for
30 min, Sigma Cat#S7951) that were derived from either
(i) BV2 microglia pre-treated with PBS, LPS, ShK-223, or
LPS+ShK-223 for 24 h or (ii) primary microglia freshly
isolated from the brains of mice that had been treated
with four daily IP doses of PBS, LPS, ShK-223, or LPS
+ShK-223 as described. After 48 h, T cells were harvested
and assessed for CFSE dilution by flow cytometry [18].
Reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR
Real-time PCR was performed as previously reported
[25]. Total RNA was isolated from cells using a standard
Trizol (Invitrogen) extraction protocol using an RNeasy
mini extraction kit (Qiagen) according to the manufac-
turer’s instructions. RNA was converted to cDNA using
a
high-capacity
cDNA
reverse
transcription
kit
(Ambion). Real-time PCR was performed on a 7500 Fast
RT-PCR instrument (Applied Biosystems) using 20 ng/uL
cDNA, TaqMan PCR master mix (Applied Biosystems),
and gene-specific TaqMan probes (Applied Biosys-
tems)
against
TAP1
(Mm00443188_m1),
EHD1
(Mm01236839_m1),
IRF1
(Mm01288580_m1),
IRF7
(Mm00516793_g1),
NFkB
(Mm00476361_m1),
IL1B
(Mm00434228_m1), Arg1 (Mm00475988_m1), GAPDH
(Mm99999915_g1), and HPRT (Mm03024075_m1). For
each RNA sample, each primer set was run in triplicate.
Gene expression was normalized to the internal control
GAPDH (for BV2 microglia) or HPRT (for primary micro-
glial cells), and relative expression was calculated for each
gene using the 2ΔΔCT method after normalizing to the
control sample.
Western blot experiments
Western blot studies were performed per our standard
protocols [7]. After overnight protein transfer, PVDF
membranes were blocked with 5% fat-free milk for 1 h
followed by incubation with primary antibodies over-
night. The immunoblots were incubated with anti-Kv1.3
rabbit polyclonal antibody (APC 101, Alomone labs,
1:1000)
and
anti-beta-actin
mAb
(Cell
Signaling,
#3873,1:1000) for 24 h and subsequently appropriate
fluorescent
secondary
antibodies
(anti-mouse
IgG
IRDye® 800 conjugate, Rockland, 1:20,000 and anti-
rabbit IgG Alexa Fluor® 680 conjugate, Invitrogen) were
added for 1 h. An Odyssey Scanner (LI-COR) was used
to visualize labeled proteins.
Other statistical considerations
Graphs were created using Graphpad Prism Version 5
or SPSS Version 22. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. For
group-wise comparisons, one-way ANOVA was per-
formed to detect differences across groups and post hoc
pairwise comparisons were performed using Tukey’s
HSD test. Paired analyses were performed for pairwise
comparisons of normalized qRT-PCR data. Statistical
significance was set at p value ≤0.05 for all experiments
unless separately specified.
Results
Kv1.3 channel upregulation by microglia and brain-
infiltrating macrophages following LPS activation
LPS,
a
bacterial
endotoxin,
is
a
prototypic
pro-
inflammatory activator of microglia and macrophages that
has pleiotropic systemic and neuro-inflammatory effects
that recapitulate chronic inflammation in neurodegenera-
tive diseases [26, 27]. We first investigated whether Kv1.3
channels are upregulated following LPS-induced pro-
inflammatory activation of microglia, using both in vitro
and in vivo models. BV2 microglia were stimulated in
vitro with LPS (100 ng/mL) for 24 h to mimic pro-
inflammatory activation. We found that LPS-upregulated
Kv1.3 channel protein expression by BV2 microglia by im-
munofluorescence microscopy (Fig. 1a) and observed an
LPS dose-dependent increase in Kv1.3 protein by im-
munoblotting (Fig. 1b). We then utilized a previously vali-
dated fluorescent assay for functional and Kv1.3 channel
detection that uses a green fluoresceinated ShK analog
(ShK-F6CA) that binds to cell surface Kv1.3 channels with
high selectivity and affinity (IC50 = 49 pM) at 1:1 stoichi-
ometry [15]. ICAM-1, an activation marker of microglia,
was also used to confirm LPS-induced activation. As ex-
pected, ShK-F6CA labeling of cell surface Kv1.3 channels
was increased after LPS activation as compared to resting
BV2 microglia in immunofluorescence (Fig. 1c) and flow
cytometric experiments (Fig. 1d). ShK-F6CA labeling of
Kv1.3 channels could be blocked by competition via pre--
incubation
with
saturating
concentrations
of
non-
fluorescent
Kv1.3-blocking
ShK
analog
ShK-223
(Additional file 1: Figure S1). We also confirmed LPS-
induced pro-inflammatory activation of BV2 microglia as
demonstrated by higher surface ICAM1, MHCII, and
CD69 expression (Fig. 1d–e) [28].
BV2 microglia are a suitable model to study pro-
inflammatory LPS activation but significant differences
between BV2 and primary microglia have been observed,
and as a result, observations using BV2 microglia need
to be validated using primary microglia [29, 30]. To bet-
ter mimic in vivo microglial activation, we administered
LPS to adult wild-type mice (single 10-μg injection by
tail vein, Fig. 2a) [14]. Brain mononuclear cells were iso-
lated from the brain and labeled for CD11b, CD45,
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 5 of 20

ICAM-1, and ShK-F6CA. Microglia (CD11b+CD45low)
accounted for the majority of isolated cells while brain-
infiltrating macrophages (CD11b+CD45high) accounted
for a minority (Fig. 2b). As compared to PBS-treated an-
imals, microglia (Fig. 2d) and macrophages (Fig. 2e) iso-
lated from the brains of LPS-treated animals expressed
higher levels of ICAM-1 and ShK-F6CA labeling. Inter-
estingly, baseline level of Kv1.3 channel expression was
also higher in CD45high brain-infiltrating macrophages
as compared to that in CD45low microglia and the
magnitude of Kv1.3 channel upregulation by LPS was
also highest in the CD45high macrophage population
(Fig. 2c-d). CD11b−cells, in contrast to CD11b+ cells,
did not exhibit changes in ICAM1 or Kv1.3 channel ex-
pression (Fig. 2e). LPS-treated mice also had a greater
proportion of macrophages in the brain, indicating in-
creased steady state levels, trafficking, or blood–brain
barrier permeability induced by systemic inflammation.
As compared to brain-infiltrating macrophages, Kv1.3
channel expression was found to be very low in splenic
Fig. 1 LPS-activated BV2 microglia upregulate Kv1.3 channels. a Immunofluorescence microscopic comparison of Kv1.3 protein expression (detected by
Anti-Kv1.3 rabbit pAb 1:500) by unstimulated and LPS-activated (100 ng/mL × 24 h) BV2 microglia. b Western blot confirmation of LPS dose-dependent
increase in Kv1.3 protein in BV2 whole-cell lysates (Anti-Kv1.3 pAb 1:1000). c Immunofluorescence microscopic comparison of cell surface Kv1.3 channels in
unstimulated and LPS-activated BV2 cells using ShK-F6CA. d Flow cytometric comparison of ShK-F6CA-labeled cell surface Kv1.3 channels and microglial
activation marker ICAM-1 in unstimulated and LPS-activated BV2 cells. e Assessment of microglial activation markers MHCII and CD69 in unstimulated and
LPS-activated BV2 cells
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 6 of 20

macrophages (Additional file 1: Figure S2). These data
demonstrate upregulation of Kv1.3 channels by microglia
and brain-infiltrating macrophages following LPS activa-
tion, in both microglial cell line and in vivo model of
LPS activation.
Quantitative proteomics reveals Kv1.3-dependent
processes in pro-inflammatory and resting microglia
Our data show that upregulation of Kv1.3 channels par-
allels pro-inflammatory LPS-induced microglial activa-
tion in BV2 as well as primary mouse microglia.
Potassium channels regulate membrane potential and
calcium signaling in immune cells and, through their co-
assembly with key signaling complexes during immune
activation, regulate specific signaling cascades that in
turn impact gene transcription and cellular processes
[31]. To investigate the molecular mechanisms in pro-
inflammatory microglial activation that are regulated by
Kv1.3
channels,
we
performed
unbiased
proteomic
screens of unstimulated and LPS-activated BV2 micro-
glia, in the presence or absence of a potent Kv1.3 chan-
nel blocker ShK-223 (100 nM). As expected, LPS
activation (100 ng/mL) induced clear morphological
differences at 24 h (Additional file 1: Figure S3). No
changes in cell viability were noted across treatment
conditions. At the 24-h time point, we identified 3141
proteins across 12 proteomic datasets (Control, ShK-
223, LPS, LPS+ShK-223; n = 3/group) of which 81.6%
proteins had no missing data (Additional file 1: Figure
S4). Of these 3141 proteins (Additional file 2: Table S1-
S2), 450 were differentially expressed across the four
groups (ANOVA p value ≤0.05). Of these 450 proteins
(Fig. 3a), 144 were either significantly up- or downregu-
lated by LPS stimulation (fold change ≥1.25 and pairwise
t test p ≤0.05 comparing LPS vs. control). This list was
also consistent with previously published proteomic data
(35.9% agreement) and transcriptomic data (94.4% agree-
ment) from LPS-treated mouse microglia (Additional file
2: Table S3) [32, 33]. As predicted, GO analysis of the
144 LPS-regulated proteins confirmed that LPS activa-
tion
resulted
in
enrichment
of
pro-inflammatory
biological functions, cell proliferation, and immune
activation and qRT-PCR confirmed upregulation of pro-
inflammatory genes IL1B, IRF1, and IRF7 and down
regulation of Arg1 (Additional file 1: Figure S5). Top
proteins that were downregulated by LPS treatment
Fig. 2 In vivo demonstration of Kv1.3 channel upregulation by microglia and brain-infiltrating macrophages in a mouse model of LPS-induced
neuroinflammation. a LPS was administered to adult C57BL/6 mice by tail vein injection, and brain mononuclear cells were analyzed by flow cytometry
(CD11b, CD45, ShK-F6CA, and ICAM-1). b Most cells were CD11b+CD45low microglia while small populations of brain-infiltrating macrophages CD11b
+CD45high and CD11b- non-myeloid cells were observed. c–e Comparison of Kv1.3 channel and ICAM-1 expression in brain mononuclear cells isolated
from control and LPS-treated mice in microglia (c), brain-infiltrating macrophages (d), and CD11b- subpopulations (e) (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.005)
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 7 of 20

included known anti-inflammatory microglial proteins
(ARG1), DNAJC21, LUC7L, and transcription factor Jun
(see Additional file 2: Table S1 for complete list). Among
the 144 LPS-regulated proteins, 21 showed statistically
significant reversal (p ≤0.05) of the LPS effect by ShK-
223 (Fig. 3a–c). Ten of these were proteins that were up-
regulated by LPS (Fig. 3b) while 11 were proteins down-
regulated by LPS (Fig. 3c). EHD1 and TAP1 proteins
demonstrated the highest upregulation while SPP1 and
GABPA showed the most downregulation following LPS
exposure. We confirmed by immunofluorescence mi-
croscopy that EHD1 protein expression was increased by
LPS, and this effect was reversed by ShK-223 treatment
(Additional file 1: Figure S6). However, we did not ob-
serve an effect of ShK-223 on LPS-induced TAP1 and
EHD1 transcription in BV2 microglia by qRT-PCR. A
combined GO analysis of these 21 proteins revealed
enrichment of several biological process terms including
“taxis,” “cell motility” and “positive and negative regula-
tion of biological processes,” “defense response,” and
“protein oligomerization” (Fig. 3d) suggesting that Kv1.3
channels may regulate cell motility and taxis in LPS-
activated microglia. Using less-stringent criteria (p ≤0.1
comparing LPS vs. LPS+ShK-223), an additional 46 LPS-
regulated and Kv1.3-dependent proteins were identified.
Among the LPS-upregulated Kv1.3 channel-dependent
proteins (n = 27), the top enriched GO terms (Fig. 3e)
were biological process terms “regulation of GTPase ac-
tivity,” “immune process regulation,” and “intracellular
protein transport (Fig. 3e).” Several of these proteins
were localized to plasma membrane. GO analysis of
LPS-downregulated Kv1.3-dependent proteins (n = 40)
showed enrichment of the biological process term “RNA
metabolic process” and were localized to the nucleus
Fig. 3 Identification of novel Kv1.3 channel-dependent molecular mechanisms by microglial quantitative proteomics. BV2 microglia were exposed
to PBS, LPS (100 ng/mL), ShK-223 (100 nM), or LPS+ShK-223 for 24 h (3 replicates/group) and whole-cell lysates were used for mass-spectrometric analysis.
a Volcano-plot: Of 450 proteins differentially expressed across all 4 groups (black dots), 144 proteins were significantly up- or downregulated following LPS
exposure (top-right and top-left quadrants; vertical dotted lines represent the upper and lower boundaries of 1.25-fold change threshold while the horizontal
dotted line represents p value threshold of 0.05 comparing LPS vs. control groups). Among these, ShK-223 reversed the LPS effect in 21 proteins (highlighted
in red). b LPS-upregulated proteins that were reversed by ShK-223 and c LPS-downregulated proteins reversed by ShK-223 are shown. Relative expression
represents label-free quantitation data in each treatment condition normalized to the control PBS group. The dotted horizontal line represents the twofold
change threshold as compared to the PBS group. d–f Circle plots representing results from GO analyses are shown (gray: protein/gene
symbol, red: biological process, green: cellular component, purple: molecular function). Only significantly enriched GO terms (unadjusted p ≤0.05 based
on enrichment score) are shown (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.005). d GO analysis of 21 LPS-regulated Kv1.3-dependent proteins (n = 21, stringent p ≤
0.05 threshold comparing LPS vs. LPS+ShK-223). e GO analysis of LPS-upregulated Kv1.3-dependent proteins (n = 26, p ≤0.10 threshold comparing LPS
vs. LPS+ShK-223). f GO analysis of LPS-downregulated Kv1.3-dependent proteins (n = 40, p ≤0.10 threshold comparing LPS vs. LPS+ShK-223)
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 8 of 20

suggesting a novel role for Kv1.3 channels in regulating
nuclear and RNA processes (Fig. 3f). We also identified
significant effects of Kv1.3 channel blockade on 53 pro-
teins (≥1.25 fold change and p ≤0.05) in unstimulated
BV2 microglia (24 upregulated and 29 downregulated by
ShK-223, Additional file 2: Table S4) of which two pro-
teins (TMF1 and VRK1) were common to those also al-
tered
by
LPS
activation.
GO
analyses
showed
enrichment of cellular component term “organelle mem-
brane” for proteins upregulated by ShK-223 and of bio-
logical process term “cellular macromolecule catabolic
process” for proteins downregulated by ShK-223. Our
results identify novel Kv1.3 channel-dependent proteins
and predict regulatory roles for Kv1.3 channels in micro-
glial taxis, focal adhesion formation, antigen and intra-
cellular protein transport, and RNA processing.
Kv1.3 channels regulate taxis and focal adhesion
formation in LPS-activated microglia
GO analyses of our proteomic data suggest a role for
Kv1.3 channels in cell adhesion and taxis in LPS-
activated microglia. Therefore, we hypothesized that
Kv1.3
channels
regulate LPS-induced
migratory re-
sponses to local tissue injury and regulate formation of
focal adhesion complexes in BV2 microglia. In the gap
closure assay of taxis, microglia respond to a local tissue
injury (scratch) by chemotaxis and proliferation to close
the gap within 24 h. This homeostatic function was
inhibited by LPS, presumably due to increased adhesive-
ness of activated microglia. While ShK-223 had no direct
effect on gap closure, ShK-223 pre-incubation partially
reversed the inhibitory effect of LPS (Fig. 4a). In the
transmigration assay, LPS inhibited migration of BV2
cells from the upper chamber towards serum-containing
medium in the lower chamber while Kv1.3 blockade by
ShK-223 rectified this inhibition. As compared to con-
trol, ShK-223 also augmented transmigration towards
serum. Minimal migration of BV2 cells was observed in
the absence of serum in the lower chamber (Fig. 4b).
ShK-186, a well-characterized and highly selective inhibi-
tor of Kv1.3 channels, also demonstrated similar effects
on transmigration (Fig. 4b). Kv1.3 channel blockade also
decreased
LPS-induced
increase
in
F-actin-enriched
focal adhesion complexes in BV2 microglia (Fig. 4c). Un-
like gap closure and focal adhesion complex formation
in microglia, we found in in vivo experiments that LPS-
induced reactive oxygen species production measured by
the DCFDA assay (Fig. 4d) and LPS-augmented phago-
cytosis
of
red-fluorescent
polystyrene
microspheres
(Fig. 4e) in brain mononuclear cells were not affected by
Kv1.3 channel blockade. These results validate predic-
tions based on our proteomic data and confirm that
Kv1.3 channels regulate LPS-induced focal adhesion
formation as well as inhibition of migration.
Kv1.3 channels regulate EHD1, TAP1, GABPA, and pro-
inflammatory gene expression in primary mouse
microglia
Our proteomic findings were derived from BV2 micro-
glia, an immortalized cell line that has been found not to
adequately represent primary microglia [34]. Therefore,
we performed validation studies of our proteomic find-
ings in freshly isolated CNS MPs from wild-type adult
mice what were treated with four daily IP doses of either
PBS, ShK-223, LPS, or LPS+ShK-223 (Fig. 5a). One-third
of CNS MPs were used for flow cytometry to detect
EHD1 along with CD11b and CD45 while the rest were
used qRT-PCR experiments (Fig. 5a). In flow cytometric
studies of permeabilized cells, we found that EHD-1 was
strongly upregulated in the CD11b+ CD45low microglial
population of CNS MPs and ShK-223 inhibited this up-
regulation (Fig. 5b). ShK-223 treated mice (without LPS
exposure)
also
demonstrated
lower
proportions
of
EHD1-positive cells compared to PBS-treated mice.
CD11b+ CD45high CNS-infiltrating macrophages did not
demonstrate any significant changes in EHD1 with LPS
or ShK-223 treatment. We were unable to detect TAP1
by flow cytometric methods. In qRT-PCR studies of
purified CNS MPs (Fig. 5c), we observed that LPS up-
regulated the expression of pro-inflammatory gene IL1B
while ShK-223 inhibited LPS-induced IL1B upregulation.
TAP1 mRNA expression was upregulated by LPS while
ShK-223 inhibited this LPS-induced effect; although,
EHD1 mRNA expression was not significantly altered
across the treatment groups. GABPA mRNA also dem-
onstrated ShK-223-induced upregulation in CNS MPs;
although, LPS did not alter GABPA mRNA expression
in CNS MPs. Overall, these validation studies at the pro-
tein and mRNA levels using freshly isolated primary
microglia validate the top Kv1.3 channel-dependent pro-
tein expression changes observed in BV2 cells (TAP1,
EHD1, and GABPA).
Kv1.3 channels regulate MHCI trafficking and MHCI-restricted
antigen presentation by LPS-activated microglia
Among the Kv1.3 channel-regulated proteins, EHD1 and
TAP1
demonstrated
the
highest
LPS
upregulation.
TAP1, along with TAP2, forms a pore in the endoplas-
mic reticulum membrane that allows processed antigenic
peptides to enter the ER and assemble with MHCI [35].
Prior work has also shown that knockdown of TAP1 also
inhibits LPS-mediated MHCI expression by macro-
phages [36]. Tapasin (TAPBP), also upregulated by LPS
but is not affected by ShK-223 in our experiments, facili-
tates this process [37]. Antigen-MHCI complexes are
then transported to the cell surface via a process that
involves EHD1 [38]. Therefore, we hypothesized that LPS-
induced TAP-1/EHD-1 upregulation facilitates MHCI
trafficking and antigen presentation to CD8+ T cells in an
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 9 of 20

antigen-specific manner and that Kv1.3 blockade inhibits
these processes. We observed that MHCI proteins (H2Kb,
H2D, and β2 microglobulin as well as TAP1, TAP2, and
TAPBP were upregulated by LPS in our proteomics
experiments; although, only TAP1 showed reversal by
ShK-223 (Fig. 6a). In flow cytometric studies of LPS-
treated BV2 microglia, MHCI surface expression was also
increased; although, ShK-223 did not impact MHCI
Fig. 4 Kv1.3 channels regulate microglial taxis and formation of F-actin complexes induced by LPS. a In the gap closure assay of microglial taxis,
BV2 cells were grown to near confluence followed by placement of a uniform scratch using a 200-μm pipette tip. Ability of microglia to close this gap was
assessed by measuring the percentage of gap closure over a 24-h period. Paired (0 and 24 h) representative images from each treatment group are shown
(a, left), and the comparison of percentage gap closure (over 24 h) is shown (a, right) (six replicates per condition). b BV2 microglial transmigration across a
transwell membrane (8-μm pore diameter) after exposure to control, ShK-223, ShK-186, LPS or LPS+ShK-223, or ShK-186, towards serum-containing
medium (10% fetal bovine serum). Following 24 h of transmigration, cells were detached from undersurface of the insert (0.25% Trypsin), and cells that
successfully migrated across the membrane were counted on a hemocytometer (n = 3, independent experiments). c Comparison of F-actin containing
focal adhesion complexes in BV2 microglia following exposure to control, ShK-223, LPS, or LPS+ShK-223. Fixed and permeabilized BV2 cells were labeled
with phalloidin-rhodamine to detect F-actin (left: immunofluorescence images). The number of focal complexes were counted per cell at ×40 magnification
(right) and compared (>25 cells counted per condition). d DCFDA assay of ROS production by brain mononuclear cells isolated from C57BL/6 mice treated
with PBS, LPS, ShK-223, or LPS+ShK-223 IP for four consecutive days (n = 3, mice/group). Cells were loaded with DCFDA for 30 min and assayed for ROS
activity by flow cytometry. e Flow cytometric phagocytosis assay of fluorescent (PE) microbeads by brain mononuclear cells isolated from C57B6/L mice
treated with PBS, LPS, ShK-223, or LPS+ShK-223, n = 3/group). Dotted line: fluorescence of cells not exposed to beads; gray histogram: PBS-treated; black
histogram: LPS-treated. The proportions of all phagocytic cells and highly phagocytic cells were compared across treatment groups (*p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.005)
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 10 of 20

expression. The lack of an effect of ShK-223 on surface
MHCI in BV2 cells may have been a result of the persist-
ent low-level of activation of BV2 microglia. A saturating
effect of LPS on MHCI protein synthesis may have also
overshadowed any effect on MHCI assembly and traffick-
ing. In order to overcome this limitation of our in vitro
BV2 model, we tested this hypothesis in vivo. Adult
C57BL/6 mice were given four daily intraperitoneal injec-
tions of PBS, ShK-223, LPS, or LPS+ShK-223 (Fig. 6b).
Flow cytometric studies of brain mononuclear cells
showed that MHCI expression in CD11b+CD45low micro-
glia was increased following LPS treatment while ShK-223
Fig. 5 Kv1.3 channels regulate TAP1, EHD1, GABPA, and IL1B expression in primary murine microglia. a Experimental plan for in vivo studies: adult
C57BL/6 mice received four daily IP doses of PBS, ShK-223, LPS, or LPS+ShK-223, and brain mononuclear cells were isolated for flow cytometry
from one hemisphere and qRT-PCR studies from the other hemisphere (n = 3, mice/group). b Results from flow cytometric studies measuring
intracellular EHD1 protein expression in freshly isolated CNS MPs (gated first on live cells, followed by CD11b+ CD45low and CD11b+ CD45high
populations). At least 10,000 live CNS MPs were counted per sample. Left: Example of flow cytometric histograms comparing EHD1 expression in
CD11b+ CD45low microglia from one mouse from each treatment group. Right: Quantitative analysis of EHD1+ cells in CD11b+CD45low and CD11b
+CD45high populations. c Results from pRT-PCR studies measuring mRNA expression of TAP1, EHD1, GABPA, and IL1B in CNS MPs. For these studies, all
CNS MPs isolated from one hemisphere were used for RNA extraction in Trizol, followed by cDNA preparation followed by quantitative PCR. HPRT was
used as the housekeeping gene. Data normalized to HPRT were then normalized to PBS-treated control samples (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.005).
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 11 of 20

inhibited this effect (Fig. 6c–d). This inhibitory effect of
ShK-223 was not significant in CD45high brain-infiltrating
macrophages (Fig. 6e). LPS also significantly increased the
proportion of CD45high brain-infiltrating macrophages in
the brain and ShK-223 appeared to partly inhibit this LPS
effect (Fig. 6f). In summary, these in vivo data confirm
that LPS-induced MHCI upregulation in microglia, but
not brain-infiltrating macrophages, is a Kv1.3 channel-
dependent process.
Unstimulated microglia, compared to peripheral mac-
rophages, have lower antigen-presenting capacity which
is significantly increased during inflammation [39, 40].
Fig. 6 LPS-induced MHCI trafficking in microglia involves Kv1.3 channels. a Comparison of MHCI and MHCI-related protein expression in BV2
proteomic data. Normalized LFQ data (compared to control-treatment) is shown (three replicates/group). b Experimental plan for in vivo studies: Adult
C57BL/6 mice received four daily IP doses of PBS, ShK-223, LPS, or LPS+ShK-223 and brain mononuclear cells were isolated for flow cytometry (pooled
n = 9/group). c Comparison of MHCI (H2Kb) expression (median fluorescence intensity) in CD11b+ CD45low microglia. d Representative flow cytometry
frequency histograms of MHCI expression in CD11b+ CD45low microglia. e Comparison of MHCI expression in CD11b+CD45high brain-infil-
trating macrophages. f Comparison of the proportions of CD11b+CD45high CNS macrophages (among all CD11b+ cells) in the four treatment groups
(*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.005)
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 12 of 20

Based on our results, we hypothesized that induction of
MHCI may augment microglial antigen presentation
capacity to CD8+ T cells in a MHCI-restricted manner,
resulting in more effective activation and proliferation of
cytotoxic CD8+ T cells, a response that can be abrogated
by Kv1.3 channel blockade. To test this hypothesis, we
performed MHCI-restricted T cell proliferation assays
using in vitro and in vivo models (Fig. 7a). We observed
that LPS-activated and ovalbumin (Ova)-loaded BV2
microglia increased proliferation of Ova-specific CD8+ T
cells from Ova-specific OT-1 mice, and this increase in
proliferation was inhibited by Kv1.3 channel blockade
(Fig. 7b). Similarly, microglia isolated from LPS-treated
mice also increased Ova-specific T cell proliferation,
which was also inhibited by Kv1.3 blockade (Fig. 7b).
Supporting the relevance of our observed increased anti-
gen presentation capability of pro-inflammatory micro-
glia, we found that LPS-induced neuroinflammation
involves a specific increase in CD8+ T cell recruitment
to the brain in mice treated (Fig. 7c–e). As compared to
CD8−T cells in the brain, CD95 (Fas) expression was
also significantly higher in CD8+ T cells, but LPS or
ShK-223 did not alter CD95 expression in this subpopu-
lation (Fig. 7f). This selectively increased CD8+ T cell
trafficking to the brain in response to LPS treatment
suggests
that
the
Kv1.3-dependent
upregulation
of
MHCI by microglia can impact neuroinflammatory re-
sponses of CD8+ cytotoxic T cells.
Kv1.3 channel regulates signaling downstream of LPS
While our results identified several novel proteins whose
regulation is downstream of Kv1.3 channel function, the
specific signaling mechanisms regulated by Kv1.3 chan-
nels in microglia are not defined. Using our proteomic
dataset, we first performed canonical pathway analyses
on a list of 120 BV2 microglial proteins whose expres-
sion was significantly altered by Kv1.3 channel blockade
with or without LPS activation and identified the puta-
tive and most highly represented signaling pathways
(Additional file 2: Table S4). The top two identified path-
ways contained 61 and 52 Kv1.3-regulated proteins re-
spectively, and several of which were downstream of
GABPA, CREB1, and SRF transcription factors (Fig. 8a,
Additional file 2: Table S5). The third most significant
pathway contained 36 proteins (including TAP1, EHD1,
and VASP proteins) which were downstream of STAT1,
IRF1, and STAT3 transcription factors (Fig. 8b). Within
our proteomic dataset, GABPA itself was downregulated
by LPS and reversed by Kv1.3 blockade while STAT1
and STAT3 were not significantly altered by LPS or
Kv1.3 blockade (Fig. 8c). The only IRF family protein
identified in our proteomic dataset was IRF5, which did
not show altered regulation across experimental condi-
tions.
Since
we
validated
Kv1.3’s
role
in
MHCI
expression, we focused on signaling mechanisms that
may regulate TAP1 and EHD1. Transcriptional regula-
tion of TAP1 involves STAT1-signaling, resulting in in-
creased transcription of IRF1, which in turn binds to an
IRF1 binding site in the TAP1 promoter region to induce
TAP1 transcription [41]. IRG1, another strongly upregu-
lated protein in LPS-activated microglia that was partly
inhibited by ShK-223 in our experiments, is also down-
stream of IRF1 signaling [42]. We therefore hypothesized
that IRF1 upregulation by LPS can be inhibited by ShK-
223. In qRT-PCR experiments, we observed that the
nearly twofold upregulation of IRF1 and IRF7 by LPS1
was partially inhibited by ShK-223, while NFKB1 upreg-
ulation was not affected by ShK-223 (Fig. 8d). Since
STAT1 protein expression was unaltered in our prote-
omic dataset but STAT1 is a known common regulator
of TAP1, EHD1, and other proteins (Fig. 8b), we also
hypothesized that STAT1 phosphorylation may be regu-
lated by Kv1.3 channel function. Serine phosphorylation
of STAT1 (S727) is directly induced by LPS-TLR signal-
ing and by IFNγ [43], while tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT1 (Y701) is an IFNγ-dependent process that in-
volves autocrine IFNγ signaling. In phospho-flow cyto-
metric studies of BV2 microglia probing for S727 and
Y701
STAT1
phosphorylation,
we
found
that
LPS
increased S727 STAT1 phosphorylation at 30 min, a re-
sponse that was partially inhibited by ShK-223 while no
LPS or ShK-223 effects were seen at 3 h (Fig. 8e). Inter-
estingly, ShK-223 also inhibited baseline levels of S727
STAT1 phosphorylation, reflecting baseline level of acti-
vation in BV2 microglia. Y701 STAT1 phosphorylation
was slightly induced by LPS at 30 min and 3 h; although,
ShK-223 did not alter the LPS effect. Since LPS binds to
the cell surface receptor complex that is comprised of
CD14 and toll-like receptors (TLRs) [44], we hypothe-
sized that Kv1.3 channels must also lie in proximity to
the CD14-TLR receptor complex in activated microglia
in order to regulate early signaling events triggered by
LPS such as STAT1 phosphorylation. Consistent with
this
hypothesis,
we
observed
that
Kv1.3
channels
(labeled by ShK-F6CA) partly co-localized with CD14 in
LPS-activated BV2 cells (Fig. 8f).
Discussion
We provide confirmatory in vivo and in vitro evidence
for upregulation and functional importance of Kv1.3
channels during pro-inflammatory activation of micro-
glia. We used LPS as the prototypic immune stimulus
that induces systemic and neuroinflammatory responses
that recapitulate microglial activation seen in chronic
neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative states [26, 27].
Our proteomics-based approach has unraveled previ-
ously novel Kv1.3-dependent molecular mechanisms
involved
in
pro-inflammatory
microglial
activation,
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 13 of 20

including microglial chemotaxis and focal adhesion
formation. We have also found that Kv1.3 channels
regulate
antigen-presenting
capacity
of
activated
microglia. Specifically, Kv1.3 channel function under-
lies upregulation of TAP1 and EHD1, both of which
regulate MHCI assembly and trafficking to the cell
surface.
Inhibition
of
Kv1.3
reduces
LPS-induced
TAP1
and
EHD1
protein
expression
and
inhibits
MHCI trafficking to the cell surface, resulting in de-
creased antigen presentation to CD8+ T cells and de-
creased
T cell
proliferation
in
a
MHCI-restricted
manner. The relevance of this novel Kv1.3 channel-
dependent mechanism is reflected by the increased
trafficking of CD8+ but not CD8−T cells to the
acutely inflamed brain, providing the opportunity for
microglia with upregulated MHCI to interact with
CD8+ T cells and thereby regulate their effector or
regulatory functions. Our results also suggest that
Kv1.3 channels regulate LPS-induced serine phosphor-
ylation
(S727)
but
not
tyrosine
phosphorylation
(Y701) of STAT1, as well as IRF1 expression, as early
signaling events following LPS activation. The func-
tional coupling between Kv1.3 channels and LPS-TLR
signaling in activated microglia is also suggested by
the co-localization of Kv1.3 channels with the CD14-
TLR complex. Based on these findings, we present a
Fig. 7 Kv1.3 blockade inhibits LPS-induced MHCI-restricted antigen presentation to CD8 T cells. a Experimental plan for MHCI-restricted T cell proliferation
studies: BV2 microglia were treated in vitro with PBS, ShK-223 (100 nM), LPS (100 ng/mL), or LPS+ShK-223 for 24 h (four replicates/group) and then loaded
with 2 μg/mL Ova (257-264) peptide for 30 min at 37 °C. Washed microglia were co-cultured with CFSE-labeled splenic T cells from Ova (257-264)-specific
OT-1 mice for 48 h (25,000 microglia:150,000 T cells/well). For in vivo experiments, adult wild-type mice were treated with four daily IP doses of saline,
ShK-223, LPS, or LPS+ShK-223 (n = 6/group) and isolated brain mononuclear cells were used for in vitro T cell proliferation studies. After 48 h, CFSE dilution
(leftward shift in CFSE staining) was assessed by flow cytometry as a measure of CD8+ T cell proliferation. b Comparison of proliferating CD8+ cells across
various treatment groups from in vitro and in vivo studies. Right: Representative frequency histograms from in vivo experiments. No direct effects of LPS or
Ova peptide on T cells were noted without the presence of microglia. c Flow cytometric detection of CD3+ CD11b−T cells in brain mononuclear cells after
thorough cardiac perfusion. Mice were injected (IP, once daily for 4 days) with PBS, LPS, ShK-223, or LPS+ShK-223. Panel a shows the gating strategy. After
forward and side-scatter gating for live mononuclear cell population, CD11b−CD3+ cells were gated and assessed for T cell markers (CD3,
CD8) and activation/cytolytic marker CD95 (Fas). d Flow cytometric evidence for increased CD8+ T cell trafficking to the brain following LPS treatment.
e Comparison of proportions of brain CD8+ and CD8−T cell populations across the 4 treatment groups. f Comparison of CD95 (Fas) expression in brain
CD8+ and CD8−T cell populations across treatment groups (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.005)
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 14 of 20

cohesive model (Fig. 9) suggesting that Kv1.3 channels as-
semble with the CD14/TLR complex on microglia during
LPS activation and regulate S727 phosphorylation of
STAT1, which in turn regulates transcription of TAP-1
and EHD-1 and regulates MHCI assembly and trafficking
of the MHCI-antigen complex to the cell surface of
microglia. This upregulation of MHCI trafficking and/or
assembly with antigen in pro-inflammatory microglia
improves their ability to present antigens to CD8+ T cells
within the inflamed brain.
The regulation of microglial MHCI expression and
antigen presentation highlight novel roles for microglial
Kv1.3 channels in adaptive immune responses mediated
by CD8+ T cells in the brain. T cell-mediated responses
involve both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, and the pathogenic
roles of CD8+ T cells in neuroinflammatory diseases
such
as
multiple
sclerosis
and
neurodegenerative
diseases are being increasingly recognized [45, 46]. We
found evidence for increased CD8+ T cell traffic to the
brain in response to systemic inflammation, and a large
Fig. 8 Identification of Kv1.3-regulated signaling mechanisms in LPS-induced microglial activation. a, b Canonical pathway analysis of 120 Kv1.3-
dependent proteins identified in our proteomic dataset revealed highly represented signaling pathways, two of which are shown here (see
Additional file 2: Table S5 for others). Members of this list of 120 proteins are marked with (red circle). Transcription factors are also highlighted
(transparent red circle). Arrows indicate directionality of the interaction (upstream vs. downstream). a GABPA, a Kv1.3-dependent transcription factor that was
downregulated by LPS, was placed upstream of several Kv1.3-regulated proteins. b MHCI proteins of relevance to our results (TAP1, Tapasin, and EHD1
proteins) were represented in a signaling network that suggested that STAT1 and IRF1 may serve as upstream regulators of these proteins. c Comparison
of normalized protein expression of transcription factors identified in our proteomic dataset across treatment groups. d Quantitative RT-PCR data comparing
IRF1, IRF7, and NFKB1 mRNA expression across treatment groups (paired t tests were used for these comparisons; six replicates/group). e Phospho-flow
cytometric studies of serine (S727) and tyrosine (Y701) STAT1 phosphorylation in BV2 microglia (n = 5/treatment group) at 30-min and 3-h time points.
f Immunofluorescence microscopy showing partial co-localization between Kv1.3 (green, detected by ShK-F6CA labeling) and CD14 (red) in LPS-activated
BV2 microglia (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.005)
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 15 of 20

proportion of these cells express CD95 (Fas) suggesting
their cytolytic effector properties. The proportion of
CD8−T cells in the brain, on the other hand, did not
change after LPS treatment. Additionally, microglia-
induced CD8+ T cell proliferation required Ova peptide
(Ova 257-264) which is specific for MHCI but not
MHCII. Consistent with our observations, others have
also found that CD8+ T cell traffic to the brain and their
proliferation within the brain are antigen-specific and
MHCI-dependent [47]. However, we did not observe an
effect of ShK-223 on LPS-induced brain infiltration by
CD8+ T cells, suggesting that CD8+ T cell traffic to the
brain does not require Kv1.3 channels. This may be
partly explained by the low levels of Kv1.3 channels
expressed by most T cells, with the exception of acti-
vated CD4+ and CD8+ effector memory T cells [48, 49].
It is also possible that CD8+ T cell traffic to the brain
requires antigen-presenting cells other than microglia,
such as endothelial cells. Endothelial cells, like microglia,
strongly upregulate MHCI in response to systemic
inflammation [50] and, unlike microglia, express KCa3.1
potassium channels that are resistant to Kv1.3 blocking
ShK
peptides
[4,
51].
These
findings
support
the
possibility
that
MHCI
upregulation
by
activated
microglia, a Kv1.3 channel-dependent process, may
modulate proliferative and cytotoxic responses of CD8+
T cells after they enter the brain. Since CD8+ T cells can
adopt
cytotoxic
and
regulatory
functions,
further
characterization of CD8+ T cell subsets in the brain needs
to be performed [52]. Our observations provide a rationale
for testing microglial Kv1.3 blocking strategies as a novel
therapeutic approach to modulate adaptive immune re-
sponses mediated by CD8+ T cells in neurological diseases.
Existing literature support the candidacy of microglial
Kv1.3 channels as therapeutic targets in neurologic
diseases [6]. Kv1.3 channels are highly expressed by
microglia in the brains of AD patients as compared to
non-AD controls [7]. Microglial Kv1.3 channels are also
upregulated following status epilepticus, in radiation
neurotoxicity and HIV-TAT neurotoxicity models, and
inhibition of Kv1.3 channels in these models has demon-
strated anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects
[53–55]. Our observation of CD14 and Kv1.3 channel
co-localization may also be highly relevant to neuro-
infectious, neuroinflammatory, and neurodegenerative
disorders, where TLR activation has pathologic relevance
[55, 56]. Our results provide in vivo evidence for Kv1.3
upregulation in a model of acute neuroinflammation in
Fig. 9 Cartoon showing the proposed mechanism by which Kv1.3 channel function regulates LPS-induced EHD1 and TAP1 upregulation and
MHC I trafficking an antigen presentation by microglia
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 16 of 20

addition to providing mechanistic insights into the roles
of Kv1.3 channels in pro-inflammatory microglial activa-
tion. ShK analogs with high selectivity for Kv1.3 chan-
nels are the most potent blockers of this channel, with
excellent safety profiles in animals and recently com-
pleted phase II human studies [57]. A potential limita-
tion
of
peptide-based
therapeutics
for
neurologic
diseases, where microglia mediate neuroinflammation, is
their anticipated low CNS bioavailability. Increased BBB
permeability has been reported in rodent models of neu-
rodegeneration as well as in neuroinflammatory states
[58] and may allow for CNS entry of small peptidergic
drugs. Our data provide indirect yet compelling evidence
for the ability of systemically administered Kv1.3 block-
ing ShK peptides to inhibit MHCI upregulation by
microglia without altering the activation and recruitment
of peripherally derived macrophages or CD8+ T cells to
the brain. The ability of peripherally administered ShK-
223 to modulate microglial activation may result from
two possible mechanisms: (1) ShK-223 may either affect
intermediary cell types in the peripheral immune system
which in turn produce factors that enter the brain and
activate microglia or (2) ShK-223 is able to enter the
brain following LPS treatment and directly modulate
microglia. Further studies are needed to clarify these
possibilities. We used ShK-223 for our experiments
based on its higher selectivity and improved stability
profiles as compared to ShK-186 (dalazatide) that is be-
ing currently tested in humans [57]. Since ShK-186 is a
very well-characterized Kv1.3 blocker, we confirmed that
our in vitro observations with ShK-223 were mirrored
by ShK-186. Furthermore, binding of ShK-F6CA to
microglia was also diminished by pre-incubation with
ShK-biotin. These data confirm that our observed results
are indeed a result of Kv1.3 channel blockade.
LPS, a classical pro-inflammatory activator of micro-
glia and macrophages, directly binds to the TLR-CD14
complex and induces several downstream signaling cas-
cades. LPS activation also involves indirect autocrine
and paracrine effects of IFNγ and TNF [26, 43, 59]. Our
observations support the early regulation of STAT1 S727
phosphorylation by Kv1.3 channels, a signaling event
that can result from direct LPS-TLR signaling mediated
through p38 MAP kinase activity as well as by IFNγ re-
ceptor activation by paracrine or autocrine IFNγ [59].
Since peripherally administered LPS has not been found
to substantially cross the blood–brain barrier even with
repeated dosing, intermediaries such as brain-infiltrating
immune cells or cytokines (TNF) that cross the blood–
brain barrier may be involved in microglial activation
through non-TLR-based mechanisms [26, 60]. While the
small amounts of LPS that cross the blood–brain barrier
after systemic administration may be adequate for TLR
activation, this seems unlikely to account for the robust
microglial activation observed in our model. Since we
found higher proportions of brain-infiltrating macrophages
as well as CD8+ T cells in LPS-treated mice, it is possible
that these cells contribute to microglial activation and
MHCI upregulation. Since Kv1.3 blockade did not alter
LPS-induced trafficking of CD8+ T cells or CD45high
macrophages to the brain and did not alter MHCI expres-
sion by peripherally derived macrophages in the brain, the
observed effects of ShK-223 on microglial MHCI upregula-
tion must be mediated by intermediary factors instead. The
lack of an effect of Kv1.3 channel blockade on brain-
infiltrating macrophages despite their higher expression of
Kv1.3 channels also suggests that alternative K channels
such as Kir2.1, KCa3.1, and K-ATP channels and possibly
other cationic (TRP) channels may play more important
roles in peripherally derived macrophages as compared to
microglia [61–63]. Since our studies focused on Kv1.3
channels, we are unable to exclude any contribution of
alternative cationic channels to MHCI upregulation in
microglia.
In addition to the Kv1.3-regulated STAT1-IRF1-TAP1/
EHD1-MHCI antigen presentation pathway highlighted
in this manuscript, we have identified several novel puta-
tive molecular pathways that may be regulated by Kv1.3
channels in microglia, including roles for Kv1.3 channels
as regulators of RNA processing, mitochondrial biogen-
esis, and nuclear function. Of particular interest is the
transcription factor GABPA, a subunit of the DNA (GA)
binding subunit of protein transcription factor GABP
that is predicted to regulate transcription of over 50
Kv1.3-regulated proteins. We found that Kv1.3 blockade
upregulates GABPA expression in both BV2 microglia
and primary microglia. GABP (NRF2) is a key transcrip-
tional regulator of mitochondrial proteins involved in
oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial DNA repli-
cation, transcription, and translation [64]. In addition to
being expressed on the cell surface, functional Kv1.3
channels
are
also
expressed
in
the
mitochondria
membrane where they regulate mitochondrial mem-
brane potential and oxidative burst and blockade of
mitochondrial Kv1.3 channels inhibits neurotoxicity me-
diated by activated microglia [9, 65]. While our studies
primarily tested the effect of blockade of cell surface
Kv1.3 channels by a membrane non-permeant peptide
blocker of Kv1.3 channels, it may be possible that extra-
cellular ShK-223 is endocytosed by microglia and re-
leased intracellularly, allowing the peptide to interact
with intracellular Kv1.3 channels. Independent of this
possibility, our results suggest a novel pathway for
regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis by Kv1.3 channels
mediated through GABPA.
A few caveats about our study merit consideration.
Since only 3141 proteins were identified in our prote-
omic studies, some Kv1.3 channel-regulated proteins
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 17 of 20

may not have been identified. Secreted proteins includ-
ing cytokines were also likely not identified using our
approach. Another limitation is the fact that our studies
focused primarily on LPS as the activating stimulus. LPS
has pleitropic effects on TLRs 1-4 that result in distinct
and overlapping downstream signaling cascades; these
were not examined in our studies. Although we are un-
able to confirm the functional coupling between a spe-
cific TLR and Kv1.3 channels, we provide supportive
evidence for Kv1.3 co-localization with CD14, a key
member of the LPS-TLR receptor complex. While LPS-
induced acute neuroinflammation is a well-established
method to induce microglial activation, we cannot be
certain that our observed in vivo or in vitro effects were
results of direct LPS-TLR interaction as opposed to in-
direct autocrine effects of pro-inflammatory cytokines
such as IFNγ or TNF. Since we observed an inhibition
of STAT1 S727 phosphorylation by ShK-223 within
30 min of LPS exposure, we suspect that Kv1.3 channels
regulate early signaling events following LPS-TLR bind-
ing but other effects of late responses cannot be
excluded. Future studies will focus on investigating
the
extent
to
which
other
activating
stimuli
for
microglia rely on the function of Kv1.3 and will
reveal the universality of the mechanism described
herein.
Conclusions
Using a systems pharmacology approach, we have unrav-
eled novel molecular and functional roles for Kv1.3
channels in pro-inflammatory microglial activation, in-
cluding a Kv1.3 channel-regulated pathway that facili-
tates MHCI expression and MHCI-dependent antigen
presentation by microglia to CD8+ T cells. We also
provide evidence for neuro-immunomodulation by sys-
temically administered ShK peptides. Our results further
strengthen the therapeutic candidacy of microglial Kv1.3
channels in neurologic diseases.
Additional files
Additional file 1: Figures S1–S6. Flow cytometric confirmation of
Kv1.3-channel specificity of the ShK-F6CA binding assay is shown in
Figure S1. Comparison of ShK-F6CA labeling of Kv1.3 channels in splenic
and brain-infiltrating macrophages is shown in Figure S2. Morphological
changes induced by LPS, ShK-223, and LPS+ShK-223 treatment conditions
are shown in Figure S3. Distribution of missing data in the proteomic data
set is shown in Figure S4. Quantitative RT-PCR data showing validation of
pro-inflammatory activation of BV2 microglia by LPS are shown in Figure
S5. EHD1 upregulation by LPS and inhibition of EHD1 upregulation by ShK-
223 is shown in Figure S6. (DOCX 1262 kb)
Additional file 2: Tables S1–S5. Raw LFQ expression data from
proteomic experiments are provided in Supplemental Tables S1 and S2.
Table S3 lists LPS-regulated proteins in our analysis, cross-referenced
with previously published microglia proteomics and transcriptomics data.
Table S4 contains lists of all Kv1.3-dependent proteins identified in this
study. Table S5 contains results from the canonical pathway analysis of
Kv1.3-dependent proteins. Raw proteomic datasets have been deposited
at http://www.proteomexchange.org/. (XLSX 1848 kb)
Abbreviations
DCFDA: Dichlorofluorescein diacetate; EHD1: EH domain containing protein I;
GO: Gene ontology; LPS: Lipopolysaccharide; MHCI: Major histocompatibility
complex I; MS: Mass spectroscopy; PBS: Phosphate-buffered saline; ROS: Reactive
oxygen species; STAT1: Signal transducer and activator of transcription 1;
TAP1: Transporter associated with antigen processing 1; TLR: Toll-like receptor
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Christine Beeton (Baylor College of Medicine) for permission to
use ShK-223 and Dr. George Chandy (Nanyang Technological University) for
the critical reading of our manuscript. The authors declare no competing
financial interests. This research project was supported in part by the Emory
University School of Medicine Flow Cytometry Core.
Funding
This work was supported by the following: Emory Alzheimer’s Disease
Research Center Grant (P50 AG025688, AIL, Role: data collection, analysis);
American Brain Foundation Award (#00042351, PI: SR, Role: Data collection,
analysis, interpretation); NINDS K08 (NS099474-1, PI: SR, Role: Data collection,
analysis, interpretation); Emory Neuroscience NINDS Core facilities grant (P30
NS055077, PI: AIL, Role: Data collection and analysis); and 1U01AG046161 (PI:
AIL, Role: data collection and analysis).
Availability of data and materials
Complete proteomic datasets are provided in the supplemental information.
Raw Data, MaxQuant search parameters and search/quantification results are
available via ProteomeXchange on the PRIDE consortium website (http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/), accession PXD006753. All data generated or analyzed
during this study are included in this published article.
Authors’ contributions
SR designed and performed the experiments, acquired and analyzed the
data, and wrote the manuscript. SAR and AP designed and performed the
experiments and edited the manuscript. QD, EBD, DD, MWP, and RB
performed the experiments and data analysis and edited the manuscript.
MGT, JJL, NTS, and AIL designed the experiments and edited the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Approval from the Emory Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee was
obtained for all animal studies reported in this manuscript which is in
agreement with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Author details
1Department of Neurology, Emory University, 615 Michael Street, Suite 525,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. 2Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53726, USA. 3Department
of Biochemistry, Emory University, 615 Michael Street, Suite 525, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. 4Peptides International, Louisville, KY 40299, USA. 5Department
of Physiology, Emory University, 615 Michael Street, Suite 525, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 18 of 20

Received: 7 March 2017 Accepted: 18 June 2017
References
1.
Crotti A, Ransohoff RM. Microglial physiology and pathophysiology: insights
from genome-wide transcriptional profiling. Immunity. 2016;44(3):505–15.
2.
Perry VH, Holmes C. Microglial priming in neurodegenerative disease. Nat
Rev Neurol. 2014;10(4):217–24.
3.
Gutman GA, Chandy KG, Grissmer S, Lazdunski M, McKinnon D, Pardo LA,
Robertson GA, Rudy B, Sanguinetti MC, Stuhmer W, et al. International
Union of Pharmacology. LIII. Nomenclature and molecular relationships of
voltage-gated potassium channels. Pharmacol Rev. 2005;57(4):473–508.
4.
Rangaraju S, Chi V, Pennington MW, Chandy KG. Kv1.3 potassium channels as a
therapeutic target in multiple sclerosis. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2009;13(8):909–24.
5.
Beeton C, Wulff H, Standifer NE, Azam P, Mullen KM, Pennington MW,
Kolski-Andreaco A, Wei E, Grino A, Counts DR, et al. Kv1.3 channels are a
therapeutic target for T cell-mediated autoimmune diseases. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2006;103(46):17414–9.
6.
Nguyen HM, Grossinger EM, Horiuchi M, Davis KW, Jin LW, Maezawa I, Wulff
H. Differential Kv1.3, KCa3.1, and Kir2.1 expression in “classically” and
“alternatively” activated microglia. Glia. 2017;65(1):106–21.
7.
Rangaraju S, Gearing M, Jin LW, Levey A. Potassium channel Kv1.3 is highly
expressed by microglia in human Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis.
2015;44(3):797–808.
8.
Heppner FL, Ransohoff RM, Becher B. Immune attack: the role of
inflammation in Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015;16(6):358–72.
9.
Fordyce CB, Jagasia R, Zhu X, Schlichter LC. Microglia Kv1.3 channels
contribute to their ability to kill neurons. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci.
2005;25(31):7139–49.
10.
Nguyen HM, Grossinger EM, Horiuchi M, Davis KW, Jin LW, Maezawa I, Wulff
H: Differential Kv1.3, KCa3.1, and Kir2.1 expression in “classically” and
“alternatively” activated microglia. Glia 2016.
11.
Eil R, Vodnala SK, Clever D, Klebanoff CA, Sukumar M, Pan JH, Palmer DC, Gros A,
Yamamoto TN, Patel SJ, et al. Ionic immune suppression within the tumour
microenvironment limits T cell effector function. Nature. 2016;537(7621):539–43.
12.
Pennington MW, Chang SC, Chauhan S, Huq R, Tajhya RB, Chhabra S, Norton
RS, Beeton C. Development of highly selective Kv1.3-blocking peptides based
on the sea anemone peptide ShK. Mar Drugs. 2015;13(1):529–42.
13.
Lee JK, Tansey MG. Microglia isolation from adult mouse brain. Methods
Mol Biol. 2013;1041:17–23.
14.
Chen Z, Jalabi W, Shpargel KB, Farabaugh KT, Dutta R, Yin X, Kidd GJ,
Bergmann CC, Stohlman SA, Trapp BD. Lipopolysaccharide-induced
microglial activation and neuroprotection against experimental brain injury
is independent of hematogenous TLR4. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci.
2012;32(34):11706–15.
15.
Beeton C, Wulff H, Singh S, Botsko S, Crossley G, Gutman GA, Cahalan MD,
Pennington M, Chandy KG. A novel fluorescent toxin to detect and
investigate Kv1.3 channel up-regulation in chronically activated T
lymphocytes. J Biol Chem. 2003;278(11):9928–37.
16.
Hickman SE, Kingery ND, Ohsumi TK, Borowsky ML, Wang LC, Means TK, El
Khoury J. The microglial sensome revealed by direct RNA sequencing. Nat
Neurosci. 2013;16(12):1896–905.
17.
Ramirez-Ortiz ZG, Prasad A, Griffith JW, Pendergraft 3rd WF, Cowley GS, Root
DE, Tai M, Luster AD, El Khoury J, Hacohen N, et al. The receptor TREML4
amplifies TLR7-mediated signaling during antiviral responses and
autoimmunity. Nat Immunol. 2015;16(5):495–504.
18.
Magness ST, Jijon H, Van Houten Fisher N, Sharpless NE, Brenner DA, Jobin
C. In vivo pattern of lipopolysaccharide and anti-CD3-induced NF-kappa B
activation using a novel gene-targeted enhanced GFP reporter gene
mouse. J Immunol. 2004;173(3):1561–70.
19.
Seyfried NT, Dammer EB, Swarup V, Nandakumar D, Duong DM, Yin L, Deng
Q, Nguyen T, Hales CM, Wingo T, et al. A multi-network approach identifies
protein-specific co-expression in asymptomatic and symptomatic
Alzheimer’s disease. Cell systems. 2017;4(1):60–72. e64.
20.
Seyfried NT, Dammer EB, Swarup V, Nandakumar D, Duong DM, Yin L, Deng
Q, Nguyen T, Hales CM, Wingo T, et al. A multi-network approach identifies
protein-specific co-expression in asymptomatic and symptomatic
Alzheimer’s disease. Cell systems. 2016.
21.
Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Accurate proteome-
wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide
ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014;13(9):2513–26.
22.
Luber CA, Cox J, Lauterbach H, Fancke B, Selbach M, Tschopp J, Akira S,
Wiegand M, Hochrein H, O’Keeffe M, et al. Quantitative proteomics reveals
subset-specific viral recognition in dendritic cells. Immunity. 2010;32(2):279–89.
23.
Zambon AC, Gaj S, Ho I, Hanspers K, Vranizan K, Evelo CT, Conklin BR, Pico
AR, Salomonis N. GO-Elite: a flexible solution for pathway and ontology
over-representation. Bioinformatics. 2012;28(16):2209–10.
24.
Mitrea C, Taghavi Z, Bokanizad B, Hanoudi S, Tagett R, Donato M, Voichita C,
Draghici S. Methods and approaches in the topology-based analysis of
biological pathways. Front Physiol. 2013;4:278.
25.
Pranski EL, Dalal NV, Herskowitz JH, Orr AL, Roesch LA, Fritz JJ, Heilman C,
Lah JJ, Levey AI, Betarbet RS. Neuronal RING finger protein 11 (RNF11)
regulates canonical NF-kappaB signaling. J Neuroinflammation. 2012;9:67.
26.
Qin L, Wu X, Block ML, Liu Y, Breese GR, Hong JS, Knapp DJ, Crews FT.
Systemic LPS causes chronic neuroinflammation and progressive
neurodegeneration. Glia. 2007;55(5):453–62.
27.
Frank-Cannon TC, Alto LT, McAlpine FE, Tansey MG. Does
neuroinflammation fan the flame in neurodegenerative diseases? Mol
Neurodegener. 2009;4:47.
28.
Madeddu S, Woods TA, Mukherjee P, Sturdevant D, Butchi NB, Peterson KE.
Identification of glial activation markers by comparison of transcriptome
changes between astrocytes and microglia following innate immune
stimulation. PLoS ONE. 2015;10(7), e0127336.
29.
Henn A, Lund S, Hedtjarn M, Schrattenholz A, Porzgen P, Leist M. The suitability
of BV2 cells as alternative model system for primary microglia cultures or for
animal experiments examining brain inflammation. Altex. 2009;26(2):83–94.
30.
Butovsky O, Jedrychowski MP, Moore CS, Cialic R, Lanser AJ, Gabriely G,
Koeglsperger T, Dake B, Wu PM, Doykan CE, et al. Identification of a unique
TGF-beta-dependent molecular and functional signature in microglia. Nat
Neurosci. 2014;17(1):131–43.
31.
Cahalan MD, Chandy KG. The functional network of ion channels in T
lymphocytes. Immunol Rev. 2009;231(1):59–87.
32.
Freilich RW, Woodbury ME, Ikezu T. Integrated expression profiles of
mRNA and miRNA in polarized primary murine microglia. PLoS ONE.
2013;8(11), e79416.
33.
Bell-Temin H, Culver-Cochran AE, Chaput D, Carlson CM, Kuehl M, Burkhardt
BR, Bickford PC, Liu B, Stevens Jr SM. Novel molecular insights into classical
and alternative activation states of microglia as revealed by stable isotope
labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based proteomics. Mol Cell
Proteomics. 2015;14(12):3173–84.
34.
Das A, Kim SH, Arifuzzaman S, Yoon T, Chai JC, Lee YS, Park KS, Jung KH,
Chai YG. Transcriptome sequencing reveals that LPS-triggered
transcriptional responses in established microglia BV2 cell lines are poorly
representative of primary microglia. J Neuroinflammation. 2016;13(1):182.
35.
Suh WK, Cohen-Doyle MF, Fruh K, Wang K, Peterson PA, Williams DB.
Interaction of MHC class I molecules with the transporter associated with
antigen processing. Science. 1994;264(5163):1322–6.
36.
Song R, Porgador A, Harding CV. Peptide-receptive class I major
histocompatibility complex molecules on TAP-deficient and wild-type cells
and their roles in the processing of exogenous antigens. Immunology.
1999;97(2):316–24.
37.
Gruhler A, Fruh K. Control of MHC class I traffic from the endoplasmic reticulum
by cellular chaperones and viral anti-chaperones. Traffic. 2000;1(4):306–11.
38.
Caplan S, Naslavsky N, Hartnell LM, Lodge R, Polishchuk RS, Donaldson JG,
Bonifacino JS. A tubular EHD1-containing compartment involved in the
recycling of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules to the
plasma membrane. EMBO J. 2002;21(11):2557–67.
39.
Mack CL, Vanderlugt-Castaneda CL, Neville KL, Miller SD. Microglia are
activated to become competent antigen presenting and effector cells in
the inflammatory environment of the Theiler’s virus model of multiple
sclerosis. J Neuroimmunol. 2003;144(1-2):68–79.
40.
Wlodarczyk A, Lobner M, Cedile O, Owens T. Comparison of microglia and
infiltrating CD11c(+) cells as antigen presenting cells for T cell proliferation
and cytokine response. J Neuroinflammation. 2014;11:57.
41.
Brucet M, Marques L, Sebastian C, Lloberas J, Celada A. Regulation of
murine Tap1 and Lmp2 genes in macrophages by interferon gamma is
mediated by STAT1 and IRF-1. Genes Immun. 2004;5(1):26–35.
42.
Tallam A, Perumal TM, Antony PM, Jager C, Fritz JV, Vallar L, Balling R, Del
Sol A, Michelucci A. Gene regulatory network inference of
immunoresponsive gene 1 (IRG1) identifies interferon regulatory factor 1
(IRF1) as its transcriptional regulator in mammalian macrophages. PLoS
ONE. 2016;11(2), e0149050.
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 19 of 20

43.
Rhee SH, Jones BW, Toshchakov V, Vogel SN, Fenton MJ. Toll-like receptors
2 and 4 activate STAT1 serine phosphorylation by distinct mechanisms in
macrophages. J Biol Chem. 2003;278(25):22506–12.
44.
Fujihara M, Muroi M, Tanamoto K, Suzuki T, Azuma H, Ikeda H. Molecular
mechanisms of macrophage activation and deactivation by lipopolysaccharide:
roles of the receptor complex. Pharmacol Ther. 2003;100(2):171–94.
45.
Weiss HA, Millward JM, Owens T. CD8+ T cells in inflammatory
demyelinating disease. J Neuroimmunol. 2007;191(1-2):79–85.
46.
Neumann H, Medana IM, Bauer J, Lassmann H. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes in
autoimmune and degenerative CNS diseases. Trends Neurosci. 2002;25(6):313–9.
47.
Galea I, Bernardes-Silva M, Forse PA, Van Rooijen N, Liblau RS, Perry VH. An
antigen-specific pathway for CD8 T cells across the blood-brain barrier. J
Exp Med. 2007;204(9):2023–30.
48.
Hu L, Wang T, Gocke AR, Nath A, Zhang H, Margolick JB, Whartenby KA,
Calabresi PA. Blockade of Kv1.3 potassium channels inhibits differentiation
and granzyme B secretion of human CD8+ T effector memory lymphocytes.
PLoS ONE. 2013;8(1):e54267.
49.
Wulff H, Calabresi PA, Allie R, Yun S, Pennington M, Beeton C, Chandy KG.
The voltage-gated Kv1.3 K(+) channel in effector memory T cells as new
target for MS. J Clin Invest. 2003;111(11):1703–13.
50.
Yang YM, Shang DS, Zhao WD, Fang WG, Chen YH. Microglial TNF-alpha-
dependent elevation of MHC class I expression on brain endothelium
induced by amyloid-beta promotes T cell transendothelial migration.
Neurochem Res. 2013;38(11):2295–304.
51.
Grgic I, Kaistha BP, Hoyer J, Kohler R. Endothelial Ca+-activated K+ channels in
normal and impaired EDHF-dilator responses—relevance to cardiovascular
pathologies and drug discovery. Br J Pharmacol. 2009;157(4):509–26.
52.
Ellwardt E, Walsh JT, Kipnis J, Zipp F. Understanding the role of T cells in
CNS homeostasis. Trends Immunol. 2016;37(2):154–65.
53.
Menteyne A, Levavasseur F, Audinat E, Avignone E. Predominant functional
expression of Kv1.3 by activated microglia of the hippocampus after status
epilepticus. PLoS ONE. 2009;4(8):e6770.
54.
Peng Y, Lu K, Li Z, Zhao Y, Wang Y, Hu B, Xu P, Shi X, Zhou B, Pennington
M, et al. Blockade of Kv1.3 channels ameliorates radiation-induced brain
injury. Neuro-Oncology. 2014;16(4):528–39.
55.
Liu J, Xu P, Collins C, Liu H, Zhang J, Keblesh JP, Xiong H. HIV-1 Tat protein
increases microglial outward K(+) current and resultant neurotoxic activity.
PLoS ONE. 2013;8(5), e64904.
56.
Kielian T. Toll-like receptors in central nervous system glial inflammation
and homeostasis. J Neurosci Res. 2006;83(5):711–30.
57.
Tarcha EJ, Chi V, Munoz-Elias EJ, Bailey D, Londono LM, Upadhyay SK,
Norton K, Banks A, Tjong I, Nguyen H, et al. Durable pharmacological
responses from the peptide ShK-186, a specific Kv1.3 channel inhibitor that
suppresses T cell mediators of autoimmune disease. J Pharmacol Exp Ther.
2012;342(3):642–53.
58.
Kawarabayashi T, Younkin LH, Saido TC, Shoji M, Ashe KH, Younkin SG. Age-
dependent changes in brain, CSF, and plasma amyloid (beta) protein in the
Tg2576 transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci Off J
Soc Neurosci. 2001;21(2):372–81.
59.
Hu X, Chakravarty SD, Ivashkiv LB. Regulation of interferon and Toll-like
receptor signaling during macrophage activation by opposing feedforward
and feedback inhibition mechanisms. Immunol Rev. 2008;226:41–56.
60.
Banks WA, Robinson SM. Minimal penetration of lipopolysaccharide across
the murine blood-brain barrier. Brain Behav Immun. 2010;24(1):102–9.
61.
Villalonga N, David M, Bielanska J, Vicente R, Comes N, Valenzuela C, Felipe
A. Immunomodulation of voltage-dependent K+ channels in macrophages:
molecular and biophysical consequences. J Gen Physiol. 2010;135(2):135–47.
62.
Grimaldi A, D’Alessandro G, Golia MT, Grossinger EM, Di Angelantonio S,
Ragozzino D, Santoro A, Esposito V, Wulff H, Catalano M, et al. KCa3.1
inhibition switches the phenotype of glioma-infiltrating microglia/
macrophages. Cell Death Dis. 2016;7:e2174.
63.
Desai BN, Leitinger N. Purinergic and calcium signaling in macrophage
function and plasticity. Front Immunol. 2014;5:580.
64.
Quiros PM, Mottis A, Auwerx J. Mitonuclear communication in homeostasis
and stress. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2016;17(4):213–26.
65.
Szabo I, Bock J, Grassme H, Soddemann M, Wilker B, Lang F, Zoratti M,
Gulbins E. Mitochondrial potassium channel Kv1.3 mediates Bax-induced
apoptosis in lymphocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105(39):14861–6.
•  We accept pre-submission inquiries 
•  Our selector tool helps you to ﬁnd the most relevant journal
•  We provide round the clock customer support 
•  Convenient online submission
•  Thorough peer review
•  Inclusion in PubMed and all major indexing services 
•  Maximum visibility for your research
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central 
and we will help you at every step:
Rangaraju et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation  (2017) 14:128 
Page 20 of 20

===== Rayon2021_Development_HumanSpinalCord+scTx =====
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
TECHNIQUES AND RESOURCES ARTICLE
Single-cell transcriptome profiling of the human developing
spinal cord reveals a conserved genetic programme with
human-specific features
Teresa Rayon, Rory J. Maizels, Christopher Barrington and James Briscoe*
ABSTRACT
The spinal cord receives input from peripheral sensory neurons and
controls motor output by regulating muscle innervating motor
neurons.
These
functions
are
carried
out
by
neural
circuits
comprising molecularly distinct neuronal subtypes generated in a
characteristic spatiotemporal arrangement from progenitors in the
embryonic neural tube. To gain insight into the diversity and
complexity of cells in the developing human neural tube, we used
single-cell mRNA sequencing to profile cervical and thoracic regions
in four human embryos of Carnegie stages (CS) CS12, CS14, CS17
and CS19 from gestational weeks 4-7. Analysis of progenitor
and neuronal populations from the neural tube and dorsal root
ganglia identified dozens of distinct cell types and facilitated the
reconstruction of the differentiation pathways of specific neuronal
subtypes. Comparison with mouse revealed overall similarity of
mammalian neural tube development while highlighting some
human-specific features. These data provide a catalogue of gene
expression and cell type identity in the human neural tube that will
support future studies of sensory and motor control systems. The data
can be explored at https://shiny.crick.ac.uk/scviewer/neuraltube/.
KEY WORDS: Developmental patterning, Human, Neuronal subtype
identity, Single-cell transcriptome, Spinal cord
INTRODUCTION
The spinal cord receives and processes information from sensory
neurons in the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and controls muscle
movement by coordinating the activity of motor neurons (MNs).
The neural circuits that perform these tasks comprise molecularly
and physiologically distinct classes of neurons that are generated in
a stereotypic spatial and temporal order from proliferating
progenitors in the embryonic neural tube and neural crest. The
spatiotemporal arrangement of progenitors and the identity of the
neurons they generate is determined by gene regulatory networks
(GRNs) controlled by extrinsic signals (Delás and Briscoe, 2020;
Sagner and Briscoe, 2019). The composition and operation of these
GRNs have been studied in model organisms, such as mouse, chick
and zebrafish, and recent work has included the systematic profiling
of single cells from the mouse neural tube and neural crest (Delile
et al., 2019; Ray et al., 2018; Rosenberg et al., 2018; Sharma et al.,
2020; Soldatov et al., 2019). This has provided catalogues of
gene expression, revealed complexity, and allowed the detailed
molecular classification of multiple cell types.
Although
recent
attention
has
focused
on
profiling
the
transcriptomes of cells in several regions of the developing human
brain (Eze et al., 2021), the embryonic human spinal cord and PNS
have
been
less
well
described.
The
available
molecular
characterisation has shown that the identity and overall organisation
of progenitors and neurons is, in the main, similar between humans
and other vertebrates (Dady et al., 2021 preprint; Marklund et al.,
2014; Rayon et al., 2020). Nevertheless, the extent of the similarity in
the molecular composition of cells in mouse and human neural tubes
has not been determined. Notably, several features of human neural
tube development have been reported to differ from other species. For
example, a subset of neural progenitors in the spinal cord co-express
the transcription factors OLIG2 and NKX2-2 in human embryos.
These are relatively rare at the equivalent developmental stages in the
mouse and chick (Marklund et al., 2014).
Systematic profiling of cell identity in the developing nervous
system of human embryos would offer a clearer picture of the
developing human neural tube and allow comparisons with other
species. To this end, we profiled gene expression in single-cell
transcriptomes in samples of dissected trunks from human embryos
from gestational weeks 4 to 7. We recovered a total of 71,219 cells,
of which 43,485 were neural, from four embryos and used these to
generate a single-cell atlas of the developing human spinal cord and
dorsal root ganglia. Comparison with equivalent staged mouse
embryos identified similarities and differences. To allow the data
to be explored further, we developed an online resource that is
available at https://shiny.crick.ac.uk/scviewer/neuraltube/.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Identification of cell types in developing human embryos
To identify the cell types in the developing human spinal cord,
we performed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) using
the droplet-based 10x Chromium platform. We microdissected
cervical-thoracic regions from shoulder to hip level of single
embryos during the first trimester of human development, spanning
4 weeks of development from gestational weeks 4 to 7,
corresponding to Carnegie stages (CS) 12, 14, 17 and 19. The
samples from CS12, CS14 and CS19 were processed on the same
day as the termination of pregnancy, whereas CS17 was processed
for sequencing after a 24 h delay. We dissected CS14, CS17 and
CS19 samples into anterior and posterior regions and sequenced
these separately. Because the CS12 sample was smaller in size,
to minimise cell loss we avoided further regional microdissection
and sequenced cells of the entire trunk element. In addition, to
Handling Editor: Samantha Morris
Received 12 April 2021; Accepted 5 July 2021
The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 1AT, UK.
*Author for correspondence ( james.briscoe@crick.ac.uk)
T.R., 0000-0001-5173-1442; R.J.M., 0000-0001-6027-3746; C.B., 0000-0003-
1281-2658; J.B., 0000-0002-1020-5240
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed.
1
© 2021. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

compensate for the increased cell numbers of the older embryos,
two replicates per time point were generated for the CS17 and the
CS19 samples. In total, 120,620 droplets were annotated as cells
after sequencing. To each sample, we applied similar quality filters
to those we established for the developing mouse spinal cord (Delile
et al., 2019). This resulted in a dataset of 71,219 cells: 11,963 from
CS12; 11,525 from CS14; 28,800 from CS17; and 18,931 from
CS19 (Fig. S1A-D). More cells were detected in the CS17 sample
compared with the other samples. This was likely due to the
increased ambient RNA as indicated by increased dispersion in the
proportion of mitochondrial unique molecular identifiers (UMIs).
The total number of detected genes (median ∼3000 per cell) and
UMIs in cells were similar in all samples analysed (Fig. S1A,B), and
were similar to the mouse single-cell dataset (Delile et al., 2019).
Expression of the male-specific SRY gene (Berta et al., 1990;
Gubbay et al., 1990; Sinclair et al., 1990) was detected in CS12 and
CS17 embryos, indicating these samples were male, whereas the
lack of SRY expression in the CS14 and CS19 samples indicated that
these were female (Fig. S1F).
In a first step, we visualised each sample separately using uniform
manifold approximation and projection (UMAP). To allocate cell
types within this embedding, we calculated a gene module score (see
Materials and Methods) that included the marker genes used to
characterise tissue types in mouse (Delile et al., 2019). This identified
progenitors and neurons of the spinal cord and dorsal root ganglion,
mesoderm, haematopoietic and skin cells (Fig. 1A). We labelled as
‘other’ cells with poorly resolved transcriptomes and cells derived
from other tissues of the embryo. Each of the samples displayed a
similar composition of cell types (Fig. 1A) but with obvious
differences in the proportions at different time points (Fig. 1B). More
neurons were contained in the CS19 dataset, consistent with the
progression of neurogenesis in the spinal cord over time. By contrast,
mesodermal cells were enriched in the early stages (CS12 and CS14)
compared with the late time points (Fig. 1B). This is due to the
proximity of the mesoderm and neural tube at early stages, and the
greater difficulty of cleanly dissecting smaller embryos.
To generate a spatiotemporal gene expression atlas of developing
neural cells, we selected the neural cell clusters from each stage and
combined these into a single dataset for further analysis. The
combined human UMAP of the neural dataset contained a total of
43,485 cells and allowed us to distinguish progenitors and neurons
of both the neural tube and dorsal root ganglia (Fig. 1C). Cells from
different samples, whether of the same or different sex, did not form
distinct clusters within the embedding, which suggested minimal
batch effects after data processing (Fig. S1G). Expression of the
progenitor marker SOX2 and the neuronal marker ELAVL3 allowed
the identification of progenitors and neurons within the map.
Likewise, the expression of the neural crest markers SOX10 and
SIX1 allowed us to discriminate progenitors and neurons of neural
crest origin (6747 cells) versus spinal cord (32,928 cells) (Fig. 1D).
Within the UMAP, neurons of both the central and peripheral
nervous system projected to adjacent clusters, pointing to a
convergence in the gene expression programmes of central and
peripheral neurons (Fig. 1C).
Fig. 1. Single-cell RNA-seq from the human developing spinal cord. (A) UMAP of CS12, CS14, CS17 and CS19 samples annotated by gene module score.
(B) Stacked bar chart indicating the cell type composition per time point (colour key as in A). (C) UMAP of the combined human neural dataset coloured by gene
module score. Colour and brightness of cells reflects the representative gene module (n=43,485). (D) Feature plots of markers of neural progenitors (SOX2),
neurons (ELAVL3) and neural crest progenitors (SOX10) and neurons (SIX1). (E) Feature plots of the spinal cord progenitor UMAP showing the patterned
expression of the indicated DV patterning markers.
2
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

Classification of central nervous cells
Computationally isolating spinal cord progenitor cells from all four
time points arranged cells in the UMAP in a way that resembled the
dorsoventral (DV) patterning of the developing neural tube (Fig. 1E).
Nevertheless, attempts to use standard unsupervised methods to
cluster progenitors were unsuccessful at classifying cells into the
known DV domains. Similar approaches with neurons were also
unsuccessful. This suggested that, similar to mouse, the complexity
and combinatorial expression profile of genes in both progenitors and
neurons preclude the use of unsupervised approaches.
In order to classify subtype identity of neural cells, we adapted
the ‘knowledge matrix’ we had previously constructed, using
available molecular characterisation of the vertebrate developing
neural tube (Delile et al., 2019) (Table S2). This represents an
inventory in which each progenitor type and neuronal class is
defined by the presence or absence of a characteristic set of marker
genes (Fig. 2B). We binarised the expression levels of the marker
gene set in the human transcriptome data and assigned each cell an
identity from the knowledge matrix. This allowed the categorisation
of cell types into specific progenitor and neuronal domains
Fig. 2. Classification of dorsoventral progenitors and neuronal classes in human. (A) Bubble plots indicating the expression of markers used to identify
dorsoventral (DV) domains in human progenitors. (B) Diagram of the DV domains in the human developing spinal cord highlighting the opposing gradients of SHH
and WNT/BMP and the patterning of the 11 DV domains, the floor plate (FP) and roof plate (RP). GliA, activator forms of Gli; GliR, Gli repressor forms; NC, notochord.
(C) Bubble plots depicting the 11 neuronal classes in human. In A and C, genes chosen forcell assignment are coloured; grey circles correspond to markers not used
for the selection of a specific population. Circle size indicates mean scaled gene expression levels. (D) Heatmap of the pairwise Pearson correlation coefficients of
gene expression in mouse (vertical) and human (horizontal) progenitor and neural cells. (E) Heatmap of Spearman correlation coefficients per time point of the
averaged gene expression of ventral progenitors and neurons in the human spinal cord in vivo (vertical) and in vitro (horizontal).
3
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

(Fig. 2A-C). Plotting the scaled mean expression of the genes used
to assign cell identities revealed the expected conserved patterns of
progenitor- and neuron-specific gene expression along the DV axis
of the spinal cord (Fig. 2A-C). Overall, we observed similar
identities and organisation of progenitors and neurons in mouse
and human (Fig. S2A,B) with a mean scaled expression for most
genes comparable between mouse and human. To compare the
transcriptional similarity between progenitors and neurons of mouse
and human, we used expression levels of homologous genes in each
neural cell type in mouse and human and estimated the Pearson
correlation coefficient for each pair of cell types. We measured the
correlation using a set of transcription factors (see Materials and
Methods). Mouse and human cells assigned to the same cell type
had the highest correlation (Fig. 2D). The similarity of progenitor
cells was higher between adjacent DV domains. By contrast,
neuronal cell types clustered according to their excitatory or
inhibitory function (Sagner and Briscoe, 2019) (Fig. 2D).
The availability of the human neural tube data allowed us to make
comparisons with the differentiation of MNs in vitro from human
embryonic stem cells. We selected highly expressed genes
that varied during neurogenic differentiation from daily bulk
RNA-seq samples of an in vitro differentiation of human MNs
(Rayon et al., 2020). We then generated ‘pseudo bulk RNA’
samples from the human in vivo dataset by averaging gene
expression of progenitors
and neurons assigned to ventral
domains (p3, pMN, p2, p1 and p0) at each time point. Pairwise
comparison of in vitro and in vivo time points indicated that the
CS12 sample had the highest correlation to in vitro Day 5 (Fig. 2E).
CS14 was most similar to in vitro Day 9. Thus, the 4-day in vitro
differentiation from Day 5 to Day 9 was similar to the
developmental progression from CS12 to CS14, corresponding to
gestational days 26-30 and days 31-35, respectively. By contrast,
CS17 and CS19 stages, which correspond to gestational days 42-44
and day 48-51 of human development, showed higher correlations
with later in vitro time points although there was less similarity at
these stages. At least in part this could be because in vitro
differentiations become progressively more asynchronous at later
time points.
Specific features of gene expression in the human
spinal cord
Although the transcriptomes of mouse and human neural cells were
broadly similar, specific differences between mouse and human
were apparent. PAX7 expression was observed in dorsal progenitors
of both mouse and human, but in addition PAX7 expression
was observed in floor plate (FP) cells of CS12, CS14 and CS17
human embryos. However, it was absent from mouse FP cells at
all time points (Fig. 2A, Fig. S2A). This is consistent with
immunohistochemical analysis of PAX7 in the human spinal cord
from CS12 to CS15 (Betters et al., 2010; Dady et al., 2021 preprint).
Inspection of genes correlating with PAX7 in human FP cells
highlighted several, including CDH7, TXLNB, CDHR3, PIFO and
RRAD, that were expressed in human FP cells but not in mouse FP
cells (Fig. 3A-C). Whether PAX7 directly regulates these or other
genes in human FP cells will require functional experiments.
NKX6-2 expression in human was detected in p1, p2, pMN, p3
and FP progenitors (Fig. 2A). By contrast, mouse Nkx6-2 defines p1
cells but is largely absent from other ventral progenitor domains
(Fig. S2A,C) (Vallstedt et al., 2001). The expression of NKX6-2 in
the p1 domain of the human neural tube was maintained across the
time points analysed but decreased over time in the pMN and p3
domains (Fig. 3D, Fig. S3B,C). The broad ventral expression profile
of NKX6-2 in the human neural progenitors resembled the broad
expression of Nkx6-2 in chick embryos and the transiently wider
domain of expression of NKX6-2 at early development stages in the
mouse (Vallstedt et al., 2001). This suggests that a heterochronic
shift in the timing of NKX6-2 downregulation could account for the
difference in expression between mouse and human.
Other notable differences between human and mouse included
the apparent scarce expression of TBX20 in human visceral MNs.
These MNs, present in the hindbrain and cervical spinal cord, are
characterised by the expression of Isl1, Phox2b, Tbx2, Tbx3 and
Tbx20 in mouse (Pontecorvi et al., 2008). Analysis of PHOX2B-
expressing neurons in the human dataset revealed that although
these cells expressed TBX2 and TBX3 there was little or no
expression of TBX20 (Fig. 3E, Fig. S3D).
Expression of primate-specific genes
The expression of genes specific to primates has received attention
because of their potential role in species-specific aspects of human
brain development, particularly in the neocortex (Fiddes et al.,
2018; Florio et al., 2015; Heide et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2017; Suzuki
et al., 2018). To investigate the expression of primate-specific genes
in the more evolutionarily conserved spinal cord, we selected a list
of 51 primate-specific protein-coding genes that have been shown to
be enriched in human cerebral neural precursors (Florio et al., 2018;
Liu et al., 2017) and assessed their expression. First, we examined
the tissue specificity of expression. TMEM133 (ARHGAP42) and
ZNF788 were not detectable in the dataset, suggesting they might be
brain specific. Of the remaining 49 genes, 87% (43/49) were
expressed broadly in more than one tissue (Fig. 4A), suggesting
these were not specific to the nervous system. These included genes
that have been shown to function in cortical expansion or folding in
human (TMEM14B, ARHGAP11B, NOTCH2NL) (Fiddes et al.,
2018; Florio et al., 2015; Heide et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2017; Suzuki
et al., 2018). We examined more closely genes expressed at an
average level of 0.10 transcripts/cell or greater in the central nervous
system (CNS) or PNS (10 genes out of 49; 20%). The only gene
expressed above this threshold with documented functions in brain
development was TMEM14B (Fig. 4A). TMEM14B, along with the
other nine genes, showed widespread expression in progenitors and
neurons, with a higher percentage of progenitors expressing these
genes (Fig. 4B,C). CCDC74B, CBWD2, DHRS4 and ZNF90 were
somewhat more expressed in populations of CNS neurons compared
with progenitors (Fig. 4B,C). Thus, expression of primate-specific
genes implicated in developmental and neurogenic functions can be
detected in the spinal cord and other tissues (Fig. S4A,B). The
function of most of these genes remains unknown (Florio et al.,
2018) and further analysis will be necessary.
Classification of PNS cells
The PNS is derived from neural crest cells and emerges in trunk
regions of human embryos around CS11-12 (O’Rahilly and Müller,
2007). We were therefore able to follow the differentiation dynamics
of neural crest cells to PNS neurons during human embryogenesis.
To classify the subtype identity of neural crest cells and investigate
sensory neurogenesis in human, we mapped cells using markers of
the PNS that had previously been defined in other species (Chiu
et al., 2014; Hockley et al., 2019; Li et al., 2016; Usoskin et al.,
2015; Vermeiren et al., 2020; Zeisel et al., 2018). We established a
classification scheme to subdivide cells into the three cell types
characteristic of the embryonic day (E) 11.5 mouse trunk dorsal root
ganglia (Soldatov et al., 2019): (1) progenitors, marked by the
expression of SOX10 alone or in combination with SOX2;
4
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

(2) sensory neuron precursors, marked by the expression of
NEUROG1, NEUROG2 and NEUROD1; and (3) postmitotic
sensory neurons expressing ELAVL3 (Fig. 5A), as the expression
of the broad mouse somatosensory neuron marker advillin (AVIL)
was limited to a small subset of cells in the human dataset (Fig. 5A).
We next established a knowledge matrix of dorsal root
ganglia-expressed genes that distinguish cell types and used this
to classify PNS cells into subtypes (Fig. 5B). Overall, the
classification was similar to mouse, with several transcription
factors characteristic of terminal neuronal subtypes in the adult
expressed in embryonic sensory neurons (Fig. 5B, Fig. S5A). Gene
expression
programmes
characteristic
of
mechanoreceptor
(LTMRs), proprioceptor, peptidergic and non-peptidergic neurons
were evident. Moreover, the expression profile of genes specific to
distinct classes of PNS neurons agreed with recent findings of a
single
neurogenic
trajectory
from
progenitors
through
a
transcriptionally unspecialised state that then diversifies into
distinct sensory lineages (Sharma et al., 2020; Soldatov et al., 2019).
The proportion of neural crest cells and neuronal progenitors
decreased from CS12 to CS19 as the proportion of peripheral
neurons increased (Fig. 5C-F). No PNS neurons were detected at the
earliest time point (CS12), and a low percentage of terminal
neuronal subtypes appeared from CS14 up to CS19 (Fig. 5D),
indicating delayed neurogenesis of the PNS system in comparison
with
the
CNS.
This
suggests that
the
diversification
and
specialisation of neurons in the PNS occurs at later developmental
stages than in the CNS.
Dynamics of neurogenesis in the human spinal cord
Because the single-cell transcriptomic atlas of the mouse neural tube
captured temporal changes in progenitor and neuronal populations
(Delile et al., 2019), we performed a similar analysis in the human
spinal cord. Despite the reduced temporal resolution of the dataset,
with four different stages from a period of approximately 2 weeks,
changes in the proportions of progenitors and neurons were evident
(Figs 1B and 6A,B). The change in the relative proportions of pMN
and p3 progenitors were consistent with the measured changes of
progenitor domain sizes in the spinal cord over time in human
embryos (Fig. 6A,B) (Rayon et al., 2020). Extending the analysis to
all progenitors and neuronal subtypes revealed that at CS12 ventral
Fig. 3. Human-specific features of neural progenitors and visceral motor neurons. (A-C) Genes most correlated with PAX7 in human FP (A), mouse FP (B)
and in human pD (dp1-dp6) (C). (D) NKX6-1 (cyan) and NKX6-2 (red) expression in transverse sections of the human neural tube at shoulder levels in CS13 (n=1,
three sections) and CS15 (n=1, three sections) embryos. Scale bars: 50 µm. (E) Scatter plot of the expression of PHOX2B and TBX20 in human transcriptomes
(n=170 cells).
5
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

progenitors and V1, V2, MN and V3 neurons were more abundant
than dorsal subtypes. The relative abundance of neural progenitors
decreased over time as neurons increased (Fig. 6A,B). Between
CS14 and CS19, the generation of neurons in ventral domains
appeared to slow (Fig. S6A). By contrast, the rate of neurogenesis in
dorsal domains increased, with proportionally more dorsal than
ventral neurons by CS19 (Fig. 6A,B). This is consistent with the
dynamics of neuronal subtype differentiation observed in other
vertebrates (Kicheva et al., 2014).
We next compared mouse and human spinal cord development
by aligning the datasets using major developmental events observed
in the two species (Rayon et al., 2020). We grouped the 11 neural
progenitor domains into dorsal interneuron progenitors (pD; dp1-
dp6), intermediate interneuron progenitors (pI; p0-p2), pMNs,
and ventral interneuron progenitors p3. A broadly similar pattern
of changes in the proportions of cell types were evident in mouse
and human, although the tempo of human development was
considerably slower than that of mouse. More detailed inspection
indicated that in the CS12 embryo, the proportion of p3 and pMN
ventral progenitors compared with pI and pD was higher in human
than mouse (pD and pI human 55% cells, mouse 72% cells; pMN
and p3 human 22% cells, mouse 16% cells; Table S5), which was
also evident by immunostaining (Fig. 6D). The increased proportion
of ventral progenitors persisted in the CS14 embryo (pMN and p3
human 11% cells, mouse 5% cells), but in the CS17 embryo the size
of the ventral domains was comparable between mouse and human
(pMN and p3 in human and mouse 3%) (Fig. 6C,D, Fig. S6B).
Next, we compared the ratio of neurons over progenitors across
domains per time point as a proxy of the rate of neurogenesis.
Whereas there was little neurogenesis between CS12 and CS14, the
neuronal output increased in all domains from CS17 onwards
(Fig. S6A). As expected, there was an earlier onset of neurogenesis
in the mouse and human pMN than in the rest of the domains (Fig.
S6) (Kicheva et al., 2014; Rayon et al., 2020), but the rate of MN
differentiation in human persisted at a higher rate from CS17
onwards compared with mouse. In contrast, the rate of neurogenesis
in the pD and pI domains was comparable between mouse and
human across time points (Fig. S6). Neurogenesis in the pD domain
in the CS17 and CS19 embryos appeared to be constant, whereas
there was a marked increase in pD progenitors from E11.5 to E13.5
in mouse (Fig. S6), consistent with a slower rate of dorsal
neurogenesis in human.
Together, the analysis indicated that, although mouse and human
display an overall similar pattern of neurogenesis, the human neural
tube has a higher initial proportion of pMN and p3 progenitors and
pMN cells undergo a higher relative rate of neurogenesis. By
contrast, dorsal neurogenesis may persist for a longer period in
human than mouse. Further validation including more embryos
spanning later time points will be needed to determine whether
human neurogenesis is delayed.
Fig. 4. Expression of primate-specific genes. (A) Bubble plots indicating the expression of primate-specific genes in different cell types. Genes expressed at an
average level of 0.10 transcripts/cell or higher in any cell type are highlighted in red. Circle size indicates mean scaled gene expression levels. (B) Violin plots for
the expression of genes in neural cell types. Cells with null values for the genes were not included. (C) Proportion of cells within each cell type that express the
indicated primate-specific genes.
6
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

Finally, we analysed the sequential expression of gliogenic
markers in progenitors. SOX9 was detected at low levels across
progenitor domains from CS12, followed by the detection of
NFIA/B at CS17 at higher levels in ventral progenitors, its
expression increasing in dorsal progenitors by CS19 (Fig. 6E).
The expression of SOX9 and NFIA/B in progenitors and neurons
was consistent with immunohistochemical assays of the embryonic
human spinal cord (Betters et al., 2010; Dady et al., 2021 preprint;
Deneen et al., 2006; Rayon et al., 2020). The expression of NFIA
correlates with the onset of gliogenesis and is observed at CS15 in
ventral progenitors but delayed until ∼CS18 in dorsal regions
(Betters et al., 2010; Dady et al., 2021 preprint; Deneen et al., 2006;
Rayon et al., 2020). In addition, we identified a small number of
cells (n=77), present from CS12 onwards, expressing SOX10,
SOX9, PDGFRA and S100B, characteristic of oligodendrocytes
(Fig. 6E).
A conserved temporal code for the specification of neuronal
identity
In parallel to the spatial patterning of neurons, a temporal
transcription factor code has been identified in mouse and is
responsible for the further diversification of neuronal identity
throughout the CNS (Sagner et al., 2020 preprint). To investigate
whether this temporal code is conserved in humans, we examined
the expression of the transcription factors that correlate with the
early- and late-born neuronal classes in all DV domains. Consistent
with analysis of gene expression in the mouse neural tube, human
neurons present at the earliest time point (CS12) express Onecut-
family members but little if any POU2F2, ZFHX2-4, NFIA/B/X or
NEUROD2/6. By CS14, many neurons expressed POU2F2 and
ZFHX2-4, characteristic of neurons born at intermediate times in
mouse. By contrast, expression of NEUROD6, NEUROD2, NFIA
and NFIB, which identify later-generated neurons in mouse, were
Fig. 5. Classification of peripheral nervous
system cells in human. (A) Gene module scores
for progenitors, sensory neuron progenitors, and
postmitotic sensory neurons in the peripheral
nervous system (PNS) UMAP. (B) Bubble plots
indicating the expression of markers used to
identify PNS cell types. Genes chosen for cell
assignment are coloured; grey circles correspond
to markers not used for the selection of a specific
population. Circle size indicates mean scaled
gene expression levels. (C-F) Fractions of
progenitors (C,E) and neurons (D,F) in the PNS
during gestational weeks 4 to 7. For C and D, the
data are proportional to the total neurons and
progenitors at each time point. E and F show the
same data as shown in C for progenitors or D for
neurons as a proportion of the number of neural
cells.
7
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

Fig. 6. Dynamics of progenitor and neuron proportions in the developing spinal cord. (A,B) Proportions of progenitors and neurons in the spinal cord during
gestational weeks 4 to 7. The data are proportional to the total neurons and progenitors at each time point. (C) Comparison of the ratio of progenitors between
mouse and human grouped in broad territories: pD (dp1-dp6); pI (p0-p2). Vertical bars indicate the range around the mean of proportions per sample. (D)
Immunofluorescence of PAX3 (cyan), OLIG2 (red), NKX2-2 (cyan) and ARX (red) in transverse sections of mouse and human cervical neural tube at E9.5 and
E11.5 in mouse embryos and CS12 and CS17 in human embryos. Scale bars: 50 µm. (E) Expression of gliogenic markers in progenitors and oligodendrocytes.
(F) Expression of the temporal transcription factor code in neurons. In E and F, the size of the circles indicates the proportion of cells that express the gene per
stage and domain, and the colour indicates the mean expression levels.
8
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

Fig. 7. Neurogenic trajectories in the developing spinal cord. (A) PCA of the pMN-to-MN trajectory in human and mouse indicating the RNA-velocity trajectories
depicted by black arrows in the PCA. PCAs are annotated by cell type (left), time point (middle) or latent time (right). The earliest latent time points are indicated in dark
blue and latest in yellow on the latent time colour scale. Neurogenic trajectories are indicated with blue arrows, and the gliogenic trajectory in the mouse pMN is
depicted by the orange arrow pointing away from the neurogenic trajectory. (B) Smoothed expression profile of the reconstructed motor neuron differentiation
trajectory using the calculated latent times in human and mouse for selected genes. (C) Heatmap of the normalised gene expression (blue, low; yellow, high) of genes
involved in neurogenesis for each neuronal class as a function of latent time in human (top bar) and mouse (bottom bar).
9
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

only detected in neurons by CS19. An exception was MNs, where
NFI factors were detected from CS14 (Fig. 6F), similar to the earlier
expression of these TFs in mouse MNs. The relatively sparse
expression of late-born neuronal markers in dI3-dI6 in the CS19
sample suggests that neurogenesis in the human developing spinal
cord continues at later time points, consistent with an extended
neurogenic period in comparison with mouse. Collectively, these
results indicate a conserved temporal code for the diversification of
neurons that is temporally protracted in the dorsal portion of the
spinal cord in human compared with mouse.
Transcriptional dynamics during neurogenesis in mouse and
human
Next, to reconstruct and compare gene expression dynamics during
the differentiation of specific neuronal subtypes we used RNA
velocity (La Manno et al., 2018) to analyse the temporal dynamics
of gene expression. We inferred RNAvelocity using scVelo (Bergen
et al., 2020) and modelled neurogenic lineages with CellRank
(Lange et al., 2020), which infers developmental trajectories from
splicing information and transcriptional similarity. For the analysis,
we included mouse samples from E9.5 to E13.5 and the CS12,
CS14 and CS19 human datasets. Because these methods are very
sensitive to the average counts per gene in each dataset, we excluded
the CS17 sample, which has lower average gene counts than the
other human samples (Fig. S7A).
The inference of neurogenic trajectories from the mouse dataset
was overall better resolved than in human, likely owing to the higher
temporal resolution of the mouse datasets compared with the
human. Nevertheless, reconstructing the differentiation of neurons
of several DV domains in mouse and human (p3, pMN, p2, p1, dI4,
Fig. 8. Overlapping expression of OLIG2 and NKX2-2. (A,B) Expression of the ventral progenitor markers PAX6 (white), OLIG2 (blue) and NKX2-2 (red) in
transverse sections of human (A) and mouse (B) cervical neural tube at CS15 and E10.5, respectively. Scale bars: 50 µm. (C) Ratio of Olig2+/Nkx2-2+ double-
positive cells within all cells expressing Nkx2-2 or Olig2. (D-G) Human UMAP of all cells expressing Nkx2-2 or Olig2 in human (D,F) and mouse (E,G). In F,G the
double-positive progenitors are colour coded by time point. (H,I) Violin plots of selected genes involved in pMN and p3 neurogenesis and progenitor maturation in
human (H) and mouse (I). Cells are labelled by time point. (J) Transcriptional distance of double-positive progenitors to pMN and p3 cells. Values closer to 1
indicate greater similarity to the population. (K) Gliogenic score of cells expressing OLIG2, NKX2-2 or both genes in human.
10
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

dI3, dI2) showed single convergent neurogenesis paths from
progenitors to neurons in each case (Fig. 7A, Fig. S7B).
Moreover, the analysis highlighted a temporal trajectory within
some progenitors, including p3, pMN and p2 in mouse (Fig. 7A,
Fig. S7B), which is consistent with the temporal programme of gene
expression in progenitors and the gliogenic switch in the spinal
cord, where neural progenitors from E11.5 give rise to neurons and
glia (Kang et al., 2012; Sagner et al., 2020 preprint).
Latent time estimations of the probability of a cell to reach
the differentiated neuronal state allowed directional ordering along
the trajectories and the inference of smoothed gene expression
dynamics in latent time. In both mouse and human, the neurogenic
trajectory from pMN to MN confirmed the expected sequential
progression of gene expression during differentiation: progenitor
genes, including Olig2, were expressed earlier in latent time,
followed by neurogenic genes, such as Neurod4, and, finally, the
markers of post-mitotic neurons Elavl3 and Mnx1 were detected at
the latest latent time points (Fig. 7B). We then examined the gene
expression dynamics for the differentiation of V3, V2, V1, dI4, dI3
and dI2 neurons in mouse and human (Fig. 7C, Fig. S7C).
Heatmaps of the dynamics of gene expression in latent time were
generally similar in the two species, and resembled the known
dynamics of the genes as well as the pseudotemporal ordering
observed in the mouse scRNA-seq (Fig. 7C) (Delile et al., 2019).
Overall, these analyses suggested that the genetic programmes for
the differentiation of neurons in the developing spinal cord are
conserved in mammals.
Co-expression of Olig2 and Nkx2-2 in the developing spinal
cord
At early stages of neural development in mouse and chick, pMN
cells express OLIG2 but not NKX2-2 and give rise to MNs. This
distinguishes pMN progenitors from NKX2-2-expressing p3 cells
(Briscoe et al., 1999; Novitch et al., 2001). At later developmental
stages, once progenitors finish generating MNs, oligodendrocyte
precursor cells (OLPs) in the region of the mouse neural tube
previously occupied by pMN cells co-express OLIG2 and NKX2-2
and produce oligodendrocytes (Richardson et al., 2000; Zhou et al.,
2001). By contrast, in human embryos a substantial number of
OLIG2 and NKX2-2 co-expressing cells are observed in the pMN
domain at early developmental stages, when MNs are still being
generated ((Marklund et al., 2014); Fig. 8A,B, Fig. S8A,B). These
are thought to represent a pMN subdomain in human (Marklund
et al., 2014). To define the molecular identity of OLIG2 and NKX2-
2 co-expressing cells, we analysed Sox2+ progenitors that expressed
either Nkx2-2 or Olig2 in mouse and human. In mouse, the number
of Olig2+/Nkx2-2+ co-expressing cells comprised <5% of the total
number of Nkx2-2- or Olig2-expressing cells until E11.5. By
contrast, the proportion of OLIG2/NKX2-2 double-positive cells
was ∼10% in equivalent staged human embryos (Fig. 8C, Fig. S8C,
D). By E12.5 in mouse, at the onset of gliogenesis, the number of
the Olig2+/Nkx2-2+ co-expressing progenitors had increased to
∼15%, correlating with the appearance of OLPs in the developing
spinal cord. This increase was not detected in human, where the ratio
of
OLIG2+/NKX2-2+
co-expressing
progenitors
in
human
decreased at CS17 and CS19 (Fig. 6C).
To investigate whether Olig2+/Nkx2-2+ co-expressing cells had a
distinct transcriptional signature, we compared Olig2+/Nkx2-2+
cells
with
Olig2+/Nkx2-2−
pMN
and
Olig2−/Nkx2-2+
p3
progenitors. UMAPs of mouse or human cells showed that
Olig2+/Nkx2-2+ cells projected to regions of the embedding that
contained either pMN or p3 cells (Fig. 8D,E). Olig2+/Nkx2-2+ cells
failed to cluster according to developmental stage (Fig. 8F,G).
Moreover, analysis of pMN and p3 markers in human and mouse
Olig2+/Nkx2-2+ cells showed a similar transcriptional signature,
which closely resembled a combination of the pMN and p3
signatures (Fig. 8H,I). To determine the similarity of Olig2+/Nkx2-
2+ cells to either pMN cells or p3 cells, we averaged the expression
profiles for each cell type per time point and calculated the distance
between double-positive cells and pMN or p3 cells in human. This
suggested that double-positive cells were somewhat closer in gene
expression space to pMN cells at CS12 and CS14 than to p3 cells
(Fig. 8J), but the degree of similarity with p3 cells increased at later
time points (Fig. 8J). Together, this analysis suggests that human
OLIG2+/NKX2-2+
co-expressing
progenitors
resemble
an
amalgamation of pMN and p3 identities.
The co-expression of OLIG2 and NKX2-2 in mouse and chick is
indicative of OLPs. For this reason, the OLIG2+/NKX2-2+ cells in
human have been proposed to be OLPs (Marklund et al., 2014).
Consistent with this, human OLIG2+/NKX2-2+ cells expressed
FABP7, OLIG1 and OLIG2, characteristic of gliogenic progenitors,
like mouse Olig2+/Nkx2-2+ cells from older embryos (Fig. 8H,I).
Whereas the expression of gliogenic markers in Olig2+/Nkx2-2+ cells
from mouse at early time points was low, the levels of FABP7, OLIG1
and OLIG2 in human double-positive progenitors were consistently
high across time points (Fig. 8H). Likewise, we observed an increased
gliogenic score in the double-positive progenitors compared with pMN
and p3 progenitor populations (Fig. 8K). Taken together, these results
are consistent with Olig2+/Nkx2-2+ cells representing OLPs. This
would indicate that OLPs are more abundant at earlier developmental
stages in the human neural tube than at the equivalent mouse stages,
representing another example of heterochronic differences between
rodents and primates. In chick and mouse, OLPs appear to arise mainly
after pMN progenitors have ended MN generation, but the lineage
relationship and the neurogenic or gliogenic potential of individual
cells needs clarification (Leber and Sanes, 1995; Leber et al., 1990;
Park et al., 2002; Richardson et al., 2000; Wu et al., 2006). In zebrafish,
MNs and oligodendrocytes have been proposed to arise from distinct
cell lineages that initiate Olig2 expression at different times (Ravanelli
and Appel, 2015). It will be important to establish the lineage
relationships between pMNs, MNs and OLPs in human, and establish
the neurogenic or gliogenic potential of double-positive cells.
Online access to mouse and human neural tube
transcriptome data
The availability of mouse and human transcriptome data from the
developing neural tube and dorsal root ganglia provides a resource for
developmental biologists studying the embryonic nervous system and
for stem cell biologists aiming to refine differentiation protocols for
the
generation
of
specific
neuronal
subtypes.
The
in
vivo
characterisation of cell diversity in mouse and human will help
identify the neuronal subtypes involved in locomotor circuits and
provides a foundation to investigate subtype-specific and species-
specific features that control connectivity and function. To provide
access to both the human and mouse transcriptome data, we have
established an interactive web application (https://shiny.crick.ac.uk/
scviewer/neuraltube/). This will allow rapid and easy investigation of
the expression of specific genes in all datasets described in this
analysis (see Movie 1).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Sample processing
Human embryonic material (gestational weeks 4-7) was obtained from the
MRC/Wellcome Trust-funded (grant #006237/1) Human Developmental
11
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

Biology Resource (HDBR57; http://www.hdbr.org) with appropriate
maternal written consent and approval from the London Fulham Research
Ethics Committee (18/LO/0822) and the Newcastle and North Tyneside
NHS Health Authority Joint Ethics Committee (08/H0906/21+5). HDBR is
regulated by the UK Human Tissue Authority (HTA; www.hta.gov.uk) and
operates in accordance with the relevant HTA Codes of Practice. Embryos
were
freshly
collected
on
Hibernate-E
medium
(A12486,
Gibco)
supplemented with 2% B-27 (17504001 Thermo Fisher Scientific) and
2.5 ml/l Glutamax (3505006, Gibco) and kept on ice until further dissection.
Trunk samples of single embryos were dissected as described by Delile
et al. (2019). Briefly, samples were placed in Hanks Balanced Solution
without calcium and magnesium (HBSS, 14185045, Life Technologies)
supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated foetal bovine serum (FBS). For neural
tube and dorsal root ganglia dissection, the superficial layers of skin, limbs
and remaining organs were removed, whereas the somites, cartilage
primordium, dorsal root ganglia and neural tube were left intact. Dissected
samples were snipped into smaller pieces and incubated on a FACSmax
(Amsbio, T200100) cell dissociation solution containing 10× Papain (30 U/
mg, Sigma-Aldrich, 10108014001) for 11 min at 37°C to dissociate the cells
and transferred to a HBSS solution with 5% FBS, Rock inhibitor (10 μM,
Stemcell Technologies, Y-27632) and 1× non-essential amino acids solution
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, 11140035). Single cells were disaggregated by
pipetting and filtration, and quality control was assayed by measuring live
cells versus cell death, cell size and number of clumps on an EVE cell counter
(NanoEntek). Each sample was prepared at a concentration of 600-1700 cells/
µl and viability ranged between 70 and 96%. Samples with a viability above
70% were used for sequencing.
Single-cell RNA sequencing
Single-cell suspensions were loaded for each sample into a separate channel
of a Chromium Chip G for use in the 10x Chromium Controller (PN-
1000120). The cells were partitioned into nanolitre scale gel beads in
emulsions (GEMs) and lysed using the 10x Genomics Single Cell 3′ Chip
V3.1 GEM, Library and Gel Bead Kit (PN-1000121). The v2 kit was used
for the E8.5 mouse as described by Delile et al. (2019). cDNA synthesis and
library construction were performed as per the manufacturer’s instructions.
Libraries were prepared from 10 µl of the cDNA and 12 cycles of
amplification. Each library was prepared using Single Index Kit T Set A
(PN-1000213) and sequenced on the HiSeq4000 system (Illumina) using
the configuration 28-8-98 on a single-index-paired-end run. Libraries were
sequenced on independent flow cells for each sample and split across
multiple lanes.
Quality control and filtering
Gene expression was quantified from FastQ files using Cell Ranger (3.1.0)
and the GRCh38-3.0.0 and mm10-3.0.0 indexes for human and mouse,
respectively. A counts matrix was generated for each library using Cell
Ranger count, submitting all technical replicates of a library together.
Putative cells reported by Cell Ranger in the filtered output matrix were
inspected manually to remove droplets that reported an extremely high or
low number of genes or UMI or had a high proportion of mitochondrial
UMI. The thresholds applied to each replicate can be found in Table S1.
Cell cycle and gene module scoring
Each cell was assigned a score based on the expression of a pre-determined
list of cell-cycle gene markers (cc.genes, supplied with Seurat) with the
CellCycleScoring function implemented in Seurat (Stuart et al., 2019).
Mouse gene names were converted from human using biomaRt Ensembl-
release 93 gene annotations. Additionally, gene module scores were
calculated using the AddModuleScore function in Seurat for each gene
module described in Table S2. Gene module scores were used for
visualisation purposes on reduced dimension plots and to identify clusters
of cells that were likely non-neural cells, which were removed from further
analysis. The gliogenic score of OLIG2+/NKX2-2+ double-positive cells in
human was determined using Seurat’s AddModuleScore function with a set
of known gliogenic markers (FABP7, SOX9, SOX10, PDGFRA, CSPG4,
FGFR3, FGFBP3, DBI, SLC1A3, HOPX, ALDH1L1).
Normalisation, integration and dimension reduction
Replicate datasets were subsequently filtered to remove contaminant
cells (such as mesoderm and blood). The resulting datasets were then
normalised and integrated using the SCTransform/IntegrateData workflow
implemented in Seurat 3.2.2 (Stuart et al., 2019). For SCTransform, 3000
variable features were selected and cell cycle effects regressed using the
difference in cell cycle scores (S-G2M). Replicates were then integrated
together to create the time point and species datasets.
Principal components of integrated datasets were calculated using
RunPCA with 3000 variable features to provide the first 70 components.
UMAP and tSNE reductions were calculated using the RunUMAP and
RunTSNE using the first 40 principal components.
Cell type classification
We classified cells using Antler (https://juliendelile.github.io/Antler/) as
described by Delile et al. (2019). Briefly, cells were classified based on the
expression of known marker genes in a two-step process that first identified
broad cell types before classifying neurons and progenitors further into 12 and
13 DV subtypes, respectively. The knowledge matrices (Tables S2 and S3)
were adapted from Delile et al. (2019), converting mouse to human gene
identifiers and replacing Tubb3 with STMN2 and MAP2, as TUBB3 levels
were low in human. In the human, additional marker genes were added for the
PNS classification and for the identification of oligodendrocytes (Table S2).
Mouse and human correlation analysis
First, a set of orthologous genes with a 1:1 correspondence was sought
between human and mouse using Ensembl biomaRt and release-93
annotations. Gene sets were then defined. The ‘transcription factor’ gene
set was defined as the unique set of genes with which the GO term
‘GO:0003700’ was associated, using human biomaRt connection.
Expression matrices were subset by cell type and gene set. Human gene
names were converted to mouse gene names and genes with no 1:1
homologue were discarded. Representative expression profiles per cell type
were calculated using the mean gene expression. Each representative profile
was correlated using the ‘cor.test’ function in R and the Pearson method.
Comparison with bulk in vitro RNA-seq data
Data from ventral (p3, pMN, p2, p1, p0) domain progenitors and neurons
were aggregated and averaged per time point. A subset of 1448 highly
expressed genes with varying dynamics along the neurogenic differentiation
trajectory was chosen to compare this pseudo-bulk data with bulk in vitro
data published previously (Rayon et al., 2020). Data from each time point
was normalised between 0 and 1 to improve comparability and Spearman’s
correlation coefficient across all average expressions was calculated
between each in vivo and in vitro time point.
Correlation analysis for PAX7
To investigate PAX7 expression in FP cells, Spearman’s correlation
coefficient was used to select the 30 genes that had the strongest positive
correlation with PAX7 in cells annotated as FP. Mean expression levels of the
genes in human FP cells, pD cells and mouse FP can be found in Table S4.
RNA velocity
Spliced/unspliced count matrices were generated from aligned reads using
the Velocyto (La Manno et al., 2018) command line interface tool with the
run10x command and default arguments. For reference genomes and repeat
masks, GRCh38-3.0.0 and mm10-3.0.0 were used for human and mouse,
respectively.
Only cells with Antler classifications were used for downstream analysis
without the SCTransform/IntegrateData workflow implemented in the
Seurat 3.2.2 normalisation step (Stuart et al., 2019). It was noted that CS17
data had lower counts per gene than other time points and this produced
artefacts in normalisation and scaling pre-processing steps for principal
components analysis (PCA) (Fig. S6A). As a result, CS17 was not included
in the trajectory analysis. Mouse E8.5 data were also excluded as there was
no corresponding time point in human data. Initial inspection of p0, dl6, dl5
and dl1 domains revealed an insufficient number of cells to model the
12
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

progenitor-to-neuron transition and so these domains were not included in
further trajectory analysis.
For downstream analysis, Scanpy was used to normalise and log transform
the data. To divide genes into subsets, 2000 highly variable genes were
selected for each time point separately, and genes common to all time points
were retained. This was done to reduce batch effects between time points. To
these highly variable genes, a curated list of 177 genes known to be involved
in neural tube development was added. Gene selection, PCA and velocity
modelling were performed on each domain independently. scVelo (Bergen
et al., 2020) was used to recover ‘latent time’ dynamics, infer velocities on
‘stochastic’ mode, and embed these velocities in PCA space.
CellRank trajectory analysis
CellRank (Lange et al., 2020) was used to construct neurogenic gene trends.
CellRank models cellular dynamics as a Markov chain whereby transition
probabilities are calculated using both RNA velocity and transcriptomic
similarity. First, each domain’s terminal states were inferred with the number
of terminal states fixed to either two or one depending on whether a
bifurcation of progenitor fates was visible in the first two PCA components
(for both mouse and human: two terminal states for p3, pMN, p2, p1 and dl2,
one for dl4 and dl3). The weight_connectivities parameter, which determines
the relative importance of velocity and transcriptomic similarity for terminal
state calculation, was adjusted for each domain to achieve a realistic prediction
(for p3, pMN, p2, p1, dl4, dl3, dl2: 0.2, 0.7, 0.7, 0.2, 0.7, 0.9, 0.5,
respectively, in human and 0.2, 0.2, 0.3, 0.2, 0.7, 0.7, 0.5, respectively, in
mouse). To produce gene trends, a generalised additive model (GAM) was
fitted to each gene’s expression pattern through latent time using CellRank’s
ul.models.GAM function. This was done with 5 knots and a spline order of
2. This function weights a cell’s contribution to the model by its lineage
probability, so progenitors committing to a gliogenic/late progenitor identity
did not contribute to neurogenic gene trends. If this GAM failed to fit to a
gene’s expression profile, or the GAM’s confidence interval achieved a range
>10, the expression profile was fixed to zero.
Immunostaining and microscopy
Immunohistochemistry on human and mouse spinal cord tissues and on
mouse and human cells was performed as described previously (Rayon
et al., 2020). Rabbit anti-PAX6 (Covance, PRB-278P-100, 1:500), goat-anti
OLIG2 (R&D Systems, AF2418, 1:800), mouse anti-NKX2-2 (BD
Pharmigen, 74.5A5,1:500), mouse anti-NKX6-1 [Developmental Studies
Hybridoma Bank (DHSB), F55A10, 1:100], mouse anti-PAX3 (DSHB,
clone C2, 1:100), rabbit anti-OLIG2 (Millipore, AB9610, 1:1000), rabbit
anti-ARX (Poirier et al., 2004; 1:1000) and guinea pig anti-NKX6-2
(Vallstedt et al., 2001; 1:8000) were used. The anti-NKX6-2 antibody raised
against the 11 amino acid N-terminal mouse epitope contained a mismatch
[alanine (A)>threonine (T)] in the human sequence and did not detect
NKX6-2 in human samples. Three embryos per stage were used for mouse.
In human, three embryos were used for PAX6, OLIG2 and NKX2-2, and
three sections of a single human embryo per stage were used for PAX3,
OLIG2, NKX2-2 and ARX immunostaining.
Cryosections were imaged using a Leica SP8 confocal microscope
equipped with a 20× NA 0.75 dry objective, or a Leica SP5 confocal
microscope. Z-stacks were acquired and represented as maximum intensity
projections using ImageJ software. Pixel intensities were adjusted across the
entire image in Fiji. The same settings were applied to all images.
RNAscope FISH with immunohistochemistry
Transverse cryosections (14 µm thickness) were cut onto Superfrost Plus
slides (Thermo Scientific, 10149870) as described by Rayon et al. (2020).
Slides were stored at −80°C until ready to be processed. The RNAscope
multiplex fluorescent v2 kit was used as per the manufacturer’s instructions
for fixed frozen samples (ACD Bio), with the protease treatment step
shortened to 15 min. The RNAscope probe Hs-NKX6-2 (48674) was used.
At the end of the RNAscope protocol, sections were fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature and then washed twice
in 1× PBS for 5 min. Sections were incubated in blocking solution (1%
bovine serum albumin, 0.1% Triton X-100 in 1× PBS) for 30 min at room
temperature and then incubated in primary antibody (DHSB, F55A10,
1:100) in blocking solution 1 h at 4°C. Sections were then washed three
times for 5 min each in 1× PBS, incubated with secondary antibody (donkey
anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 conjugate; Invitrogen, A32766, 1:1000) for
30 min at room temperature, rinsed in 1× PBS three times for 5 min each,
and mounted with ProLong Gold with DAPI mounting medium (Thermo
Fisher Scientific). Sections were imaged using a 40× oil immersion lens on a
Leica SP8 confocal microscope. Images were taken with the pinhole set to
2 AU. Three sections of a single human embryo were recorded per stage.
Image analyses of mouse and human spinal cord sections
Themean fluorescence intensity in immunostained sectionswasquantified across
a line adjacent to the apical lumen employing a Fiji macro described by Zagorski
and Kicheva (2018). For the analysis, three mouse embryos per stage and three
sections from single human embryos were used. Data were plotted in R.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for the human embryonic material provided by MRC/Wellcome Trust
(MR/R006237/1) Human Developmental Biology Resource and the generous
donors whose contributions have enabled this research. We thank past and current
members of the Briscoe lab for feedback. We acknowledge the Crick Science and
Technology platforms, especially Advanced Sequencing, Scientific Computing,
Bioinformatics and Biostatistics group, Mary Green from Experimental
Histopathology Laboratory, and Marc Pollitt from Scientific Computing. Manuela
Melchionda provided the embryo sections; Katherine Exelby designed the spinal
cord diagram. We thank Despina Stamataki, Andreas Sagner, M. Joaquina Delás,
Tiago Rito and Tom Frith for comments on the manuscript. The Francis Crick
Institute receives its core funding from Cancer Research UK, the UK Medical
Research Council and the Wellcome Trust (all under FC001051).
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: T.R., J.B.; Methodology: T.R., R.J.M., C.B., J.B.; Software:
R.J.M., C.B.; Formal analysis: R.J.M., C.B; Investigation: T.R., J.B.; Writing - original
draft: T.R., J.B.; Writing - review & editing: T.R., R.J.M., C.B., J.B.; Supervision: T.R.,
J.B.; Project administration: T.R., J.B.; Funding acquisition: J.B.
Funding
T.R. and. J.B. are supported by the Wellcome Trust (215116/Z/18/Z). T.R. received
funding from a European Molecular Biology Organization long-term fellowship
(ALTF 328-2015). Open access funding provided by The Francis Crick Institute.
Deposited in PMC for immediate release.
Data availability
Single-cell RNA sequencing data have been deposited in NCBI Gene Expression
Omnibus under accession number GSE171892. The R analysis script developed for
this paper is available at https://github.com/briscoelab/human_single_cell.
Processed single-cell sequencing is available for exploration at our cell browser
https://shiny.crick.ac.uk/scviewer/neuraltube/
Peer review history
The peer review history is available online at https://journals.biologists.com/dev/
article-lookup/doi/10.1242/dev.199711
References
Bergen, V., Lange, M., Peidli, S., Wolf, F. A. and Theis, F. J. (2020). Generalizing
RNA velocity to transient cell states through dynamical modeling. Nat. Biotechnol.
38, 1408-1414. doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0591-3
Berta, P., Hawkins, J. B., Sinclair, A. H., Taylor, A., Griffiths, B. L., Goodfellow,
P. N. and Fellous, M. (1990). Genetic evidence equating SRY and the testis-
determining factor. Nature 348, 448-450. doi:10.1038/348448a0
Betters, E., Liu, Y., Kjaeldgaard, A., Sundströ m, E. and Garcı́a-Castro, M. I.
(2010). Analysis of early human neural crest development. Dev. Biol. 344,
578-592. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.05.012
Briscoe, J., Sussel, L., Serup, P., Hartigan-O’Connor, D., Jessell, T. M.,
Rubenstein, J. L. R. and Ericson, J. (1999). Homeobox gene Nkx2.2 and
specification of neuronal identity by graded Sonic hedgehog signalling. Nature
398, 622-627. doi:10.1038/19315
Chiu, I. M., Barrett, L. B., Williams, E. K., Strochlic, D. E., Lee, S., Weyer, A. D., Lou,
S., Bryman, G. S., Roberson, D. P., Ghasemlou, N. et al. (2014). Transcriptional
profiling at whole population and single cell levels reveals somatosensory neuron
molecular diversity. eLife 3, e04660. doi:10.7554/eLife.04660.034
13
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

Dady, A., Davidson, L., Halley, P. A. and Storey, K. G. (2021). Human spinal cord
differentiation proceeds rapidly in vitro and only initially maintains differentiation
pace in a heterologous environment. bioRxiv 2021.02.06.429972.
Delás, M. J. and Briscoe, J. (2020). Repressive interactions in gene regulatory
networks: when you have no other choice. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 139, 239-266.
doi:10.1016/bs.ctdb.2020.03.003
Delile, J., Rayon, T., Melchionda, M., Edwards, A., Briscoe, J. and Sagner, A.
(2019). Single cell transcriptomics reveals spatial and temporal dynamics of gene
expression in the developing mouse spinal cord. Development 146, dev173807.
doi:10.1242/dev.173807
Deneen, B., Ho, R., Lukaszewicz, A., Hochstim, C. J., Gronostajski, R. M. and
Anderson, D. J. (2006). The transcription factor NFIA controls the onset of
gliogenesis in the developing spinal cord. Neuron 52, 953-968. doi:10.1016/j.
neuron.2006.11.019
Eze, U. C., Bhaduri, A., Haeussler, M., Nowakowski, T. J. and Kriegstein, A. R.
(2021).
Single-cell
atlas
of
early
human
brain
development
highlights
heterogeneity of human neuroepithelial cells and early radial glia. Nat.
Neurosci. 24, 584-594. doi:10.1101/2020.03.06.981423
Fiddes, I. T., Lodewijk, G. A., Mooring, M., Bosworth, C. M., Ewing, A. D.,
Mantalas, G. L., Novak, A. M., van den Bout, A., Bishara, A., Rosenkrantz,
J. L. et al. (2018). Human-specific NOTCH2NL genes affect notch signaling and
cortical neurogenesis. Cell 173, 1356-1369.e22. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.051
Florio, M., Albert, M., Taverna, E., Namba, T., Brandl, H., Lewitus, E., Haffner, C.,
Sykes, A., Wong, F. K., Peters, J. et al. (2015). Human-specific gene
ARHGAP11B
promotes
basal
progenitor
amplification
and
neocortex
expansion. Science 347, 1465-1470. doi:10.1126/science.aaa1975
Florio, M., Heide, M., Pinson, A., Brandl, H., Albert, M., Winkler, S., Wimberger,
P., Huttner, W. B. and Hiller, M. (2018). Evolution and cell-type specificity of
human-specific genes preferentially expressed in progenitors of fetal neocortex.
eLife 7, e32332. doi:10.7554/eLife.32332
Gubbay, J., Collignon, J., Koopman, P., Capel, B., Economou, A., Mü nsterberg,
A., Vivian, N., Goodfellow, P. and Lovell-Badge, R. (1990). A gene mapping to
the sex-determining region of the mouse Y chromosome is a member of a novel
family of embryonically expressed genes. Nature 346, 245-250. doi:10.1038/
346245a0
Heide, M., Haffner, C., Murayama, A., Kurotaki, Y., Shinohara, H., Okano, H.,
Sasaki, E. and Huttner, W. B. (2020). Human-specific ARHGAP11B increases
size and folding of primate neocortex in the fetal marmoset. Science 369,
546-550. doi:10.1126/science.abb2401
Hockley, J. R. F., Taylor, T. S., Callejo, G., Wilbrey, A. L., Gutteridge, A., Bach,
K., Winchester, W. J., Bulmer, D. C., McMurray, G. and Smith, E. S. J. (2019).
Single-cell RNAseq reveals seven classes of colonic sensory neuron. Gut 68,
633-644. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315631
Kang, P., Lee, H. K., Glasgow, S. M., Finley, M., Donti, T., Gaber, Z. B., Graham,
B. H., Foster, A. E., Novitch, B. G., Gronostajski, R. M. et al. (2012). Sox9 and
NFIA coordinate a transcriptional regulatory cascade during the initiation of
gliogenesis. Neuron 74, 79-94. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2012.01.024
Kicheva, A., Bollenbach, T., Ribeiro, A., Valle, H. P., Lovell-Badge, R.,
Episkopou, V. and Briscoe, J. (2014). Coordination of progenitor specification
and growth in mouse and chick spinal cord. Science (New York, N.Y.) 345,
1254927. doi:10.1126/science.1254927
La Manno, G., Soldatov, R., Zeisel, A., Braun, E., Hochgerner, H., Petukhov, V.,
Lidschreiber, K., Kastriti, M. E., Lö nnerberg, P., Furlan, A. et al. (2018). RNA
velocity of single cells. Nature 560, 494-498. doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0414-6
Lange, M., Bergen, V., Klein, M., Setty, M., Reuter, B., Bakhti, M., Lickert, H.,
Ansari, M., Schniering, J., Schiller, H. B. et al. (2020). CellRank for directed
single-cell fate mapping. bioRxiv 2020.10.19.345983.
Leber, S. M. and Sanes, J. R. (1995). Migratory paths of neurons and glia in the
embryonic
chick
spinal
cord.
J.
Neurosci.
15,
1236-1248.
doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.15-02-01236.1995
Leber, S. M., Breedlove, S. M. and Sanes, J. R. (1990). Lineage, arrangement, and
death of clonally related motoneurons in chick spinal cord. J Neurosci 10,
2451-2462. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.10-07-02451.1990
Li, C.-L., Li, K.-C., Wu, D., Chen, Y., Luo, H., Zhao, J.-R., Wang, S.-S., Sun, M.-M.,
Lu, Y.-J., Zhong, Y.-Q. et al. (2016). Somatosensory neuron types identified by
high-coverage single-cell RNA-sequencing and functional heterogeneity. Cell
Res. 26, 83-102. doi:10.1038/cr.2015.149
Liu, J., Liu, W., Yang, L., Wu, Q., Zhang, H., Fang, A., Li, L., Xu, X., Sun, L.,
Zhang, J. et al. (2017). The primate-specific gene TMEM14B marks outer radial
glia cells and promotes cortical expansion and folding. Cell Stem Cell 21,
635-649.e8. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2017.08.013
Marklund, U., Alekseenko, Z., Andersson, E., Falci, S., Westgren, M., Perlmann,
T., Graham, A., Sundströ m, E. and Ericson, J. (2014). Detailed expression
analysis of regulatory genes in the early developing human neural tube. Stem
Cells Dev. 23, 5-15. doi:10.1089/scd.2013.0309
Novitch, B. G., Chen, A. I. and Jessell, T. M. (2001). Coordinate regulation of motor
neuron subtype identity and pan-neuronal properties by the bHLH repressor
Olig2. Neuron 31, 773-789. doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(01)00407-X
O’Rahilly, R. and Mü ller, F. (2007). The development of the neural crest in the
human. J. Anat. 211, 335-351. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7580.2007.00773.x
Park, H.-C., Mehta, A., Richardson, J. S. and Appel, B. (2002). olig2 is required for
zebrafish primary motor neuron and oligodendrocyte development. Dev. Biol. 248,
356-368. doi:10.1006/dbio.2002.0738
Poirier, K., Van Esch, H., Friocourt, G., Saillour, Y., Bahi, N., Backer, S., Souil,
E.,
Castelnau-Ptakhine,
L.,
Beldjord,
C.,
Francis,
F.
et
al.
(2004).
Neuroanatomical distribution of ARX in brain and its localisation in GABAergic
neurons. Mol. Brain Res. 122, 35-46. doi:10.1016/j.molbrainres.2003.11.021
Pontecorvi, M., Goding, C. R., Richardson, W. D. and Kessaris, N. (2008).
Expression of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in the developing hypothalamic-pituitary axis. Gene
Expr. Patterns 8, 411-417. doi:10.1016/j.gep.2008.04.006
Ravanelli, A. M. and Appel, B. (2015). Motor neurons and oligodendrocytes arise
from distinct cell lineages by progenitor recruitment. Genes Dev. 29, 2504-2515.
doi:10.1101/gad.271312.115
Ray, P., Torck, A., Quigley, L., Wangzhou, A., Neiman, M., Rao, C., Lam, T., Kim,
J.-Y., Kim, T. H., Zhang, M. Q. et al. (2018). Comparative transcriptome profiling
of the human and mouse dorsal root ganglia: An RNA-seq-based resource for
pain and sensory neuroscience research. Pain 159, 1325-1345. doi:10.1097/j.
pain.0000000000001217
Rayon, T., Stamataki, D., Perez-Carrasco, R., Garcia-Perez, L., Barrington, C.,
Melchionda, M., Exelby, K., Lazaro, J., Tybulewicz, V. L. J., Fisher, E. M. C.
et al. (2020). Species-specific pace of development is associated with differences
in protein stability. Science 369, eaba7667. doi:10.1126/science.aba7667
Richardson, W. D., Smith, H. K., Sun, T., Pringle, N. P., Hall, A. and Woodruff, R.
(2000). Oligodendrocyte lineage and the motor neuron connection. Glia 29, 136-142.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1098-1136(20000115)29:2<136::AID-GLIA6>3.0.CO;2-G
Rosenberg, A. B., Roco, C. M., Muscat, R. A., Kuchina, A., Sample, P., Yao, Z.,
Graybuck, L. T., Peeler, D. J., Mukherjee, S., Chen, W. et al. (2018). Single-cell
profiling of the developing mouse brain and spinal cord with split-pool barcoding.
Science 360, 176-182. doi:10.1126/science.aam8999
Sagner, A. and Briscoe, J. (2019). Establishing neuronal diversity in the spinal
cord: A time and a place. Development (Camb.) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/
dev.182154
Sagner, A., Zhang, I., Watson, T., Lazaro, J., Melchionda, M. and Briscoe, J.
(2020). Temporal patterning of the central nervous system by a shared
transcription factor code. bioRxiv 2020.11.10.376491.
Sharma, N., Flaherty, K., Lezgiyeva, K., Wagner, D. E., Klein, A. M. and Ginty,
D. D. (2020). The emergence of transcriptional identity in somatosensory
neurons. Nature 577, 392-398. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1900-1
Sinclair, A. H., Berta, P., Palmer, M. S., Hawkins, J. R., Griffiths, B. L., Smith,
M. J., Foster, J. W., Frischauf, A.-M., Lovell-Badge, R. and Goodfellow, P. N.
(1990). A gene from the human sex-determining region encodes a protein with
homology to a conserved DNA-binding motif. Nature 346, 240-244. doi:10.1038/
346240a0
Soldatov, R., Kaucka, M., Kastriti, M. E., Petersen, J., Chontorotzea, T.,
Englmaier, L., Akkuratova, N., Yang, Y., Hä ring, M., Dyachuk, V. et al. (2019).
Spatiotemporal structure of cell fate decisions in murine neural crest. Science 364,
eaas9536. doi:10.1126/science.aas9536
Stuart, T., Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Hafemeister, C., Papalexi, E., Mauck, W. M., Hao,
Y., Stoeckius, M., Smibert, P. and Satija, R. (2019). Comprehensive integration of
single-cell data. Cell 177, 1888-1902.e21. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.031
Suzuki, I. K., Gacquer, D., Van Heurck, R., Kumar, D., Wojno, M., Bilheu, A.,
Herpoel, A., Lambert, N., Cheron, J., Polleux, F. et al. (2018). Human-specific
NOTCH2NL genes expand cortical neurogenesis through Delta/Notch regulation.
Cell 173, 1370-1384. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.067
Usoskin, D., Furlan, A., Islam, S., Abdo, H., Lö nnerberg, P., Lou, D., Hjerling-
Leffler, J., Haeggströ m, J., Kharchenko, O., Kharchenko, P. V. et al. (2015).
Unbiased classification of sensory neuron types by large-scale single-cell RNA
sequencing. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 145-153. doi:10.1038/nn.3881
Vallstedt, A., Muhr, J., Pattyn, A., Pierani, A., Mendelsohn, M., Sander, M.,
Jessell, T. M. and Ericson, J. (2001). Different levels of repressor activity assign
redundant and specific roles to Nkx6 genes in motor neuron and interneuron
specification. Neuron 31, 743-755. doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(01)00412-3
Vermeiren, S., Bellefroid, E. J. and Desiderio, S. (2020). Vertebrate sensory
ganglia: common and divergent features of the transcriptional programs
generating their functional specialization. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 8, 1026. doi:10.
3389/fcell.2020.587699
Wu, S., Wu, Y. and Capecchi, M. R. (2006). Motoneurons and oligodendrocytes are
sequentially generated from neural stem cells but do not appear to share common
lineage-restricted progenitors in vivo. Development (Cambridge, England) 133,
581-590. doi:10.1242/dev.02236
Zagorski, M. and Kicheva, A. (2018). Measuring dorsoventral pattern and
morphogen signaling profiles in the growing neural tube. Methods Mol. Biol.
1863, 47-63. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-8772-6_4
Zeisel, A., Hochgerner, H., Lö nnerberg, P., Johnsson, A., Memic, F., van der
Zwan, J., Hä ring, M., Braun, E., Borm, L. E., La Manno, G. et al. (2018).
Molecular architecture of the mouse nervous system. Cell 174, 999-1014.e22.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.06.021
Zhou, Q., Choi, G. and Anderson, D. J. (2001). The bHLH transcription factor Olig2
promotes oligodendrocyte differentiation in collaboration with Nkx2.2. Neuron 31,
791-807. doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(01)00414-7
14
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Development (2021) 148, dev199711. doi:10.1242/dev.199711
DEVELOPMENT

A 
B 
15.0°/. 
6k 
30k 
:iE::> 
VJ 
_810.0°/. 
Q) 
M 20k 
C 4k 
E 
Q) 
CT) ++ -•
]i 
( • 
C ++ +
0 
 
• 
·.;. 
 
g_ 5.0% 
2k 
10k 
0 
0 
0 
0.0% 
CS12 
CS14 
CS17 
CS19 
CS12 
CS14 
CS17 
CS19 
CS12 
CS14 
CS19 
E 30k 
CNS progenitor 
F
:::; 300 
20k 
2. 
a, 
10k 
Mesoderm 
_J
Blood 
0 
Skin 
0 
CS12 
CS14 
CS17 
CS19 
CS12 
CS14 
CS17 CS19 
Other 
CS12 
CS14 
CS17 
CS19 
G 
CS12 
CS14 
CS17 
CS19 
Replicate •
R1 •
R2 •
R3 •
R4 
H 
15k 
Filter stage 
Low quality 
a, 
u 10k 
• Non-neural cells 
(Seurat clusters) 
• CNS neuron 
• CNS progenitor 
5k 
• PNS
a, 
u 
• Non-neural cells 
(Antler) 
Fig. 51. Characterization of the single cell transcriptome dataset. 
(A) Number of genes per cell for each stage. (B) Number of unique molecular identifiers (UMI) per cell for each stage.
(C) Proportion of mitochondria UMI per cell for each stage. (D) Number of cells per replicate in each timepoint. (E)
Number of cells classified per cell type in each stage. (F) Expression of the male-specific gene SRY per embryo. (G)
UMAP of neural cells by timepoint and replicate. (H) Number of cells identified by Cell Ranger for each embryo. Low
quality cells were removed using (A-C). Curated cells were classified with Seurat and Antler.
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.199711: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

Fig. S2. Classification of dorsoventral progenitors and neuronal classes in human and mouse. 
(A, B) Combined bubble plot that depicts the expression of markers used to identify DV domains in human and mouse (A) 
progenitors and (B) neurons. Genes chosen for cell assignment are coloured; grey circles correspond to markers not used 
for the selection of a specific population. Circle size indicates mean scaled gene expression levels.
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.199711: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

A 
PAX? 
B 
NKX6-2 
2.0 
i 
1.5 
2 11 
1.0 11 
:n 
-s. 
cl 
0.5 
0.0 
.illilt. ......... 
0 
  
2.5 
l 
ii; 2.0 
2 
....J 
6 1.5 1-1 
-0 
·u, 
-0 
1 
s: 
 1.0 
0 
0.5 
0.0 
.......... ...... 
0 
3 
1.5 
I
11 
2 
1.0 
..,, 
-0 
cl 
l I
"'
0.5 
0.0 
.illilt. 
0 
.......... 
CS12 
CS14 
CS17 
CS19 
CS12 
CS14 
CS17 
CS19 
D 
2 
• CS12 
• CS14 
(I) 
• CS19 
_J 
.iii 
(I) 
£ll 
:::; 
x
N 
C'1 
I!) 
0 
I!) 
CX) 
0 
N 
N 
X 
X 
X 
x 
x 
x 
N 
N 
1:§ 
 
£ll 
£ll 
£ll 
£ll 
X 
X 
f-
f-
f-
f-
£ll 
£ll 
£ll 
£ll 
£ll 
I 
f-
f-
f-
f-
f-
a. 
Fig. S3. Further characterization of human-specific features of neural progenitors and visceral motor 
neurons. 
(A) Violin plots of PAX? expression in the floor plate (FP), pD (dp1-dp6) and roof plate (RP) at the indicated 
timepoints. (B) Violin plots of NKX6.2 expression in p1, pMN and p3 progenitors. (C) NKX6.2 and NKX6.1 
expression in transverse sections of the mouse and human neural tube at shoulder levels in mouse E9.5, and 
human CS13 and CS15 embryos. Scale bars, 50µm. (D) Violin plots for the expression of the indicated TBX 
genes in visceral motor neurons classified according to the expression of PHOX2B in human color coded by 
timepoint.
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.199711: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

A 
RP 
pD 
pl 
pMN 
p3 
FP 
B 
di 
VO-V2 
MN 
V3 
. . . 
. . 
. . . 
. .
. . . . .
. . .
. . 
. . . 
. . 
. . 
• • • • • • •
• •
• • • • •
• • •
• • • • • 
• •
• • • • •
• • • • • • • •
• • • • • • •  
• • • • • • •
• •
• • • • • • •
• •
• • • • • • •
• •
• • • • • • •
• •
• • • • • • •
• • • 
• • 
• •
• • 
• • 
• • •
• •
• • 
• •
• •
Mean 
Expression 
0.9 
0.6 
0.3 
• • • • • • • 
• •
• • •
• • 
L-,--	


-r 
0.0 
• 
. . . . .
. . . . .
. . .
. . . . . . . 
. . . . . . 
• 
. . . . . . . . 
• • • • 
• •
. .
• • 
• •
• • 
• •
• • 
• • 
• • 
• •
cell proportion 
0 
o 25 
0 50 
0 75 
0 100 
Fig. 54. Expression of primate-specific genes in progenitors and neurons of the human developing 
spinal cord. 
(A, B) Bubble plots that depict the expression of primate specific genes in (A) DV progenitors or (B) neurons. 
The size of the circles indicates the proportion of cells that express the gene per stage and domain, and the 
colour indicates the mean expression levels. pD (dp1-dp6), pl (p0-p2), di (dl1-dl6). 
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.199711: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

MAP2 
S1X1 
STMN2 
POU4F2 
POU4F3 
CACNA1H 
: 
NTRK2 
NEFH 
RET 
FAM19A1 
NTRK3 
PARVB 
Scaled 
, 
expression 
1.00 
.· 
0.75 
0.50 
:• 
0.25 
.... 
0.00 
RUNX3 
P2RX3 
PLXNC1 
SCN10A 
TRPV1 
NTRK1 
GFRA2 
PIEZ02 
SLC17A8 
TH 
1SL1 
1SL2 
B  
PNS progenitor 
PNS neuron 
2100% 
c 
40.0% 
·5
0.. 75% 
Q) 
30.0% 
50% 
<ii 
20.0% 
0.. 
!!2 
25% 
10.0% 
(/) 
0%
0.0% 
CS12 
CS14 
CS17 
CS19 
CS12 
CS14 
CS17 
CS19 
C-LTMR 
Nonpeptidergic nociceptor 
DRG progenitor 
• Sensory neuron progenitor • 
LTMR I • 
Peptidergic nociceptor 
• 
Neural crest progenitor 
• 
LTMR II • 
Proprioceptor 
• 
Myelinted LMTR • 
Unspecialised sensory neuron 
Fig. 55. Further classification of peripheral nervous system cells in the developing human embryo. 
(A) Feature plots of genes selected for the classification. (B) Proportion of peripheral nervous system (PNS) progenitors and
neurons per time point.
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.199711: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

A 
4- - - - -
P-0- - - - -
 
2 
0 
"' 
8'-2 
0 
1§-4 
Q) 
0) 
0 
- Human 
2 
0 
-2 
-4 
-6 
e6 
_ _ _ _ _  
pM_N 
_ _ _ _ _  
4
- - - -
p_3 
_ _ _ _ _  
 
 
+- - -i
- 4 
2 
0 
2 
-2 
0 
-4 
B 
0.75 
0.50 
0.25 
=>o.oo 
"' 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
-E9.5 
-cs12 
ooi:
mn  
/ 
gi 
k=_ 
FP pMN human 
 ouse 
& 
I\) 
Q) 
0.00 
0.25 
0.50 
0. 75 
1.00 
Normalized DV Position 
-E11.5 
0_9 - CS17 
-u 
0.6 
0.3 
=> 0.0 
--PD 
__   "' 
Q) 
'() 
;;: 
Q 
I\) 
oi 1.00..'==========3 
0.75 
0.50 
0.25 
0.00 
0.25 
0.50 
0.75 
1.00 
Normalized DV Position 
Fig. 56. Rate of neurogenesis and domain sizes in the developing spinal cord. 
(A) Ratio of neurons to progenitors per domain across timepoints in mouse and human grouped in broad territories: pD
(dp1-dp6); pl (p0-p2). Vertical bars indicate the range around the mean of proportions per sample. (B) Quantification of the 
mean fluorescence intensity in immunostained sections to determine domain sizes in mouse and human (mouse n= 3 embryos 
per stage, human n=1 embryo per stage using 3 sections).
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.199711: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

===== Reddien2019_Science_RegenerationPreview =====
sciencemag.org  SCIENCE
PHOTO: STEFAN SIEBERT/YASHODARA ABEYKOON/JULIANO LAB AT UC DAVIS
By Peter W. Reddien
T
he ability to regenerate missing body 
parts is a prominent feature of many 
animals. Investigation into the cellu-
lar and molecular basis of regenera-
tion using highly regenerative model 
organisms should identify principles 
that explain how regeneration can occur 
and might clarify why such regenerative 
capacity is limited in humans. Hydra are 
freshwater cnidarians capable of whole-
body regeneration after amputation. On 
page 341 of this issue, Siebert et al. (1) re-
port a cell type transcriptome atlas of all 
major cell types of Hydra, generated by 
single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). 
In another recent study, Aztekin et al. (2) 
used scRNA-seq to study Xenopus tadpole 
tail regeneration and identified a cell that 
regulates regeneration, which they call the 
regeneration-organizing cell (ROC). These 
sequencing approaches provide a wealth of 
molecular data that should enable future 
dissection of regeneration mechanisms.
scRNA-seq is a transformative technology 
that can rapidly identify the transcriptomes 
of thousands of cells. This approach is be-
ing applied to the many unique problems 
of regeneration, including the identity of 
adult progenitor cells that generate new 
tissue and the regulatory mechanisms that 
orchestrate the formation of correctly orga-
nized new adult tissues.
In animals with a high degree of cell turn-
over as well as regenerative ability, such as 
Hydra, scRNA-seq of uninjured animals can 
capture the transcriptomes of all differen-
tiated cell types, the progenitor and transi-
tion states that generate these cells, and the 
constitutively active positional information 
(i.e., the genes that regulate regional tissue 
identity and pattern) guiding the process, 
all in a single animal stage. Such progeni-
tor cells and positional information can also 
be involved in regeneration. This approach 
has been applied to planarians (a type of 
flatworm) (3, 4). Planarians possess a popu-
lation of pluripotent stem cells called neo-
blasts that generate all differentiated cell 
types in tissue turnover and regeneration. 
REGENERATION
The cells of regeneration
Single-cell RNA sequencing identifies cell types with 
central roles in regeneration
PERSPECTIVES
INSIGHTS
314    26 JULY 2019 • VOL 365 ISSUE 6451
Published by AAAS
on March 4, 2021
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 

SCIENCE  sciencemag.org
scRNA-seq defined the genes expressed in 
subsets of neoblasts, including those that 
can be functionally pluripotent (5) and oth-
ers as they transit to differentiation (3–5). 
Planarian positional information is promi-
nently harbored in muscle, and scRNA-seq 
identified genes regionally expressed in 
muscle that are associated with adult tissue 
patterning and regeneration (3, 6).
scRNA-seq can also be applied to stages of 
regeneration after injury. For example, the 
cell type architecture of the transcriptional 
response to wounds in planarians was deter-
mined with scRNA-seq (7). Axolotls (a type 
of salamander) can replace lost limbs after 
injury. scRNA-seq in axolotl limb regenera-
tion revealed that heterogeneous connective 
tissue cells change state toward a more ho-
mogeneous pool of multipotent progenitors 
(8). In zebrafish, scRNA-seq characterized 
transcriptomes for hair cell progenitors (9) 
and was combined with simultaneous cell-
clone tracing to identify transcriptomes for 
lineage-restricted progenitors in fin regen-
eration (10). In mouse digit tip regeneration, 
scRNA-seq identified nerve mesenchymal 
populations that act as progenitors for con-
nective tissues (11). Moreover, the transcrip-
tomes of regulatory cells in vertebrate 
regeneration identified genes that can be 
studied to understand how such cells pro-
mote regrowth. For instance, the epidermis 
that covers an injury, the wound epidermis, 
has an essential role in regeneration and has 
been subjected to scRNA-seq in axolotls (12).
The regenerative feats of Hydra have 
been studied since the 1700s. Hydra cell 
turnover involves two populations of divid-
ing myoepithelial cells (endoderm and ecto-
derm) and interstitial stem cells (ISCs). The 
myoepithelial cells divide in the body col-
umn and displace cells toward the oral and 
aboral ends, where they are shed. The multi-
potent ISCs produce a diversity of cell types, 
including neurons, gland cells, nematocytes 
(stinging cells that typify cnidarians), and 
germ cells (when depleted). Siebert et al. 
sequenced the transcriptomes of ~25,000 
cells from Hydra polyps. In addition to en-
abling investigation of Hydra regeneration, 
this resource, together with recent scRNA-
seq of the cnidarian Nematostella vectensis, 
a sea anemone (13), will enable molecular 
investigation of the fascinating cell biology 
of cnidarians, the comparison of gene roles 
across organisms, and study of the evolu-
tion of cell types and cell ensembles.
By arranging Hydra epithelial cells on the 
oral-aboral axis according to gene expres-
sion on a predicted trajectory, Siebert et al. 
explored constitutive regional gene expres-
sion that might constitute adult positional 
information. This approach identified spa-
tially regulated gene expression patterns 
that matched predictions from prior work 
and for numerous previously unstudied Hy-
dra genes. These genes, including potential 
Wnt, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), 
and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) pathway 
regulators, are good candidates to regulate 
body plan maintenance and regeneration.
Siebert et al. identified a set of cells 
largely defined by the absence of expres-
sion of differentiation markers and pro-
posed that these represent ISCs. ISCs are 
important for understanding Hydra regen-
eration and the evolution of regeneration. 
One ISC marker gene (Hy-icell1) and a gene 
activated in both putative transition states 
from ISCs (HvSoxC) could enable future 
visualization and isolation of these cell 
states for characterizing the molecular pro-
cesses that underlie state transitions in mul-
tipotent regenerative progenitors. Analyses 
indicated that nematocyte progenitors and 
a shared neuronal and gland cell progenitor 
are produced from ISCs. The interpretation 
that gland cells and neurons share a com-
mon transitional cell state was unexpected. 
The proposed branched-tree trajectory for 
ISC-derived cell types is potentially impor-
tant for understanding the mechanisms of 
multipotency restriction during differen-
tiation and for understanding the origins of 
different cnidarian cell types. One challenge 
in determining cell lineage from trajectory 
analyses using transcriptomes is that differ-
ent conclusions can be reached depending 
on where the trajectory is inferred to start. 
Siebert et al. supported their model by vali-
dating that a marker of the candidate com-
mon neuron/gland progenitor (Myb) was 
coexpressed with both neuronal and gland 
markers. This model can be further tested 
using cell-tracking tools and with gene 
function investigations.
Large-scale cell transcriptome studies 
harbor myriad fascinating features. For in-
stance, Hydra gland cells, like epithelial 
cells, are proposed to undergo position-
dependent gene expression changes as they 
transit orally or aborally during cell turnover 
and to transdifferentiate (e.g., from zymogen 
to granular mucous gland cells) (14). In ac-
cordance with this model, position-depen-
dent gene expression changes in gland cells 
were predicted from trajectory analyses. 
Interestingly, some changes included genes 
involved in oral-aboral axis patterning (e.g., 
Wnt1, Wnt3), raising the question of whether 
gland cells contribute to axis pattern.
The African clawed frog Xenopus laevis 
is a classic model of embryology and pre-
sents an intriguing case of regeneration 
that shows stage specificity. Tadpole tails 
can regenerate in regeneration-competent 
developmental stages, but not in a regener-
ation-incompetent stage (15). Aztekin et al. 
used these stages and scRNA-seq to identify 
cells with a regulatory role in promoting 
regeneration.
An epidermal cell, the ROC, was found to 
exist at regeneration-competent tail wounds 
but not at regeneration-incompetent ones. 
ROCs also exist at the midline edge of unin-
jured tadpole tails. Existing tail ROCs spread 
over the wound after injury, as opposed to 
this cell state being induced in the wound 
epidermis after injury. Genetic ablation of 
ROCs blocked regeneration, supporting a 
model in which ROCs promote regeneration.
The identity and transcriptome of ROCs 
raise many questions and opportunities for 
future work. The localization and function 
of ROCs during blastema growth, after the 
initial 24 hours of wound repair, is not well 
resolved and could be a target of future 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Whitehead Institute, and 
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Email: reddien@wi.mit.edu
 Hydra is a model of tissue 
regeneration. The image 
shows the expression of two 
genes (red and green) in 
single cells; their expression 
overlaps appear in orange. 
DNA is shown in blue. 
26 JULY 2019 • VOL 365 ISSUE 6451    315
Published by AAAS
on March 4, 2021
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 

INSIGHTS  |  PERSPECTIVES
sciencemag.org  SCIENCE
study. The ROC transcriptome should en-
able exploration of the roles for the varied 
signaling molecules expressed in these cells 
in regeneration-initiating events. ROCs have 
molecular similarity to the apical ectoder-
mal ridge (AER) that promotes limb growth 
in many organisms, and are present early in 
development at the tail bud tip, raising the 
question of whether a role for these cells in 
promoting tail development (analogous to 
the AER) is linked to their role in regenera-
tion. Comparing the roles of ROCs versus 
other cells in regulating specific regenera-
tive events will also be important. Finally, it 
will be important to explore how the roles 
of ROCs compare to the molecular and cel-
lular roles of the wound epidermis in adult 
vertebrate appendage regeneration.
ROCs exist in the uninjured epidermis 
of tadpoles at the regeneration-incompe-
tent stage. However, their absence from 
wounds 24 hours after amputation at this 
stage raises the possibility that failed ROC 
wound coverage explains failed regenera-
tion. Additional work will be important for 
testing this possibility. Determining what 
explains the difference in the behavior of 
ROCs between regeneration-competent 
and -incompetent stages is an interesting 
direction. Regeneration ability is naturally 
regained in tadpole tails after a refractory 
period (15), and it will also be of interest to 
examine ROCs at this later stage.
scRNA-seq can readily be applied to 
traditional model systems as well as un-
derstudied organisms with important and 
fascinating biology. The resources gen-
erated can fuel molecular inquiry into a 
vast array of questions. The cells of regen-
eration in many organisms will continue 
to be profiled with scRNA-seq, opening the 
door to a myriad of molecular and cellular 
experiments aimed at revealing the logic 
of regeneration.  j
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1.  S. Siebert et al., Science 365, eaav9314 (2019).
 2.  C. Aztekin et al., Science 364, 653 (2019).  
 3.  C. T. Fincher, O. Wurtzel, T. de Hoog, K. M. Kravarik,
P.  W. Reddien, Science 360, eaaq1736 (2018). 
 4.  M. Plass et al., Science 360, eaaq1723 (2018). 
 5.  A. Zeng et al., Cell 173, 1593 (2018).  
 6.  M. L. Scimone, L. E. Cote, T. Rogers, P. W. Reddien,  eLife 5, 
e12845 (2016).  
 7.  O. Wurtzel et al., Dev. Cell 35, 632 (2015).  
 8.  T. Gerber et al., Science 362, eaaq0681 (2018).
 9.  M. E. Lush et al., eLife 8, e44431 (2019).  
 10.  A. Alemany, M. Florescu, C. S. Baron, J. Peterson-Maduro, 
A. van Oudenaarden, Nature 556, 108 (2018).  
 11.  M. J. Carr et al., Cell Stem Cell 24, 240 (2019).  
 12.  N. D. Leigh et al., Nat. Commun. 9, 5153 (2018).  
 13.  A. Sebé-Pedrós et al., Cell 173, 1520 (2018).  
 14.  S. Siebert, F. Anton-Erxleben, T. C. Bosch, Dev. Biol. 313, 13 
(2008).  
 15.  C. W. Beck, B. Christen, J. M. Slack, Dev. Cell 5, 429 (2003). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank C. Fincher, C. McMann, and A. Raz for helpful comments.
10.1126/science.aay3660
IMMUNOLOGY
Immune control of the 
microbiota prevents obesity
Specialized T cells regulate the composition of the intestinal 
microbiota, with important consequences for obesity
By Yuhao Wang1 and Lora V. Hooper1,2
O
besity is a complex disease that is 
influenced by a mixture of genetic, 
behavioral, and environmental vari-
ables, such as the ability to metabo-
lize nutrients, how much food is 
eaten, and diet composition. Adding 
to the complexity are the diverse commu-
nities of intestinal bacteria—known as the 
microbiota—that can influence whether 
obesity develops or not. But which species 
of gut bacteria predispose to obesity and 
which protect against it? And how do these 
bacteria become established in the gut? On 
page 340 of this issue, Petersen et al. (1) 
show that the immune system promotes 
gut colonization by bacteria that protect 
against obesity. The findings reveal how 
defective immune control of the microbiota 
can provoke metabolic disease.
The gut microbiota helps humans digest 
food by breaking down complex carbohy-
drates that come from plants. But the meta-
bolic functions of the microbiota go beyond 
simple digestion. Microbiologically sterile 
(germ-free) mice accumulate less body fat 
than conventionally reared mice that have 
a microbiota, indicating that the micro-
biota promotes the storage of body fat (2, 
3). Moreover, the microbiota composition is 
starkly different when comparing lean and 
obese mice (4), and notably, lean and obese 
humans (5). But are these differences in mi-
crobiota composition truly a cause of lean-
ness or obesity?
Remarkably, metabolic phenotypes can 
be transmitted through the microbiota, 
similar to an infectious disease. When the 
fecal microbiota from an obese mouse or 
human is transplanted into a germ-free 
mouse, the recipient mouse eventually 
becomes obese (6, 7). Similarly, the fecal 
microbiota from an underweight mouse 
or human transplanted into a germ-free 
mouse will cause that mouse to become 
underweight (6, 7). These findings show 
that different assemblages of bacteria can 
indeed predispose to obesity or leanness, 
indicating a cause-and-effect relationship 
between microbiota composition and body 
composition.
Given that differences in microbial com-
munities can predispose to leanness or 
obesity, what determines the types of bac-
teria that inhabit the gut? Several studies, 
including that of Petersen et al., indicate 
that the immune system is a key factor. 
Indeed, the intestines of both humans and 
mice are full of immune cells, including T 
and B cells, agents of the adaptive immune 
system that confer long-term, specific im-
munity to microorganisms. In particular, 
intestinal B cells produce large quantities 
of immunoglobulin A (IgA) antibodies. IgA 
antibodies are secreted into the gut lumen 
where they stick to the surfaces of gut bac-
teria, and through mechanisms that are 
not yet fully understood, help to determine 
which bacteria colonize the gut and which 
are excluded (8).
Petersen et al. discovered that immune 
cells that promote IgA production also 
protect mice from obesity (see the figure). 
T follicular helper (TFH) cells are special-
ized T cells that reside in lymphoid fol-
licles–specialized regions within lymph 
nodes that contain developing B cells. In 
the follicles, TFH cells directly interact with 
B cells and induce genetic changes, known 
as class-switching, which prompt the B cells 
to produce IgA. This same research group 
previously discovered that a signaling path-
way, involving the myeloid differentiation 
primary response protein 88 (MyD88), was 
needed for this “helper” function of TFH 
cells (9). When the Myd88 gene was deleted 
in mouse T cells, TFH cells failed to develop 
properly and very little gut IgA was pro-
duced. Consequently, the gut microbiotas of 
these T-Myd88−/− mice were quite different 
from those of wild-type mice (9).
Petersen et al. watched the T-Myd88−/− 
mice age and in doing so, acquired some 
interesting metabolic insights. Although ag-
ing wild-type mice remained lean, the aging 
T-Myd88−/− mice became obese. Further, the 
researchers could accelerate the develop-
ment of obesity if they fed mice a high-fat, 
1Department of Immunology, The University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. 
2The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. 
Email: lora.hooper@utsouthwestern.edu
316    26 JULY 2019 • VOL 365 ISSUE 6451
Published by AAAS
on March 4, 2021
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 

The cells of regeneration
Peter W. Reddien
DOI: 10.1126/science.aay3660
 (6451), 314-316.
365
Science 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/365/6451/314
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/365/6451/eaav9314.full
REFERENCES
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/365/6451/314#BIBL
This article cites 15 articles, 5 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title 
(print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science 
Copyright © 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science
on March 4, 2021
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from

===== Redmond2019_CellRep_EC+NSC =====
Article
Development of Ependymal and Postnatal Neural
Stem Cells and Their Origin from a Common
Embryonic Progenitor
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Numbers of cells in the lateral ventricle wall decrease despite
ventricle growth
d Ependymal cells expand apical surface area to accommodate
larger ventricle size
d Apical ependymal expansion and clustering of stem cells
results in pinwheel formation
d Ependymal and adult neural stem cells share common
embryonic progenitors
Authors
Stephanie A. Redmond,
Marı´a Figueres-On˜ ate,
Kirsten Obernier, ...,
Laura Lo´ pez-Mascaraque,
Luis C. Fuentealba, Arturo Alvarez-Buylla
Correspondence
abuylla@stemcell.ucsf.edu
In Brief
Redmond et al. examine the
transformation of the embryonic
ventricular zone into the largest germinal
niche of the adult rodent forebrain. They
trace the origin of ependymal and neural
stem cells to a common embryonic
progenitor and follow the postnatal apical
maturation that results in this niche’s
characteristic pinwheels.
Redmond et al., 2019, Cell Reports 27, 429–441
April 9, 2019 ª 2019
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.01.088

Cell Reports
Article
Development of Ependymal and Postnatal
Neural Stem Cells and Their Origin
from a Common Embryonic Progenitor
Stephanie A. Redmond,1 Marı´a Figueres-On˜ ate,2,4 Kirsten Obernier,1,3 Marcos Assis Nascimento,1 Jose I. Parraguez,1
Laura Lo´ pez-Mascaraque,2 Luis C. Fuentealba,1,5 and Arturo Alvarez-Buylla1,6,*
1Department of Neurological Surgery and the Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
2Instituto Cajal-CSIC, 28002 Madrid, Spain
3Present address: Fountain Therapeutics, Inc., San Francisco, CA 94107, USA
4Present address: Max Planck Research Unit for Neurogenetics, 60438 Frankfurt, Germany
5Present address: Neurona Therapeutics, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA
6Lead Contact
*Correspondence: abuylla@stemcell.ucsf.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.01.088
SUMMARY
The adult mouse brain contains an extensive neuro-
genic niche in the lateral walls of the lateral ventricles.
This epithelium, which has a unique pinwheel organi-
zation, contains multiciliated ependymal (E1) cells
and neural stem cells (B1). This postnatal germinal
epithelium develops from the embryonic ventricular
zone, but the lineage relationship between E1 and
B1 cells remains unknown. Distinct subpopulations
of radial glia (RG) cells in late embryonic and early
postnatal development either expand their apical
domain >11-fold to form E1 cells or retain small api-
cal domains that coalesce into the centers of pin-
wheels to form B1 cells. Using independent methods
of lineage tracing, we show that individual RG cells
can give rise to clones containing E1 and B1 cells.
This study reveals key developmental steps in the
formation of the postnatal germinal niche and the
shared cellular origin of E1 and B1 cells.
INTRODUCTION
Ependymal cells (E1 cells) are postmitotic epithelial cells in the
walls of the brain ventricles (Spassky et al., 2005). A key func-
tion of E1 cells is the propulsion of cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF)
along the ventricular system through the coordinated beating
of their cilia (Sawamoto et al., 2006; Del Bigio, 2010). E1 cells
are part of the neurogenic niche in the adult ventricular-subven-
tricular zone (V-SVZ) of the lateral ventricles. This germinal ven-
tricular wall contains adult neural stem cells (NSCs); a subpop-
ulation
of
glial
ﬁbrillary
acidic
protein
(GFAP)-expressing
astrocytes known as B1 cells that function as primary progen-
itors of neurons and oligodendrocytes (Doetsch et al., 1999;
Menn et al., 2006; Mirzadeh et al., 2008; Ortega et al., 2013;
Tong et al., 2015). From their birth in the embryo until the
time when they produce olfactory bulb (OB) interneurons later
in life, B1 cells remain largely quiescent (Fuentealba et al.,
2015; Furutachi et al., 2015). The apical domains of B1 cells
share the surface of the ventricular wall with E1 cells. Both
cell types are organized into polarized structures called pin-
wheels, where the small apical endings of B1 cells form the
center of pinwheels and are surrounded by a rosette of ependy-
mal cells with large apical surfaces (Mirzadeh et al., 2008;
Kokovay et al., 2012; Hu et al., 2017). This organization is
unique to regions of the ventricular walls where neurogenesis
continues throughout adulthood.
In the embryonic brain, the walls of the lateral ventricles are
composed of a pseudostratiﬁed ventricular zone (VZ). This
epithelium transforms into a mixed epithelium in the adult that
in mouse includes the cuboidal E1 cells and pseudostratiﬁed
B1 cells. It has been proposed that the adult V-SVZ niche forms
by the progressive transformation of the embryonic VZ (Tramon-
tin et al., 2003), but the cellular dynamics underlying this transfor-
mation are poorly understood. It has been shown that radial glial
(RG) cells, the NSCs during embryogenesis, give rise to B1
cells and to multiciliated E1 cells (Merkle et al., 2004, 2007;
Spassky et al., 2005). However, it remains unknown whether
single RG cells have the potential to give rise to both B1 and
E1 cells or whether distinct RG populations generate exclusively
B1 or E1 cells. Recent ﬁndings suggest that mouse RG cells
that divide around embryonic day 15.5 (E15.5) generate B1 cells;
a subpopulation of these NSCs divide symmetrically to self-
renew in postnatal life (Fuentealba et al., 2015; Obernier et al.,
2018). Interestingly, the lineages for postnatal and embryonic
NSCs also separate around the same time (E15.5) (Fuentealba
et al., 2015). It is intriguing that the time when RG cells divide
to become prospective postnatal B1 cells closely matches the
time when E1 cells are born (Spassky et al., 2005). However,
the lineage relationship between E1 and B1 cells remains
unknown.
Here, we investigated how the lateral wall of the lateral ven-
tricles transitions from an embryonic VZ into the adult V-SVZ,
how E1 and B1 cells acquire their unique apical domains and
marker expression, and how these cells become organized
into pinwheels. Given the similar times of birth of B1 and E1
Cell Reports 27, 429–441, April 9, 2019 ª 2019
429
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

cells in the embryo, we also ask whether E1 and B1 are gener-
ated from single RG progenitors. This work reveals the shared
cellular origins and maturation of E1 and B1 cells, two cells
with key functions for brain homeostasis and persistent
neurogenesis.
RESULTS
Postnatal Growth of the Lateral Walls Occurs Despite
Net Loss of Epithelial Cells
How the epithelial cells of the brain lateral ventricles contribute to
the postnatal growth of its walls remains unknown. The principal
cell populations that inhabit the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle,
E1 and B1 cells, are postmitotic (E1 cells) or largely quiescent (B1
cells) after they are speciﬁed in mid-fetal development (Spassky
et al., 2005; Fuentealba et al., 2015; Furutachi et al., 2015). We
therefore hypothesized that the apical domain of VZ cells must
grow to explain the expansion of this wall.
We measured the total area of the lateral wall of the lateral
ventricle from embryonic and postnatal stages by tracing whole
mounts immunostained for b-catenin, which labels the lateral
membranes of ventricular epithelial cells (Figure 1A). The area
containing brightly stained b-catenin+ apical surfaces was
considered the lateral wall and was distinct from the surrounding
tissue that was largely b-catenin-negative (Figures 1B and 1C).
We found that the surface area of the lateral wall of the lateral
ventricle grew from an average of 3.19 mm2 (n = 3; SD,
0.50 mm2) to 5.97 mm2 (n = 3; SD, 0.50 mm2) from E17.5 to post-
natal day 15 (P15) (p = 0.000016, one-way ANOVA with Tukey
honest signiﬁcant difference [HSD] correction for multiple com-
parisons; see Table 1 for statistics details) but did not signiﬁ-
cantly change in size between P15 and P40 (n = 4; mean,
6.58 mm2; SD, 0.40 mm2; p = 0.51). Because of the inherent vari-
ability in microscope-assisted dissections of whole mounts, we
also prepared serial frontal sections of mouse brains and recon-
structed the lateral wall from cross-sections (Figures 1D and 1E).
A similar growth pattern was observed by this serial section anal-
ysis (Figure 1E).
We next measured the apical surface areas of cells delineated
by b-catenin staining (Figure 1F). We found that the average api-
cal surface area of ventricular epithelial cells increased signiﬁ-
cantly between E17.5 (27.84 mm2; SD, 4.51 mm2; n = 3) and
P15 (110.26 mm2; SD, 16.00 mm2; n = 3; 3.96-fold change;
p = 0.000029) (Figure 1F).
Next, we determined how the number of apical proﬁles in the
lateral wall changes over time using systematic random sam-
pling-based stereology to estimate the total population of cells
(Figure 1G). We found that the lateral wall had an average of
117,148 cells at E17.5 (n = 3; SD, 14,535.15). Interestingly, this
number began to decrease directly after birth and declined
by nearly 44% at P15 (65,879 cells; SD, 1,804.51; n = 3;
p = 0.00056) (Figure 1G). This loss of cells in the walls of the
lateral ventricles is likely due to the symmetric consumption of
B1 cells as they produce neurons destined for the OB (Obernier
et al., 2018). The growth of the lateral wall during this time of cell
loss is explained by the nearly 4-fold increase in the average api-
cal surface size of ventricular epithelial cells (E17.5 to P15; see
above) (Figure 1F). E1 cells have very large apical domain sizes
compared to B1 cells (Mirzadeh et al., 2008; Figure 2A; see
below), and the population of B1 cells declines after birth
(Obernier et al., 2018). Thus, we infer that the postnatal growth
of the ventricles is overwhelmingly mediated by the expansion
of E1 cells.
Maturation of E1 and B1 Cells and the Formation of
Pinwheels
We next analyzed how apical domain size correlated with the
expression of E1 and B1 cell-speciﬁc markers over perinatal
and postnatal development (Figure 2). The apical domain of
mature B1 cells has been shown to be positive for vascular cell
adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM1) (Kokovay et al., 2012) and was
also recently described in a subset of embryonic RG cells (Hu
et al., 2017). In contrast, mature E1 cells do not express
VCAM1 but are positive for the forkhead transcription factor J1
(FoxJ1), which is also required for ependymal cell differentiation
(Jacquet et al., 2009).
Whole mounts were dissected and immunostained for cell-
type-speciﬁc proteins and b-catenin to analyze the molecular
differentiation of ventricular epithelial cells over time. We
analyzed the molecular marker expression and apical surface
sizes of 153–888 ventricular epithelial cells per time point (Fig-
ure 2A). In agreement with previous ﬁndings, we found that
VCAM1 was expressed in the apical domain of many embryonic
VZ cells (Figure 2A; Hu et al., 2017). During postnatal develop-
ment, VCAM1 expression decreased in cells that continued to
expand their apical domains (Figures 2A–2C). By P5, the majority
of cells with large apical domains were negative for VCAM1,
while cells that maintained VCAM1 expression from P5 onward
had smaller apical domains (Figure 2A). These results suggest
that RG cells that become either E1 or B1 cells express
VCAM1 around the time of birth, but E1 cells rapidly downregu-
late the expression of VCAM1 while B1 cells maintain VCAM1
expression.
Given the expression pattern of VCAM1 in the majority of RG
cells shortly before birth and the lack of VCAM1 protein in
mature E1 cells, we wanted to understand the relationship be-
tween RG VCAM1 expression and ependymal cell differentia-
tion. To follow RG transformation into E1 cells, we determined
the expression pattern of the E1 cell marker FoxJ1 in cells
with increasing apical domain size (Figures 2A and 2D–2F).
We subdivided the lateral wall into four quadrants based on
anterior-posterior and dorsal-ventral axes (Mirzadeh et al.,
2008) to determine whether there was a spatiotemporal pattern
of E1 cell differentiation. We did not detect FoxJ1 expression in
whole-mount preparations of the lateral wall before E17.5 (data
not shown). At E17.5, we found FoxJ1+ cells in the lateral wall,
consistent with the previously reported wave of ependymal
cell differentiation (Spassky et al., 2005) (Figure 2A). By P0,
the density of FoxJ1+ cells in the P-V region had increased
and FoxJ1+ cells were also detected in the posterior-dorsal
(P-D) and anterior-dorsal (A-D) regions (Figure 2D). At P2,
FoxJ1+ cells were detected in all regions of the lateral wall (Fig-
ure 2E). At P5, the expression of FoxJ1 was clearly correlated
with larger apical domains, consistent with E1 cell differentiation
(Figure 2F). Interestingly, at P0, P2, and P5, we detected
many FoxJ1+ cells that expressed VCAM1 (Figures 2A, 2B,
430
Cell Reports 27, 429–441, April 9, 2019

and 2D–2F). Moreover, we observed VCAM1+ cells that con-
tained g-tubulin+ deuterosomes, organelles associated with
the formation of basal bodies in multiciliated cells and the differ-
entiation of E1 cells (Figure 2C) (Spassky et al., 2005; Klos
Dehring et al., 2013; Al Jord et al., 2014). This suggests that
E1-producing RG progressively acquire E1 identity while
VCAM1 continues to be present. However, this transitional
stage of differentiation was conﬁned to a short period of time.
Double-labeled VCAM1+/FoxJ1+ cells were rare in the lateral
wall after P5 (Figure 2A).
Figure 1. Development of the Lateral Wall of
the Lateral Ventricle
(A) Confocal images taken at the surface of whole
mounts of the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle at
different ages. In red, b-catenin delineates the
apical proﬁles of ventricular epithelial cells.
(B) Camera lucida drawings of whole mounts of the
lateral ventricular wall illustrate the increases in the
size of the lateral wall over postnatal development.
(C) Area of the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle,
measuredfromwhole-mount preparationscollected
at different ages of development.
(D) Three-dimensional reconstruction of a P5
lateral wall measured from serial frontal cross-
sections.
(E) Lateral wall areas measured by 3D recon-
struction of frontal sections at progressive stages
of development.
(F)
Mean
apical
surface
sizes
of
ventricular
epithelial cells.
(G) Number of ventricular epithelial cells per lateral
wall at different ages.
Each point represents one quantiﬁed whole mount
from one brain hemisphere, plotted with mean
(dash) and SD (error bars). Between 237 and 538
cells per whole mount were analyzed across 200
sampling sites in (F) and (G) (totaling 939–2,004
cells/age; see STAR Methods). One-way ANOVA
was used in (C) and (E)–(G) with Tukey HSD
correction for multiple comparison, where p < 0.05
was considered signiﬁcant (see Table 1 for all
p values and summary of statistical tests). Hori-
zontal lines above graphs indicate unidirectional
signiﬁcant differences between groups; groups
located under a tick plus horizontal bar are
signiﬁcantly different than the groups indicated by
a tick mark, with a p value < 0.05 (*), 0.01 (**),
0.001 (***), or 0.0001 (****). If groups are connected
by only tick marks (no horizontal bars in the
comparison), the signiﬁcance relationship is bidi-
rectional. Example: in (C), E17.5 or P0 are signiﬁ-
cantly different than P5, P15, P21, and P40, with
p < 0.01, but P21 is not necessarily signiﬁcantly
different than P40. Scale bar: 10 mm.
As ventricular epithelial cells structur-
ally and molecularly differentiated, we
also observed the emergence of pinwheel
structures. Beginning at P5, pinwheels
could be observed in the P-V region
of
the
lateral
wall
but
were
absent
from the other three regions (Figure 3A).
Within the pinwheels, the majority of cells with smaller apical do-
mains expressed VCAM1, while the cells with larger apical do-
mains expressed FoxJ1. At P7, well-deﬁned pinwheels could
also be seen in the P-D V-SVZ (Figure 3B, top row). We did not
observe clear pinwheel structures in the anterior-dorsal (A-D)
or anterior-ventral (A-V) regions at P7, although FoxJ1+ cells
with large apical domains and numerous VCAM1+ cells with
small apical domains were present (Figure 3B, bottom row). After
P10, pinwheels became evident in A-V and A-D regions
(Figure 3C).
Cell Reports 27, 429–441, April 9, 2019
431

Table 1. Summary of Statistics Applied to Data Presented in Figure 1
One-Way ANOVA
Tukey HSD Adjusted p Values, 95% Conﬁdence Interval
Figure
Experiment
Degrees of
Freedom,
Between
Degrees of
Freedom,
Within
F Statistic
p Value
Age
E17.5
P0
P5
P15
P21
P40
1C
traced whole-
mount area
5
16
41.59
1.30E-08*
E17.5
P0
0.8462807
P5
0.0042380*
0.0001550*
P15
0.0000161*
0.0000011*
0.0132359*
P21
0.0000840*
0.0000055*
0.1021914
0.9248499
P40
0.0000005*
0.0000000*
0.0001395*
0.5127735
0.1110083
1E
serial
reconstruction
area
4
14
29.80
1.03E-06*
P0
NA
P5
NA
0.3403408
P15
NA
0.0009096*
0.0198807*
P21
NA
0.0000081*
0.0000746*
0.0657414
P40
NA
0.0000059*
0.0000430*
0.0146639*
0.7350948
1F
average apical
surface size
5
16
24.02
6.54E-07*
E17.5
P0
0.9997739
P5
0.1017804
0.0360687*
P15
0.0000287*
0.0000081*
0.0011026*
P21
0.0000804*
0.0000229*
0.0040271*
0.9903036
P40
0.0003412*
0.0000859*
0.0299407*
0.4516533
0.8103080
1G
total cell
number
5
16
14.10
2.21E-05*
E17.5
P0
0.9904301
P5
0.1078104
0.2191231
P15
0.0005639*
0.0008395*
0.0385908*
P21
0.0003220*
0.0004581*
0.0202644*
0.9996279
P40
0.0015663*
0.0024889*
0.1484919
0.9385329
0.8183208
Asterisk (*) indicates p < 0.05.
432
Cell Reports 27, 429–441, April 9, 2019

Figure 2. Development of Marker Expression in Ventricular Epithelial Cells within Four Quadrants of the Lateral Wall of the Lateral Ventricle
(A) Quantiﬁcation of the apical domain areas from all four quadrants during development. Cells expressing the marker proteins FoxJ1 (E1 cells) and VCAM1 (adult
B1 cells) are color-coded as follows: FoxJ1+/VCAM1, red; FoxJ1/VCAM1+, green; FoxJ1+/VCAM1+, yellow; and FoxJ1/VCAM1, black. Note that the apical
surface sizes of FoxJ1+/VCAM1 cells segregate from FoxJ1/VCAM1+ cells within the ﬁrst postnatal week.
(B) Lateral-wall whole mounts from P2 mice immunostained for b-catenin (red), VCAM1 (green), and FoxJ1 (white) show apical domains of cells that are VCAM1+/
FoxJ1+ (arrows) or VCAM1-/FoxJ1+ (arrowheads).
(C) Lateral-wall whole mounts from P2 mice immunostained for b-catenin (red), VCAM1 (green), and gamma-tubulin (white) show apical domains of cells that are
VCAM1+ with one basal body (arrowhead), deuterosomes (double arrowhead), and VCAM1 with multiple basal bodies (arrow).
(D–F) Quantiﬁcation of apical domain sizes of by region at progressive perinatal ages (D, P0; E, P2; and F, P5), color-coded by marker expression (see A). Below
each graph are examples of images taken from the whole-mount quadrants indicated by the subscripts i–iii. Numbers of cells plotted are as follows: (A) 888
(E17.5), 572 (P0), 562 (P0), 346 (P5), 227 (P10), 153 (P15), and 171 (P21).
(D) 173 (A-D), 213 (A-V), 115 (P-D), and 71 (P-V).
(E) 162 (A-D), 173 (A-V), 102 (P-D), and 125 (P-V).
(F) 51 (A-D), 136 (A-V), 37 (P-D), and 122 (P-V).
A-D, anterior-dorsal; A-V, anterior-ventral; P-D, posterior-dorsal; P-V, posterior-ventral. See Mirzadeh et al. (2008). Scale bars: 10 mm.
Cell Reports 27, 429–441, April 9, 2019
433

Taken together, these data suggest that the formation of
pinwheels is associated with the enlargement of RG apical do-
mains as they differentiate into E1 cells. During RG differentia-
tion, we found that VCAM1 was transiently expressed in nearly
all V-SVZ cells while apical domains expanded (Figure 2).
VCAM1 expression was maintained as cells became B1 cells
(Figures 2D–2F), but was downregulated as FoxJ1 expression
increased in young E1 cells that continued their apical expansion
(Figures 2A and 2D–2F).
Do Ependymal Cells and Postnatal NSCs Share a
Common Origin?
Embryonic VZ RG cells give rise to both B1 and E1 cells (Merkle
et al., 2004, 2007; Spassky et al., 2005). Intriguingly, the time of
birth of E1 cells closely matches the time when RG cells give
rise to B1 cells (Spassky et al., 2005; Fuentealba et al., 2015;
Furutachi et al., 2015). These observations suggest that B1
and E1 cells could share a common cell of origin in the embry-
onic VZ.
Figure 3. Emergence of Pinwheels during Early Postnatal Development
Confocal images were taken at the surface of whole mounts of the lateral wall of the LV.
(A) At P5, pinwheels could be observed in the P-V region of the lateral wall (white outline in merged image). Cells with a smaller apical domain expressed VCAM1,
while the cells with a larger apical domains expressed FoxJ1.
(B) At P7, pinwheels structures could be identiﬁed in dorsal (P-D) regions of the V-SVZ (white outline in merged image; top row). Clear pinwheel structures were not
observed in the A-V region (bottom row) or A-D region (data not shown).
(C) By P10, pinwheels had also emerged in the anterior regions of the lateral wall: A-D, white outline in merged image, top row; A-V, data not shown. Scale
bars: 20 mm.
434
Cell Reports 27, 429–441, April 9, 2019

To study thelineage of single RG cells, we have previously used
a library of retroviruses (QmGFP-OL), each encoding a unique 24-
base pair DNA sequence, or ‘‘barcode’’ (Cepko et al., 1995, 1998;
Golden et al., 1995; Fuentealba et al., 2015). We analyzed the bar-
code data from this study and found one E1 cell that shared the
same barcode as a group 3 granule cells in the OB (clone
Q056R-C3) from an animal injected with the retroviral library at
E13.5. Because E1 cells do not divide in the adult brain (Spassky
et al., 2005), we infer that the adult E1 cell was clonally related to a
B1 cell that generated the OB neurons. We therefore laser-micro-
dissected and analyzed additional OB neurons and ependymal
cells from P34 (n = 5) or P56 (n = 5) mice that received intraventric-
ular QmGFP-OL injections at E12.5, E13.5, or E15.5, and found
ﬁve additional E1 cells that shared a barcode with OB neurons
(for experimental details, see Fuentealba et al., 2015). These ob-
servations suggested that E1 cells are lineage related to B1 cells,
which generate OB interneurons postnatally. However, since it is
not possible to laser-microdissect neighboring E1 and B1 cells
separately in the walls of lateral ventricles, with this lineage-
tracing method we could not directly observe possible E1-B1
cells clones in the V-SVZ.
A Subpopulation of RG Gives Rise to E1 Cells and B1
Cells
In order to directly observe clonal relationships among cells in
the ventricular epithelium of the adult brain, we used the UbC-
StarTrack lineage-tracing method (Figure 4) (Figueres-On˜ ate
et al., 2016). This clonal analysis is based on the electroporation
of 12 transposon constructs (encoding six ﬂuorophores with
either nuclear or cytoplasmic localization), as well as plasmids
encoding hyperactive piggyBac transposase (hyPBase) and
tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase (CreERT2). Following hy-
PBase-mediated transposition, ﬂuorophores are randomly inte-
grated into the cell genome. Tamoxifen (Tmx) induces Cre-medi-
ated recombination at loxP sites of non-integrated constructs,
removes terminal repeat sequences required for genomic inte-
gration, and halts additional transpositions (Figure 4A). This re-
sults in the continuous expression of a heritable color code
with very high complexity (16 3 106 possible combinations).
We electroporated VZ cells at E14.5, injected Tmx at P1 to halt
further integration events, and analyzed whole mounts at P60
(Figure 4B). UbC-StarTrack-labeled cells were present along
the entire surface of the whole mount (Figure 4C). Clonal relation-
ships among labeled cells on the lateral wall of the lateral
ventricle were determined by analyzing the combination of the
six different ﬂuorescent markers (analyzed in separate ﬂuores-
cent channels) for each individual labeled cell. Thus, speciﬁc
color codes were generated by the presence or absence of the
six ﬂuorophores in the cytoplasm and/or nucleus of each cell
(Figures 4C–4I). B1 cells were identiﬁed by their morphology
and E1 cell identity was conﬁrmed by FoxJ1 staining (Figures
4D–4F, 4H, and 4I, asterisks). Consistent with the above results,
we found 8 E1-B1 cell pairs (Figures 4D–4F and 4I [lower clone]),
20 pairs of E1-E1 cells (Figures 4H and 4I [upper clone]), and 125
single E1 cells (Figure 4J). We also observed six other StarTrack
clones containing more than two cells, indicating additional divi-
sions (data not shown): three consisted of E1 cells only, and
three had B1 and E1 cells.
The barcode and StarTrack lineage-tracing experiments sug-
gests that B1 cells and E1 cells can originate from a common
progenitor in the embryonic forebrain. However, given the large
number of ﬂuorophores needed for the StarTrack approach,
we could not use additional markers for cell identiﬁcation or
to demarcate apical cell borders. We therefore used a third
approach for lineage tracing: Nestin::CreER;Ai14 pregnant fe-
male mice were given a single low dose of Tmx to induce label-
ing at clonal density (at E11.5, E14.5, or E17.5; Figure 5A) (Bo-
naguidi et al., 2011; DeCarolis et al., 2013; Obernier et al.,
2018). Because it is possible that two cells next to each other
could have undergone Cre recombination independently, or
that active Cre recombinase protein in one cell was transferred
to a neighbor (Zomer et al., 2015), we also administered two
pulses of BrdU: the ﬁrst, immediately, and the second, 6 h after
Tmx administration (Figure 5A; Obernier et al., 2018). Whole
mounts of the V-SVZ were analyzed at P10 (Figure 5A). E1
and B1 cells were identiﬁed based on morphology; b-catenin
staining was used to identify cell borders and to conﬁrm E1
or B1 cell identity based on the size of their apical domain (Fig-
ure 5B). We quantiﬁed the number of tdT+/BrdU+ pairs in whole
mounts at P10 and reasoned that pairs of double-labeled cells
must be derived from a recombined progenitor cell that divided
soon after bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) administration (Figure 5C).
Tdt+/BrdU+ E1-E1 cell pairs were found in animals injected at
E11.5 and E14.5 (E1-E1 pairs: 2 at E11.5; 1 at E14.5; 0 at
E17.5; n = 5 whole mounts per age). Interestingly, we also
found 6 tdT+/BrdU+ E1-B1 cell pairs (E1-B1 pairs: 2 at E11.5;
4 at E14.5; 0 at E17.5). We also found 32 single tdT+/BrdU+
E1 cells. We cannot exclude that, in the intervening time be-
tween the initial labeling and when whole mounts were
analyzed, additional members of these clones were lost by
cell death, migration, or consumption. This double-labeling
experiment further supports the hypothesis that a subpopula-
tion of RGs that divide in the embryo can give rise to pairs of
E1-E1 and B1-E1 cells. The number of tdT+/BrdU+ E1-B1
clones was higher at E14.5 compared to E17.5, indicating
that the majority of these E1-B1 progenitors divide predomi-
nantly around E14.5 (Figure 5C). Interestingly, we also found
single tdT+B1 cells (data not shown), with no other labeled
cell in their proximity. These cells are likely derived from RGs
that divided in the embryo, but one of the two daughter cells
may have died or, in the case of a B1 cell, could have been
consumed by the generation of OB interneurons or other glia
(Calzolari et al., 2015; Obernier et al., 2018).
Reporter-based
lineage-tracing
techniques
necessitate
sparse labeling of cell populations to ensure the correct identiﬁ-
cation of single clones. However, sparse labeling may not reveal
rare events. Our UbC-StarTrack experiments overcome the
problem of clonal density with high-complexity ﬂuorophore
combinational codes, but electroporation does not allow for
cell type speciﬁcity of reporter expression. To test whether our
ﬁndings using sparse labeling in Nestin::CreER;Ai14 were repre-
sentative of Nestin+ RG clones, we used Nestin::CreER;Confetti
mice (Figures 5D–5F). The Confetti reporter allows for four
possible
recombination
events,
leading
to
expression
of
different
reporters:
nuclear
GFP,
membrane-bound
CFP,
cytoplasmic YFP, or cytoplasmic RFP (Snippert et al., 2010).
Cell Reports 27, 429–441, April 9, 2019
435

A cluster of cells labeled by one of the four reporters is
likely derived from a single progenitor that underwent one of
the four Cre-induced recombination events. We injected a
single dose of Tmx into timed-pregnant Nestin::CreER;Confetti
mice (at E12.5, E14.5, or E17.5) to induce recombination in
RG cells (Figure 5D). The amount of Tmx was 60-fold higher
than that administered to Nestin::CreER;Ai14 mice (100 mg/kg
versus 1.67 mg/kg), resulting in a greater number of recombina-
tion
events
per
whole
mount;
the
presence
of
multiple
reporters allowed us to resolve single clones. At P10 or P21,
Figure 4. StarTrack Lineage Tracing of Embryonic Radial Glia at E14.5
(A) UbC-StarTrack clonal mixture contains six transposable ﬂuorescent reporters (nuclear or cytoplasmic mTsapphire, mCerulean, EGFP, YFP, mKO, and
mCherry), as well as hyPBase- and Cre-ERT2-encoding plasmids, all under ubiquitous promoters.
(B) In utero electroporations with the UbC-StarTrack clonal mixture at E14.5. Whole mounts were dissected at P60 and immunostained for FoxJ1.
(C) Whole mount of the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle with multiple clones of labeled cells.
(D–F) Three different clones of E1 and B1 cells from (C) expressing ﬁve (D), three (E), or six (F) ﬂuorescent reporters. Clonal relationships were assessed by
identifying the unique combination of ﬂuorescent reporters expressed in cell nuclei or cytoplasm in each ﬂuorescent channel. Clone color codes are illustrated to
the right as ﬁlled or unﬁlled concentric circles: the center circle denotes nuclear localization, and the outer ring denotes cytoplasmic localization.
(G) Four clones, three made up of E1-E1 pairs, and a fourth with an E1 and B1 cell.
(H) Two E1-E1 clonal pairs are separated by the diagonal white line (left color code, upper clone; right color code, lower clone).
(I) Two nearby clones are separated by a diagonal line. The upper clone is E1-E1 (right color code), and the lower clone is made up of an E1 cell with a B1 cell (left
color code).
(J) Numbers of E1-E1, E1-B1, and single E1 clones identiﬁed by analyzing the color codes of 844 cells in three whole mounts injected and electroporated at E14.5.
The asterisk in the E1-B1 column indicates that one clone had two E1 cells and one B1 cell (shown in F). Arrowheads correspond to B1 cells, and the other
asterisks correspond to FoxJ1+ E1 cells. Scale bars: 50 mm.
436
Cell Reports 27, 429–441, April 9, 2019

the presence of E1-E1 and/or E1-B1 cell pairs expressing one of
the four ﬂuorescent proteins was analyzed in whole mounts of
the lateral wall (Figures 5E and 5F). Similar to our previous re-
sults (Figures 5A–5C), we found 45 E1-E1 cell pairs (12 pairs
at E12.5; 26 pairs at E14.5; 7 pairs at E17.5) and 129 E1-B1
cell pairs (47 pairs at E12.5; 66 pairs at E14.5; 16 pairs at
E17.5) in animals injected at different stages of development
(Figure 5F). These ﬁndings are in line with the hypothesis that
a common progenitor can give rise to both E1 and B1 cells. In
this analysis too, the number of E1-B1 cell pairs was highest
at E14.5, suggesting that E1 cells and B1 cells with a common
origin are mostly produced around E14.5 (Figures 5C and 5F).
We conclude that progenitor cells in the embryo can produce
pairs of E1 cells, as well as mixed pairs containing both B1
and E1 cells.
DISCUSSION
Here, we describe the changes the murine embryonic VZ un-
dergoes as it transforms into the ependyma and germinal epithe-
lium of the adult V-SVZ (Figures 1, 2, and 3). Furthermore, we
show that the two main cell types in this adult epithelium, E1
and B1 cells, can have a common origin from RG cells that divide
during mid-fetal development (Figures 4 and 5). First, we show
how the surface area of the lateral wall expands nearly two times
to accommodate the growth of the lateral ventricle (Figures 1B
and 1C). This expansion occurs despite a net loss in epithelial
cell number as postnatal NSCs, through symmetric consuming
divisions, generate OB neurons (Obernier et al., 2018), a process
that is particularly active during juvenile development. The
ventricular growth, despite this net loss of epithelial cells, is
Figure 5. Clonally Related V-SVZ Cells Derived from Nestin+ RG
(A) Low doses of tamoxifen were given to Nestin::CreER;Ai14 timed-pregnant female mice at E11.5, E14.5, or E17.5. BrdU was injected simultaneously and 6 h
later. Whole mounts were analyzed at P10 for double-labeled tdT+/BrdU+ cells.
(B) Confocal images of an isolated tdT+/BrdU+ clone of E1 cells (arrows, top row) and a clone containing a B1 cell (arrowhead, bottom row) and an E1 cell (arrow,
bottom row).
(C) Quantiﬁcation of tdT+/BrdU+ clones observed at different ages of injection, from a total of 5 analyzed whole mounts (WMs) per age.
(D) Sixty-fold higher doses of Tmx were administered to Nestin::CreER;Confetti timed-pregnant female mice at E12.5, E14.5, and E17.5. Whole mounts were
analyzed at P10 (E12.5, E14.5) or P21 (E17.5) for single-ﬂuorophore-labeled pairs of cells that included E1 cells (arrows) and/or B1 cells (arrowheads).
(E) Confocal images of isolated single-ﬂuorophore-expressing clones (YFP shown here) of E1 cells (arrows, top row) and of a B1 cell (arrowhead) with an E1 cell
(arrow, bottom row).
(F) Quantiﬁcation of clones observed using the Nestin::CreER;Confetti mice at different ages of injection, from a total of 3–5 WMs analyzed per age.
Cell Reports 27, 429–441, April 9, 2019
437

explained by the increasing size of the apical domains of differ-
entiating E1 cells (Figures 1F, 1G, and 2A). During differentiation
from RG cells at E17.5 to morphologically mature cells at P21, E1
cells expand their apical domain up to 11-fold (average sizes,
16.5 mm2 [E17.5 RG cells] and 185.6 mm2 [P10 FoxJ1+ cells]; Fig-
ure 2A). The expansion and differentiation of E1 cells in the lateral
wall occur in a region-speciﬁc manner, with the P-V region being
ﬁrst to show mature E1 cells and pinwheel structures, followed
by P-D, A-D, and A-V regions (Figures 2D–2F and 3). This
gradient of differentiation is similar to that observed for the
time of birth of E1 cells (Spassky et al., 2005).
The growth of E1 cell apical domains provides a cellular plat-
form for the organization of their planar polarity. The basal
body of the RG primary cilium generates a deuterosome, which
in turn generates the many basal bodies that will anchor each E1
cell motile cilium (Spassky et al., 2005). Planar polarity is estab-
lished as RG cells differentiate into E1 cells, a process that re-
quires the primary cilium of RG and hydrodynamic forces (Mirza-
deh et al., 2008, 2010b; Guirao et al., 2010), and is essential for
E1 cells to generate proper CSF ﬂow and prevent hydrocephalus
(Ohata et al., 2014, 2015; Foerster et al., 2017). In the absence of
a RG primary cilium, RG apical domains prematurely expand in
an mTORC-dependent process, leading to embryonic ventricu-
lomegaly and postnatal hydrocephalus (Foerster et al., 2017).
Interestingly, normal apical surface expansion coincides with
E1 cells acquiring FoxJ1 expression but occurs before multicili-
ation. At P2, FoxJ1 is co-expressed with multiciliated ependymal
cell markers, such as S100b, while it is absent from B1 cells (Jac-
quet et al., 2009). FoxJ1 is also essential for E1 cell differentiation
(Jacquet et al., 2009) and is implicated in centriole docking
(Stubbs et al., 2008; Yu et al., 2008). Although the molecular
link between transcription factors controlling the differentiation
of E1 cells and the expansion of the apical domain remains un-
known, data suggest that molecular programs that guide the
initial differentiation of E1 cells are well underway by the time
FoxJ1 is expressed. GemC1 and Mcidas are upstream of E1
cell fate (Kyrousi et al., 2015), and c-Myb directly regulates
FoxJ1 expression (Tan et al., 2013). c-Myb is also co-expressed
with FoxJ1 in the wall of the lateral ventricles in the postnatal
brain until P5, suggesting that FoxJ1 activation is mediated by
c-Myb (Tan et al., 2013). Deletion of c-Myb and/or FoxJ1 dis-
rupts the generation of multiple cilia and causes ependymal
cell layer alteration, associated with enlarged lateral ventricles
or hydrocephalus and reduced NSC proliferation (Malaterre
et al., 2008; Jacquet et al., 2009).
In contrast to E1 cells, differentiating B1 cells maintain a
smaller apical domain size, similar to RG cells (Figure 2A). This
difference in size results in the formation of pinwheels that can
contain multiple B1 cells at their cores (Mirzadeh et al., 2008).
Our results show that pinwheels develop around P5 in a
ventral-to-dorsal and posterior-to-anterior gradient, similar to
the direction of E1 cell differentiation and maturation (Figure 3;
Spassky et al., 2005). However, for pinwheels to form, B1 cells
must also maintain adhesion among themselves so that their
small apical domains can coalesce into the cores of pinwheels.
E1 cells also adhere to B1 cells in pinwheel cores. VCAM1 has
been shown to be expressed on the apical domain of quiescent
B1 cells (Kokovay et al., 2012; Codega et al., 2014; Hu et al.,
2017), and blocking antibodies against VCAM1 destabilize junc-
tional complexes and disrupt epithelial cytoarchitecture, result-
ing in a loss of pinwheels (Kokovay et al., 2012). However, the
time at which VCAM1 function is necessary for the development
of pinwheels, and the potential involvement of other adhesion
molecules expressed by E1 cells, B1 cells, or both are not well
understood. We found that expression of VCAM1, which is
expressed by most RG cells by E17.5, preceded the onset of
RG apical domain expansion that occurred between P0 and P5
(Figures 2A and 2D–2F). Recent work has also demonstrated
that widespread VCAM1 expression in RG cells at birth is
progressively lost by epithelial cells with large apical domains,
likely corresponding to differentiating and maturing E1 cells
(Hu et al., 2017). Interestingly, VCAM1 expression persists during
E1 cell differentiation for a short period (Figures 2B and 2C). This
subpopulation of epithelial cells had increased apical domain
size but expressed both VCAM1 and FoxJ1 (Figure 2B). Some
of these VCAM1+ cells also had deuterosomes (Figure 2C).
We do not know whether VCAM1 expression detected in differ-
entiating E1 cells represents the remnants of slowly degrading
protein, or whether it continues to be expressed and play a
role during E1 cell differentiation. Given that epithelial layer integ-
rity is essential for V-SVZ organization and function, and the
maintenance of adult neurogenesis (Kuo et al., 2006; Rasin
et al., 2007; Jacquet et al., 2009; Paez-Gonzalez et al., 2011; Ko-
kovay et al., 2012), it is possible that this adhesion protein is
essential to stabilize the apical contacts between differentiating
RG cells to maintain a continuous epithelium during lateral wall
expansion.
Our data not only reveal some of the cellular mechanisms by
which the V-SVZ becomes organized by demonstrating the co-
ordinated changes in the apical domains of E1 and B1 cells (Fig-
ures 6A and 6B), but also show that the origins of E1 and B1 cells
are closely linked (Figure 6C). Lineage-tracing experiments using
four alternative methods showed that embryonic RG cells divide
to give rise to clones in the V-SVZ that contain either E1 or B1
cells, or a combination of both. It is possible that some clonally
related sibling cells were not identiﬁed here due to cell death,
migration away from the ventricle, or consuming neurogenic di-
visions (Obernier et al., 2018). The retrovirus library showed
clonal relationships between E1 cells and neurons in the OB,
which suggested that E1 and B1 cells could be derived from
the same progenitor cell in the embryo (Fuentealba et al.,
2015; data not shown). Clonal analysis using Ubc-StarTrack,
Nestin::CreER;Ai14, and Nestin::CreER;Confetti mice conﬁrmed
this hypothesis by directly revealing pairs of clonally related B1
and E1 cells in the adult V-SVZ (Figures 4 and 5). This indicates
that at least some RG are bipotent. While the majority of bipotent
clones (E1-B1) appeared around E14.5, a peak time for E1 and
B1 cell generation (Spassky et al., 2005; Fuentealba et al.,
2015), mixed clones were also observed at other time points of
clonal labeling. This suggests that some bipotent progenitors
are present throughout embryonic development.
Taken together, these results demonstrate that a subpopula-
tion of RG cells gives rise to E1 and B1 cells, in addition to other
RG cell populations that generate clones containing only E1 cells
(Figure 6C). The intrinsic or extrinsic signals that determine the
fate of RG cells remain elusive. The proportion of B1 to E1 cells
438
Cell Reports 27, 429–441, April 9, 2019

varies along both dorsal-ventral and anterior-posterior axes of
the lateral wall (Mirzadeh et al., 2008), and B1 cells give rise to
different types of OB interneurons based on their location in
the lateral wall (Kelsch et al., 2007; Kohwi et al., 2007; Merkle
et al., 2007; Ventura and Goldman, 2007; Young et al., 2007).
The mechanisms that drive this apparent spatially encoded het-
erogeneity remain unknown, but its origins are likely present in
embryonic RG cells (Fuentealba et al., 2015).
Here, we have charted the transformation of the embryonic VZ
into the adult V-SVZ. This process is key for the generation of an
epithelium that combines two different functions important to the
postnatal brain: CSF homeostasis and postnatal generation of
neurons. We show how closely interrelated the postnatal devel-
opment of E1 and B1 cells’ apical domain is, and how this pro-
cess is key to the formation of pinwheels. The emerging V-SVZ
expands, not by cell addition, but by a dramatic expansion and
reorganization of E1 cells. In addition, we provide direct evidence
that E1 and B1 cells, which together form key structural compo-
nents of the V-SVZ niche and are functionally linked in their regu-
lation of adult neurogenesis, also have a common cell of origin in
embryonic development.
Together, these ﬁndings reveal the timing and cellular changes
that underlie the transformation of the embryonic VZ into an adult
V-SVZ. Our ﬁndings raise speciﬁc questions, including how the
relative numbers of E1 and B1 cells are controlled, and how their
lineages diverge. The common origin of cells so different in
structure and function also highlights the divergent nature of
the last stages of differentiation of the embryonic neuroepithelial
cells. The large postnatal apical expansion of E1 cells and the
retraction of B1 cells are carefully orchestrated to form a properly
sized ventricle despite decreasing numbers of ventricle-contact-
ing cells. Our study should help identify molecular determinants
for this dramatic epithelial remodeling that follows a precise
spatiotemporal pattern. This study deﬁnes the cellular origins
and key stages of cell maturation and tissue remodeling neces-
sary to understand the formation and, ultimately, the function of
the V-SVZ.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Animals
d METHOD DETAILS
B Whole-mount Dissections
B Immunostaining
B BrdU and Tmx Administration
B In Utero Surgeries
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
B Imaging and Quantiﬁcation
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank members of the Alvarez-Buylla laboratory for
helpful discussions, William Walantus for technical expertise, and Kenneth
Xavier Probst of Xavier Studio for cell illustration designs. This study was sup-
ported by funding from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute/Helen Hay Whit-
ney Foundation (to L.C.F.); Becas Chile, Ministerio de Educacio´ n (to J.I.P.);
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (to K.O.); NIH grant F32 NS103221 (to
S.A.R.); MINECO (BFU2016-80360-R; to M.F.-O.); and NIH grants R37
HD32116 and R01 NS28478, the Heather and Melanie Muss Endowed Chair,
and a generous gift from the John G. Bowes Research Fund (to A.A.-B.).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, S.A.R., J.I.P., K.O., L.C.F., and A.A.-B.; Methodology,
S.A.R., J.I.P., K.O., L.C.F., M.A.N., M.F.-O., L.L.-M., and A.A.-B.; Investigation,
S.A.R., J.I.P., K.O., L.C.F., M.A.N., and M.F.-O.; Formal Analysis, S.A.R.;
Writing – Original Draft, S.A.R., J.I.P., K.O., M.F.-O., and A.A.-B.; Writing –
Review & Editing, S.A.R., J.I.P., K.O., L.C.F., M.A.N., M.F.-O., L.L.-M., and
A.A.-B.; Funding Acquisition, S.A.R., J.I.P., K.O., L.C.F., M.F.-O., L.L.-M.,
and A.A.-B.; Supervision, L.L.-M. and A.A.-B.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: August 2, 2018
Revised: December 5, 2018
Accepted: January 23, 2019
Published: April 9, 2019
Figure 6. Summary and Proposed Model of the Developmental
Origins of E1 and B1 Cells
(A) The lateral wall of the lateral ventricle nearly doubles in size after birth,
despite decreasing numbers of ventricular epithelial cells.
(B) The apical surface sizes of ventricular epithelial cells increase in late fetal
development and postnatally. As E1 (gold) and B1 cells (teal) differentiate from
RG cells (dark blue), they start to express cell type-speciﬁc markers, and E1
cells begin to dramatically expand their apical surfaces. By P5, pinwheels start
to form in the P-V region of the whole mount and are found in all regions of the
lateral wall after P10.
(C) An embryonic RG cell (left) divides around E14.5 to give rise to two types of
clones: mixed E1-B1 clones (top row) or E1-E1 clones (bottom row).
Morphological and molecular maturation of E1 and B1 cells begins around
birth and is largely completed by P7. The age associated with each cartoon
panel in (A)–(C) is located on the blue timeline directly below the image.
Cell Reports 27, 429–441, April 9, 2019
439

REFERENCES
Al Jord, A., Lema^ıtre, A.-I.I., Delgehyr, N., Faucourt, M., Spassky, N., and Meu-
nier, A. (2014). Centriole ampliﬁcation by mother and daughter centrioles dif-
fers in multiciliated cells. Nature 516, 104–107.
Bonaguidi, M.A., Wheeler, M.A., Shapiro, J.S., Stadel, R.P., Sun, G.J., Ming,
G.L., and Song, H. (2011). In vivo clonal analysis reveals self-renewing and
multipotent adult neural stem cell characteristics. Cell 145, 1142–1155.
Calzolari, F., Michel, J., Baumgart, E.V., Theis, F., Go¨ tz, M., and Ninkovic, J.
(2015). Fast clonal expansion and limited neural stem cell self-renewal in the
adult subependymal zone. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 490–492.
Cepko, C., Ryder, E.F., Austin, C.P., Walsh, C., and Fekete, D.M. (1995). Line-
age analysis using retrovirus vectors. Methods Enzymol. 254, 387–419.
Cepko, C.L., Ryder, E., Austin, C., Golden, J., Fields-Berry, S., and Lin, J.
(1998). Lineage analysis using retroviral vectors. Methods 14, 393–406.
Codega, P., Silva-Vargas, V., Paul, A., Maldonado-Soto, A.R., Deleo, A.M.,
Pastrana, E., and Doetsch, F. (2014). Prospective identiﬁcation and puriﬁca-
tion of quiescent adult neural stem cells from their in vivo niche. Neuron 82,
545–559.
DeCarolis, N.A., Mechanic, M., Petrik, D., Carlton, A., Ables, J.L., Malhotra, S.,
Bachoo, R., Go¨ tz, M., Lagace, D.C., and Eisch, A.J. (2013). In vivo contribution
of nestin- and GLAST-lineage cells to adult hippocampal neurogenesis.
Hippocampus 23, 708–719.
Del Bigio, M.R. (2010). Ependymal cells: biology and pathology. Acta Neuropa-
thol. 119, 55–73.
Doetsch, F., Caille´ , I., Lim, D.A., Garcı´a-Verdugo, J.M., and Alvarez-Buylla, A.
(1999). Subventricular zone astrocytes are neural stem cells in the adult
mammalian brain. Cell 97, 703–716.
Figueres-On˜ ate, M., Garcı´a-Marque´ s, J., Pedraza, M., De Carlos, J.A., and
Lo´ pez-Mascaraque, L. (2015). Spatiotemporal analyses of neural lineages
after embryonic and postnatal progenitor targeting combining different re-
porters. Front. Neurosci. 9, 87.
Figueres-On˜ ate, M., Garcı´a-Marque´ s, J., and Lo´ pez-Mascaraque, L. (2016).
UbC-StarTrack, a clonal method to target the entire progeny of individual pro-
genitors. Sci. Rep. 6, 33896.
Foerster, P., Daclin, M., Asm, S., Faucourt, M., Boletta, A., Genovesio, A., and
Spassky, N. (2017). mTORC1 signaling and primary cilia are required for brain
ventricle morphogenesis. Development 144, 201–210.
Fuentealba, L.C., Rompani, S.B., Parraguez, J.I., Obernier, K., Romero, R.,
Cepko, C.L., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2015). Embryonic origin of postnatal neu-
ral stem cells. Cell 161, 1644–1655.
Furutachi, S., Miya, H., Watanabe, T., Kawai, H., Yamasaki, N., Harada, Y.,
Imayoshi, I., Nelson, M., Nakayama, K.I., Hirabayashi, Y., and Gotoh, Y.
(2015). Slowly dividing neural progenitors are an embryonic origin of adult neu-
ral stem cells. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 657–665.
Golden, J.A., Fields-Berry, S.C., and Cepko, C.L. (1995). Construction and
characterization of a highly complex retroviral library for lineage analysis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 5704–5708.
Guirao, B., Meunier, A., Mortaud, S., Aguilar, A., Corsi, J.-M.M., Strehl, L., Hir-
ota, Y., Desoeuvre, A., Boutin, C., Han, Y.-G.G., et al. (2010). Coupling be-
tween hydrodynamic forces and planar cell polarity orients mammalian motile
cilia. Nat. Cell Biol. 12, 341–350.
Hu, X.-L., Chen, G., Zhang, S., Zheng, J., Wu, J., Bai, Q.-R., Wang, Y., Li, J.,
Wang, H., Feng, H., et al. (2017). Persistent expression of VCAM1 in radial glial
cells is required for the embryonic origin of postnatal neural stem cells. Neuron
95, 309–325.e6.
Ihrie, R.A., Shah, J.K., Harwell, C.C., Levine, J.H., Guinto, C.D., Lezameta, M.,
Kriegstein, A.R., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2011). Persistent sonic hedgehog
signaling in adult brain determines neural stem cell positional identity. Neuron
71, 250–262.
Jacquet, B.V., Salinas-Mondragon, R., Liang, H., Therit, B., Buie, J.D., Dyk-
stra, M., Campbell, K., Ostrowski, L.E., Brody, S.L., and Ghashghaei, H.T.
(2009). FoxJ1-dependent gene expression is required for differentiation of
radial glia into ependymal cells and a subset of astrocytes in the postnatal
brain. Development 136, 4021–4031.
Kelsch, W., Mosley, C.P., Lin, C.-W.W., and Lois, C. (2007). Distinct mamma-
lian precursors are committed to generate neurons with deﬁned dendritic pro-
jection patterns. PLoS Biol. 5, e300.
Klos Dehring, D.A., Vladar, E.K., Werner, M.E., Mitchell, J.W., Hwang, P., and
Mitchell, B.J. (2013). Deuterosome-mediated centriole biogenesis. Dev. Cell
27, 103–112.
Kohwi, M., Petryniak, M.A., Long, J.E., Ekker, M., Obata, K., Yanagawa, Y.,
Rubenstein, J.L., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2007). A subpopulation of olfactory
bulb GABAergic interneurons is derived from Emx1- and Dlx5/6-expressing
progenitors. J. Neurosci. 27, 6878–6891.
Kokovay, E., Wang, Y., Kusek, G., Wurster, R., Lederman, P., Lowry, N., Shen,
Q., and Temple, S. (2012). VCAM1 is essential to maintain the structure of the
SVZ niche and acts as an environmental sensor to regulate SVZ lineage pro-
gression. Cell Stem Cell 11, 220–230.
Kuo, C.T., Mirzadeh, Z., Soriano-Navarro, M., Rasin, M., Wang, D., Shen, J., Se-
stan, N., Garcia-Verdugo, J., Alvarez-Buylla, A., Jan, L.Y., and Jan, Y.-N.N.
(2006). Postnatal deletion of Numb/Numblike reveals repair and remodeling ca-
pacity in the subventricular neurogenic niche. Cell 127, 1253–1264.
Kyrousi, C., Arbi, M., Pilz, G.-A.A., Pefani, D.-E.E., Lalioti, M.-E.E., Ninkovic, J.,
Go¨ tz, M., Lygerou, Z., and Taraviras, S. (2015). Mcidas and GemC1 are key
regulators for the generation of multiciliated ependymal cells in the adult
neurogenic niche. Development 142, 3661–3674.
Lagace, D.C., Whitman, M.C., Noonan, M.A., Ables, J.L., DeCarolis, N.A.,
Arguello, A.A., Donovan, M.H., Fischer, S.J., Farnbauch, L.A., Beech, R.D.,
et al. (2007). Dynamic contribution of nestin-expressing stem cells to adult
neurogenesis. J. Neurosci. 27, 12623–12629.
Madisen, L., Zwingman, T.A., Sunkin, S.M., Oh, S.W., Zariwala, H.A., Gu, H.,
Ng, L.L., Palmiter, R.D., Hawrylycz, M.J., Jones, A.R., et al. (2010). A robust
and high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the whole
mouse brain. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 133–140.
Malaterre, J., Mantamadiotis, T., Dworkin, S., Lightowler, S., Yang, Q., Ran-
some, M.I., Turnley, A.M., Nichols, N.R., Emambokus, N.R., Frampton, J.,
and Ramsay, R.G. (2008). c-Myb is required for neural progenitor cell prolifer-
ation and maintenance of the neural stem cell niche in adult brain. Stem Cells
26, 173–181.
Menn, B., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., Yaschine, C., Gonzalez-Perez, O., Rowitch,
D., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2006). Origin of oligodendrocytes in the subventric-
ular zone of the adult brain. J. Neurosci. 26, 7907–7918.
Merkle, F.T., Tramontin, A.D., Garcı´a-Verdugo, J.M.M., and Alvarez-Buylla, A.
(2004). Radial glia give rise to adult neural stem cells in the subventricular zone.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 17528–17532.
Merkle, F.T., Mirzadeh, Z., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2007). Mosaic organization
of neural stem cells in the adult brain. Science 317, 381–384.
Mirzadeh, Z., Merkle, F.T., Soriano-Navarro, M., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., and
Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2008). Neural stem cells confer unique pinwheel architec-
ture to the ventricular surface in neurogenic regions of the adult brain. Cell
Stem Cell 3, 265–278.
Mirzadeh, Z., Doetsch, F., Sawamoto, K., Wichterle, H., and Alvarez-Buylla, A.
(2010a). The subventricular zone en-face: wholemount staining and ependy-
mal ﬂow. J. Vis. Exp. 2010, 1938.
Mirzadeh, Z., Han, Y.-G.G., Soriano-Navarro, M., Garcı´a-Verdugo, J.M., and
Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2010b). Cilia organize ependymal planar polarity. J. Neuro-
sci. 30, 2600–2610.
Obernier, K., Cebrian-Silla, A., Thomson, M., Parraguez, J.I.I., Anderson, R.,
Guinto, C., Rodas Rodriguez, J., Garcia-Verdugo, J.-M.M., and Alvarez-
Buylla, A. (2018). Adult neurogenesis is sustained by symmetric self-renewal
and differentiation. Cell Stem Cell 22, 221–234.e8.
Ohata, S., Nakatani, J., Herranz-Pe´ rez, V., Cheng, J., Belinson, H., Inubushi,
T., Snider, W.D., Garcı´a-Verdugo, J.M., Wynshaw-Boris, A., and Alvarez-
Buylla, A. (2014). Loss of Dishevelleds disrupts planar polarity in ependymal
motile cilia and results in hydrocephalus. Neuron 83, 558–571.
440
Cell Reports 27, 429–441, April 9, 2019

Ohata, S., Herranz-Pe´ rez, V., Nakatani, J., Boletta, A., Garcı´a-Verdugo,
J.M.M., and A´ lvarez-Buylla, A. (2015). Mechanosensory genes Pkd1 and
Pkd2 contribute to the planar polarization of brain ventricular epithelium.
J. Neurosci. 35, 11153–11168.
Ortega, F., Gasco´ n, S., Masserdotti, G., Deshpande, A., Simon, C., Fischer, J.,
Dimou, L., Chichung Lie, D., Schroeder, T., and Berninger, B. (2013). Oligoden-
drogliogenic and neurogenic adult subependymal zone neural stem cells
constitute distinct lineages and exhibit differential responsiveness to Wnt sig-
nalling. Nat. Cell Biol. 15, 602–613.
Paul, G., Cardinale, J., and Sbalzarini, I.F. (2013). Coupling image restoration
and segmentation: A generalized linear model/Bregman perspective. Int. J.
Comput. Vis. 104, 69–93.
Paez-Gonzalez, P., Abdi, K., Luciano, D., Liu, Y., Soriano-Navarro, M., Raw-
lins, E., Bennett, V., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., and Kuo, C.T. (2011). Ank3-depen-
dent SVZ niche assembly is required for the continued production of new
neurons. Neuron 71, 61–75.
Rasin, M.-R.R., Gazula, V.-R.R., Breunig, J.J., Kwan, K.Y., Johnson, M.B., Liu-
Chen, S., Li, H.-S.S., Jan, L.Y., Jan, Y.-N.N., Rakic, P., and Sestan, N. (2007).
Numb and Numbl are required for maintenance of cadherin-based adhesion
and polarity of neural progenitors. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 819–827.
Rizk, A., Paul, G., Incardona, P., Bugarski, M., Mansouri, M., Niemann, A., Zie-
gler, U., Berger, P., and Sbalzarini, I.F. (2014). Segmentation and quantiﬁcation
of subcellular structures in ﬂuorescence microscopy images using Squassh.
Nat. Protoc. 9, 586–596.
Sawamoto, K., Wichterle, H., Gonzalez-Perez, O., Cholﬁn, J.A., Yamada, M.,
Spassky, N., Murcia, N.S., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., Marin, O., Rubenstein,
J.L., et al. (2006). New neurons follow the ﬂow of cerebrospinal ﬂuid in the adult
brain. Science 311, 629–632.
Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch,
T., Preibisch, S., Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., et al. (2012). Fiji: an
open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 676–682.
Schneider, C.A., Rasband, W.S., and Eliceiri, K.W. (2012). NIH Image to
ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 671–675.
Snippert, H.J., van der Flier, L.G., Sato, T., van Es, J.H., van den Born, M.,
Kroon-Veenboer, C., Barker, N., Klein, A.M., van Rheenen, J., Simons, B.D.,
and Clevers, H. (2010). Intestinal crypt homeostasis results from neutral
competition between symmetrically dividing Lgr5 stem cells. Cell 143,
134–144.
Spassky, N., Merkle, F.T., Flames, N., Tramontin, A.D., Garcı´a-Verdugo,
J.M.M., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2005). Adult ependymal cells are postmitotic
and are derived from radial glial cells during embryogenesis. J. Neurosci. 25,
10–18.
Stubbs, J.L., Oishi, I., Izpisu´ a Belmonte, J.C., and Kintner, C. (2008). The fork-
head protein Foxj1 speciﬁes node-like cilia in Xenopus and zebraﬁsh embryos.
Nat. Genet. 40, 1454–1460.
Tan, F.E., Vladar, E.K., Ma, L., Fuentealba, L.C., Hoh, R., Espinoza, F.H., Ax-
elrod, J.D., Alvarez-Buylla, A., Stearns, T., Kintner, C., and Krasnow, M.A.
(2013). Myb promotes centriole ampliﬁcation and later steps of the multicilio-
genesis program. Development 140, 4277–4286.
Tong, C.K., Fuentealba, L.C., Shah, J.K., Lindquist, R.A., Ihrie, R.A., Guinto,
C.D., Rodas-Rodriguez, J.L., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2015). A dorsal SHH-
dependent domain in the V-SVZ produces large numbers of oligodendroglial
lineage cells in the postnatal brain. Stem Cell Reports 5, 461–470.
Tramontin, A.D., Garcı´a-Verdugo, J.M.M., Lim, D.A., and Alvarez-Buylla, A.
(2003). Postnatal development of radial glia and the ventricular zone (VZ): a
continuum of the neural stem cell compartment. Cereb. Cortex 13, 580–587.
Ventura, R.E., and Goldman, J.E. (2007). Dorsal radial glia generate olfactory
bulb interneurons in the postnatal murine brain. J. Neurosci. 27, 4297–4302.
Young, K.M., Fogarty, M., Kessaris, N., and Richardson, W.D. (2007). Subven-
tricular zone stem cells are heterogeneous with respect to their embryonic
origins and neurogenic fates in the adult olfactory bulb. J. Neurosci. 27,
8286–8296.
Yu, X., Ng, C.P., Habacher, H., and Roy, S. (2008). Foxj1 transcription factors
are master regulators of the motile ciliogenic program. Nat. Genet. 40, 1445–
1453.
Zomer, A., Maynard, C., Verweij, F.J., Kamermans, A., Scha¨ fer, R., Beerling,
E., Schiffelers, R.M., de Wit, E., Berenguer, J., Ellenbroek, S.I.J., et al.
(2015). In Vivo imaging reveals extracellular vesicle-mediated phenocopying
of metastatic behavior. Cell 161, 1046–1057.
Cell Reports 27, 429–441, April 9, 2019
441

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
mouse anti-acetylated tubulin - 1:500
Sigma
Cat# T6793; RRID:AB_477585
mouse anti-b-catenin - 1:500
BD Biosciences
Cat# 610153; RRID:AB_397554
rabbit anti-b-catenin - 1:1000
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# C2206; RRID:AB_476831
rat anti-BrdU - 1:250
Abcam
Cat# ab6326; RRID:AB_305426
mouse anti-FoxJ1 - 1:300
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 14-9965-80; RRID:AB_1548836
mouse anti-g-tubulin - 1:500
Abcam
Cat# ab11316; RRID:AB_297920
rabbit anti-g-tubulin - 1:1000
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# T5192; RRID:AB_261690
chicken anti-GFAP - 1:1000
Abcam
Cat# ab4674; RRID:AB_304558
rabbit anti-GFAP - 1:1000
Dako
Cat# Z0334; RRID:AB_10013382
chicken anti-GFP (for CFP, YFP) - 1:700
Aves Labs
Cat# GFP-1020; RRID:AB_10000240
rabbit anti-RFP (for tdTomato) - 1:500
Rockland
Cat# 600-401-379; RRID:AB_2209751
rabbit anti-DsRed (for tdTomato) - 1:500
Clontech Laboratories, Inc.
Cat# 632496; RRID:AB_10013483
rat anti-VCAM1 - 1:100
BD Biosciences
Cat# 550547; RRID:AB_393741
Secondary antibodies: conjugated to AlexaFluor dyes
(donkey or goat polyclonal)
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
N/A
Bacterial and Virus Strains
QmGFP-OL
Fuentealba et al., 2015
N/A
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Tmx
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# T5648
Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# B5002
Aqua Poly/Mount medium
Polysciences
Cat# 18606-5
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Mouse: Nestin::CreERT2: B6.Cg-Tg(Nes-cre/ERT2)KEisc
A. J. Eisch lab (Lagace et al., 2007)
N/A
Mouse: Ai14: B6.Cg-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm14(CAG-
tdTomato)Hze/J
The Jackson Laboratory (Madisen
et al., 2010)
Cat# 007914
Mouse: Confetti: Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(CAG-
Brainbow2.1)Cle/J
The Jackson Laboratory (Snippert
et al., 2010)
Cat# 013731
Mouse: CD-1
Charles River Laboratories
Strain Code: 482
Mouse: C57BL/6
Cajal Institute
N/A
Oligonucleotides
primer S161 (50-GACAACCACTACCTGAGCACC
CAGT-30)
Fuentealba et al., 2015
N/A
primer S126 (50-GGCTCGTACTCTATAGGCTTCAG
CTGGTGA-30)
Fuentealba et al., 2015
N/A
primer S160 (50- ATCACATGGTCCTGCTGGAGTT
CGTGA-30)
Fuentealba et al., 2015
N/A
primer S128 (50- ATTGTTGAGTCAAAACTAGAGC
CTGGACCA-30)
Fuentealba et al., 2015
N/A
Recombinant DNA
UbC-StarTrack plasmids
Figueres-On˜ ate et al., 2016
N/A
Software and Algorithms
R version 3.4.3 (2017-11-30)
The R Foundation
N/A
ImageJ
NIH
N/A
Stereo Investigator
MBF Bioscience
N/A
(Continued on next page)
e1
Cell Reports 27, 429–441.e1–e3, April 9, 2019

CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact, Arturo
Alvarez-Buylla (ABuylla@stemcell.ucsf.edu).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Animals
For UbC-StarTrack experiments, wild-type C57BL/6 mice from the Cajal Institute animal facility were treated according to the Euro-
pean Union Council Guidelines on the use and welfare of experimental animals (2010/63/EU) and those of the Spanish Ministry of
Agriculture (R.D. 1201/2005 and L. 32/2007). The CSIC Bioethical Committee approved all procedures. Males and females were
used for all experiments.
All other animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and Laboratory Animal Resource
Center at UCSF, and maintained following the NIH, American Veterinary Medical Association, and UCSF guidelines. Nestin::CreER
(Lagace et al., 2007), Ai14 (Madisen et al., 2010), and R26R-Confetti (Snippert et al., 2010) mice have been previously generated and
were genotyped as described. Wild-type mice were CD1 (Charles River Laboratories) unless otherwise noted. Males and females
were used for all experiments.
METHOD DETAILS
Whole-mount Dissections
Whole-mount dissections were done as described in Mirzadeh et al. (2008, 2010a). Brieﬂy, mouse brains at different ages were ex-
tracted and the walls of the lateral ventricles dissected out from the caudal aspect of the telencephalon, the hippocampus, and
septum. Whole mounts were ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde with 0.1% Triton X-100 at 4C overnight and then stored in PBS/
0.1% sodium azide at 4C until immunohistochemical processing. After immunostaining, a 200-300 mm thick section of the lateral
wall was carefully dissected away from the remaining brain and mounted in Aqua Poly/Mount medium (Polysciences) on microscope
slides. Whole mounts were left to settle for at least twelve hours prior to imaging.
Immunostaining
Whole mounts were incubated in blocking solution, 0.5% Triton X-100/10% normal goat or donkey serum/PBS, for 1-2 hr at room
temperature. Primary antibodies were incubated for 24-48 hr at 4C, followed by appropriate secondary antibodies for 2-48 hr at 4C,
depending on target antigens. For bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) immunostaining, samples were incubated for 40 min at 37C with 2N
HCl followed by 10 min at 25C with 0.1 M boric acid (pH 8.5) prior to immunostaining procedures. Whole mounts were embedded in
Aqua Poly/Mount medium (Polysciences) on microscope slides for imaging.
BrdU and Tmx Administration
For embryonic Tmx administration, two to three month-old, timed-pregnant Nestin::CreER;Ai14 or Nestin::CreER;Confetti females
received a single dose of Tmx, 1.67mg/kg and 100mg/kg respectively, via oral gavage (Ihrie et al., 2011). Nestin::CreER;Ai14
mice received two repeated intraperitoneal injections of BrdU (50mg/kg, six hours apart) at the indicated ages in the text. The morning
of the plug was considered E0.5. Mice were sacriﬁced and brains were processed for microscopy at the ages indicated in the text.
UbC-StarTrack animals were injected with a single dose of 75 mg/kg Tmx at P1.
In Utero Surgeries
In utero electroporation was performed as described previously (Figueres-On˜ ate et al., 2015). Brieﬂy, E14.5 timed-pregnant mice
were anesthetized with 1.5% isoﬂuorane/O2 inhalation and their uterine horns were exposed by midline laparotomy. Intraventricular
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Neurolucida
MBF Bioscience
N/A
MAFFT version 7
CBRC, Japan
N/A
MultiAlin
GenoToul bioinformatics
N/A
Zeiss PALM MicroBeam LCM (version 4.3.2.13)
Carl Zeiss MicroImaging
N/A
Other
PEN-membrane slides - 2 mm
Leica Microsystems
Cat# 11505158
Cell Reports 27, 429–441.e1–e3, April 9, 2019
e2

lateral injections of the UbC-StarTrack mixture into E14.5 embryo brains were guided by trans-illumination. Five consecutive electric
square wave pulses (37V, E15; 50 ms duration) were applied to each embryo, after which the uterine horns were replaced into the
abdominal cavity. Dams were placed in clean cage to recover and they were monitored closely.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
For all experiments, male and female mice were used, and sample sizes were not determined beforehand. Statistical analyses were
performed using R version 3.4.3 (2017-11-30) (Figure 1). One-way ANOVA and Tukey Honest Signiﬁcant Difference multiple compar-
ison correction (95% conﬁdence interval) were used to determine statistical signiﬁcance. p values < 0.05 were considered signiﬁcant.
All applied statistical tests and outputs, including p values, are listed in Table 1.
Imaging and Quantiﬁcation
Immunoﬂuorescence images, except for UbC-StarTrack experiments in Figure 4 (see below), were acquired using Leica SP5 and
SP8 confocal microscopes.
Data in Figure 1 were generated using Stereo Investigator and Neurolucida software (MBF Bioscience) on a Zeiss Axiovert 200M
epiﬂuorescence microscope. Whole-mount areas were traced based on b-catenin staining (Figures 1B and 1C). The dorsal-ventral
length of the lateral wall was traced in serial coronal brain sections and reconstructed in 3-D (Figures 1D and 1E) with Neurolucida
software (MBF Bioscience). Average apical surface sizes and numbers (Figures 1F and 1G) were estimated using systematic random
sampling OpticalFractionator and Nucleator (vertical section aligned to dorsal-ventral whole-mount axis, four measuring rays) ste-
reological probes and b-catenin staining (Figures 1F and 1G, respectively). Sampling parameters were as follows: 200 sites per whole
mount were sampled using square 64 mm2 (ages < P15) or 144 mm2 (ages = > P15) counting frames. Only estimates with Schmitz-Hof
coefﬁcients of error < 0.10 were included in analyses.
For data in Figure 2, images were acquired using Leica SP5 and SP8 confocal microscopes. Apical domain sizes of epithelial cells
were measured using ImageJ software (Schindelin et al., 2012; Schneider et al., 2012) from one ﬁeld per each of the four regions of
one lateral wall per age (92.35x92.35 mm2 ﬁelds). Apical surfaces were delimited by beta-catenin staining, and surface areas were
segmented using the Squassh algorithm in the Mosaic plugin (Paul et al., 2013; Rizk et al., 2014). Segmented image masks were
manually checked for accuracy against the original beta-catenin staining, and corrected with the pen tool if necessary. Apical sur-
faces sizes were measured using the Fiji Analyze Particles algorithm, with a minimum cell size of two mm2. Cell-type speciﬁc markers
were annotated by hand using the Multi-point tool. Marker points, corresponding to VCAM1, FoxJ1, or none, were assigned to each
apical surface ROI using an ImageJ macro.
UbC-StarTrack ﬂuorescent labeling (Figure 4) was visualized under a confocal microscope using acquisition parameters previously
described (Figueres-On˜ ate et al., 2016). Brieﬂy, color codes were determined using an ImageJ macro. Each cell was separately eval-
uated for ﬂuorescence intensity in six independent channels for different emission wavelengths. This was done for the nucleus and for
the cytoplasm. Fluorophore intensity measurements above background levels were considered as positive for that reporter; this was
done for each channel. Cells containing the same pattern of reporter expression were considered clonally related. One additional
detection channel was available after StarTrack ﬂuorophore analysis, and so we immunostained whole mounts for FoxJ1 to identify
E1 cells. B1 cells were identiﬁed by morphology. Clones containing FoxJ1+ cell(s) are reported in the ﬁgure.
Tamoxifen-based clonal analysis (Fig. 5) was conducted as follows: Whole mounts were prepared at ages indicated in the text (P10
or P21), and immunostained. Entire whole-mount surfaces were imaged at 10x or 20x magniﬁcation to identify locations of potential
clones. Clonal pairs of cells containing at least one E1 cell which were then imaged at 63x magniﬁcation with 0.5 mm z-plane intervals
from the surface of the ventricle wall through the cell bodies of reporter-positive cells. Image stacks were then analyzed to conﬁrm
clonality and cell type composition. Pairs of cells containing at least one E1 cell are reported in the ﬁgure.
e3
Cell Reports 27, 429–441.e1–e3, April 9, 2019

===== Resenzweig2018_NatMed_Monkey+NSCtransplant =====
A rt i c l e s
484 
VOLUME 24 | NUMBER 4 | APRIL 2018  nature medicine
Three decades of spinal cord injury (SCI) research have made it clear 
that abundant, long-distance regeneration of injured axons, which 
might improve function below a lesion site, remains elusive1. Numerous 
extrinsic mechanisms, including an inhibitory extracellular matrix that 
develops around the site of injury2,3, inhibitory myelin-associated 
proteins4,5, and a lack of growth-promoting factors, such as neuro­
trophins6, in appropriate spatial and temporal gradients for promotion 
of growth, contribute to failure of axonal regeneration after SCI.
Failure of neuron-intrinsic mechanisms also contributes to the lack 
of axonal regeneration in adult central nervous system (CNS), and 
enhancing those intrinsic neuronal growth mechanisms overcomes 
extrinsic inhibitors7,8. For example, neurons derived from developing 
spinal cord have active growth programs that support robust axon 
extension and may be insensitive to inhibitors present in adult CNS9–11. 
This suggests recovery after SCI may be improved through an alter­
native approach: grafting neural progenitor and neural stem cells 
into the injury site to form a neuronal relay circuit across the gap9–15. 
Such relay circuits are conceptually similar to those formed by pro­
priospinal circuits after incomplete SCI16. To create such a circuit, a 
critical mass of grafted cells must: (i) survive and differentiate into 
neurons; (ii) support growth of injured host axons into the graft; (iii) 
accept synapses from these host-derived axons; (iv) extend axons 
into the host spinal cord; and (v) form synapses on host neurons 
below the lesion (Fig. 1a). Building on this concept, we recently opti­
mized methods for grafting neural stem cells to sites of SCI in rodents 
that improve electrophysiological and functional outcomes after 
even severe SCI17–19. Moreover, spinal cord retransection immedi­
ately rostral to an established graft reverses electrophysiological and 
functional recovery, supporting the hypothesis that these implants 
form new neural relays across the lesion17. These findings support 
the possibility that neural stem cell grafting could promote neural 
repair after human SCI.
A nonhuman primate model of SCI can address numerous points 
related to clinical translation, including species differences in (i) 
intrinsic stem cell biology, procurement, and maturation; (ii) CNS 
size and functional neuroanatomy; and (iii) immune mechanisms20–23. 
Indeed, a number of experimental therapies showing efficacy in rodent 
models may be ineffective or impractical in primates24; these therapies 
may fail for numerous reasons, including differences in intrinsic biol­
ogy, small effect sizes, poor safety and tolerability, and lack of scalability 
to humans of methods developed in rodents25. Primate studies can be of 
great importance in addressing these issues before human clinical tri­
als24. Indeed, recent reports support the paramount importance of the 
validation of translational programs before human implementation26, 
and proof of principle in a primate model is key in this endeavor24.
We now report successful engraftment of human spinal cord–
derived multipotent neural progenitor cells into rhesus monkeys after 
SCI. Human neural progenitor cells extend up to hundreds of thou­
sands of axons through degenerating white matter into the host spinal 
cord and form reciprocal synaptic connections with host circuits. 
Grafts are safe and well-tolerated and improve functional outcomes.
RESULTS
A total of nine adult male rhesus monkeys underwent implanta­
tion of human spinal cord–derived neural progenitor cells. Monkeys 
received right-side C7 hemisection lesions as previously described27 
1Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. 2Veterans Administration Medical Center, La Jolla, California, USA. 
3California National Primate Research Center, University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA. 4Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Hokkaido University, 
Sapporo, Japan. 5Department of Neurosurgery, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA. 6Department of Neurology, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA. 7College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. 
8Veterans Administration Medical Center, San Francisco, California, USA. Correspondence should be addressed to M.H.T. (mtuszynski@ucsd.edu).
Received 3 March 2017; accepted 26 January 2018; published online 26 February 2018; doi:10.1038/nm.4502
Restorative effects of human neural stem cell grafts on the 
primate spinal cord
Ephron S Rosenzweig1, John H Brock1,2, Paul Lu1,2, Hiromi Kumamaru1, Ernesto A Salegio3, Ken Kadoya1,4, 
Janet L Weber1, Justine J Liang1, Rod Moseanko3, Stephanie Hawbecker3, J Russell Huie5, Leif A Havton6, 
Yvette S Nout-Lomas7   , Adam R Ferguson5,8   , Michael S Beattie5, Jacqueline C Bresnahan5 
& Mark H Tuszynski1,2
We grafted human spinal cord–derived neural progenitor cells (NPCs) into sites of cervical spinal cord injury in rhesus monkeys 
(Macaca mulatta). Under three-drug immunosuppression, grafts survived at least 9 months postinjury and expressed both neuronal 
and glial markers. Monkey axons regenerated into grafts and formed synapses. Hundreds of thousands of human axons extended 
out from grafts through monkey white matter and synapsed in distal gray matter. Grafts gradually matured over 9 months and 
improved forelimb function beginning several months after grafting. These findings in a ‘preclinical trial’ support translation of 
NPC graft therapy to humans with the objective of reconstituting both a neuronal and glial milieu in the site of spinal cord injury.
© 2018 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

a rt i c l e s
nature medicine  VOLUME 24 | NUMBER 4 | APRIL 2018	
485
2 weeks before grafting. This 2-week delay after injury is a clinically 
relevant time period in which humans might be expected to medi­
cally stabilize before undergoing neural stem cell therapy. On the 
day of grafting, the spinal cord lesion site was surgically re-exposed, 
and scar tissue on the dorsal aspect of the spinal cord was incised 
(Fig. 1b,c). Viscous fluid containing cellular debris was released from 
the lesion site, and the open lesion cavity was microscopically visual­
ized in its entirety and freed of internal adhesions if present. A total of 
20 million cells were then grafted into the lesion cavity using sterilized 
100-µl pipettors held freehand. Grafted cells were GFP-expressing 
human multipotent neural progenitor cells isolated from an 8-week-
old human embryonic spinal cord and maintained as a stable cell 
line (566RSC-UBQT line)28–30. Cells were shipped overnight from 
Maryland to the University of California, Davis primate research center 
and arrived on the day of implantation. Immediately before grafting, 
cells were suspended in a growth factor cocktail and fibrin–thrombin 
matrix as employed in rodent experiments17,18 (Online Methods).
Development of grafting methods
Highlighting the vital importance of large animal models in transla­
tional studies, our initial efforts to transplant human neural progeni­
tor cells into four monkeys failed to support graft survival despite 
use of methods that were successful in rodents. First, we found that 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rapidly filled the lesion cavity and washed 
away grafted cells despite the use of a rapidly gelling fibrin–thrombin 
matrix. Thus, the first two subjects had no surviving cells. Employing 
a historical method for draining CSF in humans, we tilted the opera­
tive table to a 30° angle immediately before grafting to drain CSF 
from the cervical spinal cord in all subsequent monkeys; this action 
provided a 15-min period in which the lesion cavity was free of CSF. 
We also increased the fibrin–thrombin concentration in the grafting 
mixture to generate rapid gelling (within 3 s). These measures resulted 
in filling of the lesion site with cells at the conclusion of the grafting 
session in the next two subjects. However, when examined 2 months 
later, cells failed to fill the entire lesion cavity, although some graft 
cell survival was evident. Monkeys up to this point had been immu­
nosuppressed with low initial doses of mycophenolate mofetil and 
tacrolimus (Online Methods). Beginning with Subject 5, we adopted 
a more robust immunosuppressive regimen to prevent rejection of 
the clinically transplanted organ. It comprised higher initial doses of 
mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus and more frequent monitor­
ing (two or three times per week) of immunosuppressant drug levels 
until therapeutic doses were well established. Using these optimized 
methods, graft survival and fill of the lesion site were achieved in the 
five subsequent subjects (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 1).
Human stem cell grafts survive and extend large numbers of 
axons over long distances in the lesioned primate spinal cord
NPCs in the five subsequent subjects survived in C7 hemisection 
lesion cavities from 2 through 9 months after grafting (Fig. 1d and 
Supplementary Fig. 1). Grafts occupied the majority of the lesion 
cavity in all subjects and integrated well with the host spinal cord. 
Neuronal markers were readily detectable in grafts at all monitored time 
points (2–9 months after grafting; Fig. 1). The early neuronal marker 
doublecortin was predominant at 2 months postgrafting and declined 
but remained detectable after 9 months (Fig. 1g). The more mature 
neuronal marker NeuN was also detected at 2 months postgrafting 
(Fig. 1e,f) and continued to be expressed over time. The density of cells 
in the graft was highest at 2 months postimplantation (400,000 cells 
per mm3 graft) and steadily dropped 63% to 150,000 cells per mm3 
at 9 months postgrafting (R2 = 0.93, P = 0.007; Fig. 2a and Table 1). 
In contrast, cell size steadily increased over the same time period 
(R2 = 0.82, P = 0.03; Fig. 2b and Table 1). Grafts expressed vimentin, a 
filamentous marker of early astrocytes, at 2 months postimplantation, 
the earliest time point examined (Fig. 1h). Glial fibrillary acidic pro­
tein (GFAP), a marker of more mature astrocytes, did not detectably 
colocalize with GFP until 5 months postgrafting (Fig. 1i), suggest­
ing a prolonged period of astrocyte maturation as well. The relative 
proportions of cells expressing a marker for one of the three cardi­
nal cell types of the CNS, namely neuronal cells (NeuN), astrocytes 
(SOX9), and oligodendrocytes (OLIG2), were 57 ± 10%, 26 ± 5%, and 
17 ± 7% (mean ± s.e.m.), respectively (Fig. 1e,j,k); these proportions 
were calculated from an analysis of 766 ± 100 (mean ± s.e.m.) indi­
vidual cells per subject. Astrocyte identity was confirmed in 80% of 
SOX9+ cells through GFAP colabeling in Subjects 8 and 9 (refs. 31,32). 
Oligodendrocyte lineage was confirmed in all OLIG2+ cells through a 
lack of colabeling with insulin gene enhancer proteins 1 and 2 (ISL1 
and ISL2; data not shown); the lack of graft-derived cell migration (see 
below) suggests that these cells are likely immature nonmyelinating 
oligodendrocytes. No graft-derived cells expressed Opalin, a marker 
of mature myelinating oligodendrocytes33 (Supplementary Fig. 2), 
a
NeuN
1
2
3
GFP NeuN
GFP GFAP
DCX
Vimentin
GFAP
GFP SOX9
GFP OLIG2
GFP Ki-67
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
b
c
d
Figure 1  Graft concept, procedure, survival, and differentiation. 
(a) Schematic of neural stem cell grafting and functional relay 
formation across a contusion injury site (brown). Host axons (blue) 
grow into the graft (1), graft axons (green) grow into the host spinal 
cord (2) to complete the relay circuit (3). (b) Surface of monkey spinal 
cord with dura retracted laterally and lesion cavity visible (arrow). 
(c) After grafting, the slightly opaque suspension of human NPCs in 
the fibrin matrix is visible in the lesion site (arrow). (d) Horizontal section 
of rhesus monkey C7 hemisection lesion site showing the human spinal 
cord neural progenitor cell graft (GFP+) is well-integrated into the 
injury site. Section is rostral to the left. (e,f) Images of NeuN labelling 
only (e) and merged NeuN and GFP labelling (f) in a 5-month-old graft. 
(g,h) Labelling for doublecortin (DCX; early neuronal marker; g) and 
vimentin (early glial marker; h), which were present in all grafts. 
(i) Labelling for GFAP (mature astrocyte marker) was only present in 
5- and 9-month-old grafts (5-month-old graft shown). Insets of vimentin 
and GFAP labelling are shown in h and i, respectively, with and without 
GFP. (j) Labelling for SOX9 (astrocyte and ependymal cell marker), which 
was present in all grafts (arrows); at 5 and 9 months, 80% of these cells 
were astrocytes (GFAP+). (k) Labelling for OLIG2, which was present in all 
grafts (arrow). (l) Labelling for Ki-67 (a dividing cell marker), which was 
observed at low (1.5%) but detectable levels (arrow) at all time points. 
Scale bars: d, 1 mm; e–l, 10 µm. e and f consist of five 0.5-µm confocal 
optical planes; g, j, k, and l consist of two 0.5-µm confocal optical planes; 
h and i are single 0.5-µm confocal optical planes. 
© 2018 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

A rt i c l e s
486 
VOLUME 24 | NUMBER 4 | APRIL 2018  nature medicine
indicating that mature oligodendrocytes were not yet present in grafts. 
The proportion of dividing cells in grafts, as assessed through Ki-67 
labeling (Fig. 1l), was low at all examined time points (1.5 ± 0.5%, 
mean ± s.e.m.); it was 0.7% at 9 months postgrafting. Teratomas or 
tumors were not detected in any subject.
Notably, human axons emerged from grafts in extraordinary 
numbers and over long distances. Up to 150,000 graft-derived axons 
were present 2 mm caudal to the lesion 2–9 months postgrafting 
(Figs. 2 and 3, Table 1, and Supplementary Fig. 1), and axons reached 
distances of up to 50 mm from the graft (Supplementary Fig. 3). 
Axons emerged rostrally in similar numbers and over similar dis­
tances (Supplementary Fig. 3). Axons extended into white mat­
ter tracts that were directly abutted against grafts and appeared to 
maintain growth within these same white matter fascicles reaching 
points distant from the graft (Supplementary Fig. 4); this observa­
tion suggests that axons may continue to extend through the white 
matter tracts that they first encounter upon emerging from grafts 
in the lesion site. Furthermore, the fact that human axons extended 
linearly through host white matter (Fig. 3 and Supplementary 
Figs. 1, 3, and 4) suggests that adult myelin does not inhibit the growth 
of these human axons at this developmental stage, which is a finding 
consistent with observations in nonprimate models9–12,17–19.
Emerging axons expressed class III β-tubulin, a marker of both 
immature and mature axons; light-chain neurofilament (NF70), a 
marker of both immature and mature small-diameter axons; and 
unphosphorylated heavy-chain neurofilament (SMI32), another 
immature axon marker (Supplementary Fig. 5). Graft-derived axons 
did not express phosphorylated heavy-chain neurofilament (NF200; 
Fig. 4f, inset), a marker expressed in many mature human axons 
(Supplementary Fig. 6). Thus, axons were not fully mature even 
9 months postgrafting; this is consistent with neuronal size measures 
and delayed expression of GFAP as noted above and with delayed 
maturation of other human neural stem cells in rat SCI34. Synapse 
formation was readily detected between graft-derived axons and host 
neurons in the spinal cord caudal to the lesion site as reflected both 
by apposition of postsynaptic HOMER1 with presynaptic GFP and 
synaptophysin and by results from ultrastructural analysis (Fig. 3 and 
Supplementary Figs. 7 and 8). Extending human axons frequently 
converged onto host motor neurons, wrapping motor neuronal 
somata with dozens of appositions that colocalized with the synap­
tic marker synaptophysin (Fig. 3f,g). Ultrastructurally, all observed 
graft–host synapses had clear, spheroid vesicles in the presynaptic 
bouton, and synaptic specializations in the plane of sectioning were 
characteristically asymmetric, features indicative of an excitatory 
phenotype (Fig. 3h–j and Supplementary Fig. 8), as expected of 
long-projecting axons35. Consistent with the apparent immature 
state of graft-derived axons, myelination of graft-derived axons 
that were caudal to the lesion site and up to 1 µm diameter was not 
detected in the 9 months following grafting (Supplementary Fig. 6). 
In contrast, axons emerging from more rapidly maturing rat neural 
progenitor cells grafted into rats are readily myelinated by 2 months 
postimplantation17.
Host axons regenerate into human neural stem cell grafts
In theory, human neural stem cell implantation into a lesion cavity 
aims to re-establish a neuronal relay across a site of SCI. For this 
to occur, host axons must regenerate into neural stem cell grafts, 
and neural stem cells must extend axons out of these grafts and into 
the host spinal cord. To assess whether host axons regenerate into 
human neural progenitor cell grafts, we performed immunolabeling 
for NF200 (which is not expressed by grafted neurons; Fig. 4f, inset) 
and serotonergic motor axons, and we performed anterograde trac­
ing of the corticospinal system using intracortical injections of bioti­
nylated dextran amine (BDA). Notably, grafts were extensively and 
densely penetrated by host NF-200-labeled axons beginning 2 months 
postgrafting and persisting through 9 months (Fig. 4e,f). Many 
NF200-labeled axons originated from intraspinal neuronal circuits. 
Serotonergic axons, critical for modulation of locomotion, muscle 
tone, and pain responses36,37, also penetrated grafts (Fig. 4c,d).
Decreasing cell density
Increasing cell size
Survival time 
0
0
2
4
80
75
70
65
2
R2 = 0.93
P = 0.007
R2 = 0.82
P = 0.03
4
6
8
10
Density (no. cells × 105 / mm3)
Cell area (µm2)
Survival time
0
2
4
6
8
10
a
b
Figure 2  Changes in graft density and cell size. (a) Graft cell density 
significantly declined over time (n = 5 monkeys; P = 0.007, Matlab 
Corrcoef). (b) Mean cell size increased over time (n = 5 monkeys; 
P = 0.03, Matlab Corrcoef).
Graft
a
c
f
g
h
i
j
d
e
b
Segment T1
Lateral motor
column
GFP+
axon
GFP NeuN
GFP Syn
Lateral white matter
Dorsal horn
e
f
d
Figure 3  Axon emergence from grafts. (a) A horizontal section of the 
lesion and graft site showing a large number of human, GFP-expressing 
axons that emerged and grew caudally in linear arrays. Many axons travel 
along the host white matter–gray matter interface (arrowheads). (b) Image 
showing the numerous linear axons present in host white matter 6 mm 
caudal to the lesion site. (c) A section of spinal cord segment T1, located 
7 mm caudal to the lesion site, showing the large number of axons that 
extended into this segment. Boxed regions marked d–f are shown at 
higher magnification in panels d–f. (d–f) Coronal sections at T1 showing 
the high density of human NSC-derived axons in lateral white matter (d), 
superficial laminae of the dorsal horn (e), and lateral motor neuron 
column (f) densely surrounding ventral motor neurons. (g) Single confocal 
plane showing many human axon terminals on spinal motor neurons 
(GFP+ and synaptophysin (Syn)+; arrows). Insets in d–g are a higher 
magnification of the smaller boxed region in each panel. (h–j) Electron 
micrographs from T1 ventral gray matter confirm formation of synapses 
(arrowheads) between GFP+ human axons and host dendrites. Asymmetric 
synaptic morphology and circular vesicles with a dense core suggest an 
excitatory synapse. a, c, and d–g are from Subject 5, and b and h–j are 
from Subject 9. i is a higher magnification of h; j is a second example. 
Scale bars: a, 250 µm; b, 20 µm; c, 1 mm; d–f, 50 µm; g, 10 µm; 
h, 250 nm; j, 100 nm.
© 2018 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

a rt i c l e s
nature medicine  VOLUME 24 | NUMBER 4 | APRIL 2018	
487
The corticospinal projection is the most important neuronal system 
for voluntary movement in humans, and its regeneration is likely to 
be important for enhancing voluntary motor movement after human 
SCI. Yet this is the most refractory axonal system to attempts to elicit 
axonal regeneration into a lesion site1 (Supplementary Fig. 9). 
Recently we reported that grafts of neural stem cells driven to a spinal 
cord identity support regeneration of corticospinal axons in rodent 
models of SCI19. We now report for the first time to our knowledge the 
regeneration of primate corticospinal axons into human NPC grafts 
(Fig. 4a,b). Corticospinal axons readily crossed the host–graft inter­
face to penetrate distances up to 500 µm into the graft (Fig. 4b).
Functional outcomes
Monkeys were scored in an open field task that sampled over 25 fea­
tures of motor function38–40. The scoring system includes several 
subscales for object manipulation, climbing, and overground loco­
motion as monkeys engage in naturalistic behaviors in a large testing 
enclosure38–40 (Supplementary Fig. 10). Monkeys received points 
for function in each behavioral category and were given a composite 
score representing an overall assessment of neurological function. The 
primate model of C7 lesion was designed to assess potential therapies 
for improving distal forelimb function, as the neural circuitry for hand 
control is located in the C7-T1 spinal levels that range 1–20 mm below 
the lesion, and axons extending from a neural stem cell graft reach 
these segments (Figs. 2 and 3). Function among monkeys with non­
surviving grafts (Subjects 1–4) exhibited stability or only partial spon­
taneous improvement up to 4–8 weeks postinjury but then reached 
stability without subsequent overall improvement (Supplementary 
Figs. 10 and 11), a pattern consistent with previous studies in lesion-
only (untreated) control subjects27,38 (Supplementary Fig. 11). In 
contrast, among monkeys with surviving grafts, the initial 4- to 
8-week period of functional loss or partial spontaneous improvement 
after lesion was followed by a second period of subsequent improve­
ment 10 weeks after lesion (Supplementary Fig. 10). Object manipu­
lation scores recovered to >25% success in four of five monkeys with 
grafts but in only one of four monkeys without grafts. Moreover, peak 
right-hand object manipulation scores were greater in monkeys with 
grafts (P < 0.01, Wald chi-square; Supplementary Fig. 10). In con­
trast, the climbing score, which measures both forelimb and hindlimb 
use, did not differ significantly between monkeys with and without 
surviving grafts (P = 0.19, Wald chi-square; Supplementary Fig. 10). 
Unlike object manipulation, locomotor recovery is fairly extensive 
after C7 hemisection in monkeys, as in humans41, and values on this 
subscale differed between groups with surviving and nonsurviving 
grafts by only 12%, a modest amount that was nonetheless signifi­
cant (P = 0.05, Wald chi-square; Supplementary Fig. 10). Monkeys 
with surviving grafts exhibited a significant degree of improvement 
in peak performance in an overall measure of motor function that 
combines all measures as compared to monkeys without surviving grafts 
(P = 0.02, Wald chi-square; Supplementary Fig. 10).
A composite behavioral score was also generated using nonlinear 
principal component analysis (PCA) on functional outcome data. 
This demonstrated a significant difference in multidimensional recov­
ery curves between monkeys with surviving grafts relative to those 
with nonsurviving grafts as determined through a last-observation-
carried-forward analysis and linear mixed-model testing (P < 0.05; 
Supplementary Figs. 10 and 12). These results are interpreted with 
caution because the study did not contain a lesioned control group in 
which no attempt to graft was made and because monkeys with poor 
graft survival did not live as long as monkeys with surviving grafts 
Table 1  Individual subject data
Subject
Survival time (months)
Graft volume (mm3)
Graft density 
(cells per mm3)
Total cells 
(millions)
Total axons 
(2 mm caudal)
Cell size (µm2)
5
2
60.9
426,000
26.0
140,149
68.8
6
3
67.4
374,000
25.0
154,848
72.1
7
2
11.2
483,000
5.4
54,002
63.8
8
5
12.4
290,000
3.6
64,000
75.3
9
9
48.0
149,000
7.0
68,011
80.9
Millions of cells survived in all grafts. Up to 155,000 axons emerged from grafts at 2 mm caudal to the lesion site within 3 months of grafting. Axon numbers appeared to be 
stable from 5 to 9 months following grafting.
BDA
5HT
d
f
f
e
d
c
b
a
GFP NF200
NF200
BDA NeuN
GFP 5HT
Figure 4  Host axons regenerate into human NPC grafts. (a) Labelling 
for corticospinal axons (BDA+), which regenerate short distances (up 
to 500 µm) into human NPC grafts. The dashed line indicates the 
host–graft interface as revealed by NeuN labeling. (b) Image of a 
sample axon located 300 µm within the graft with a complex branching 
pattern and bouton-like swellings. (c,d) Serotonergic (5HT+) axons 
regenerate into human NPC grafts in all subjects with good rostral 
host–graft integration. The boxed region marked d is shown at a higher 
magnification in d. (e,f) Host NF200+ axons extensively regenerate 
into NPC grafts. The boxed region marked f is shown at a higher 
magnification in f. Insets in f, taken in host white matter, show that 
graft-derived GFP+ axons do not label for NF200. Scale bars: a, b, d, 
and f, 50 µm; c, 200 µm; e, 1 mm.
© 2018 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

A rt i c l e s
488 
VOLUME 24 | NUMBER 4 | APRIL 2018  nature medicine
(Subjects 1–4 were enrolled earlier in the study, and their early eutha­
nization was preplanned for assessment of graft survival). However, 
three points support the probability that these statistically significant 
improvements in function in monkeys with surviving grafts reflect 
true recovery: (i) control lesioned animals from previous27,38 and 
recent (Supplementary Fig. 11) studies did not exhibit late functional 
recovery of the type observed in successfully grafted monkeys; (ii) 
one monkey without graft survival in the present study that was per­
fused after 21 weeks did not show late improvement (Supplementary 
Fig. 10b); and (iii) improvements were proportionately greater in 
measures of forelimb than hindlimb function in successfully grafted 
subjects, which is consistent with dense penetration of graft-derived 
axons into cervical spinal cord segments (Fig. 3).
Cells do not migrate from the lesion site or form ectopic colonies
Previous studies have reported long-distance migration of human 
neural stem cells implanted into mouse models; this migration has 
consisted nearly entirely of glia42. In this study, we did not observe 
migration of human neurons or glia more than 100 µm from the 
lesion site (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 1). This result is consistent 
with graft-derived OLIG2+ cells representing immature oligodendro­
cytes rather than migratory oligodendrocyte progenitor cells43. Also, 
ectopic deposits of grafted neural stem cells have been observed along 
the spinal cord central canal and on the surface of the spinal cord in 
rat models44,45. In the present study, we did not observe migration of 
implanted human neural progenitor cells in the central canal, ven­
tricles, or brain. In one subject, a single colony of GFP-expressing 
NPCs was present on the spinal cord surface directly at the site of 
engraftment, but not at more distal sites.
Lesions in all nine monkeys were similar in extent (Supplementary 
Fig. 13). Grafts were well vascularized as revealed by both Nissl staining 
and collagen immunolabeling (Supplementary Fig. 14). Mild perivas­
cular cellular infiltrates consisting of CD8+ T cells were present in fully 
immunosuppressed monkeys, suggesting that there was an ongoing, 
low-grade immune response that continued 9 months postgrafting 
(Supplementary Fig. 14).
Visualization of grafts by magnetic resonance imaging
We performed high-resolution 3D T1- and T2-weighted isotropic 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans on a 3 Tesla Siemens clini­
cal MR scanner in monkeys sedated with ketamine (5 mg per kg 
body weight) after grafting to determine whether fill of the lesion 
site could be detected in the living subject. Findings were compared 
to those from anatomical analyses (Fig. 1 and Supplementary 
Fig. 1). Monkeys lacking surviving grafts exhibited a low signal 
intensity on T1-weighted imaging and a high signal intensity on T2-
weighted imaging in the lesion site, whereas monkeys with surviving 
grafts exhibited the opposite result (Supplementary Fig. 15).
DISCUSSION
Four important observations arise from this study. First, human neu­
ral stem cells can be successfully engrafted to fill the large lesion cavity 
of a nonhuman primate spinal cord using methods that are unique to 
the primate model. These methods include an increased concentra­
tion of fibrinogen–thrombin in the grafting mixture and intraopera­
tive drainage of CSF to create a dry grafting cavity. Second, human 
grafts exhibit a prolonged time period of maturation. Although the 
grafts continued to mature over the 9-month period of this study, 
functional effects of the grafts may have been evident 3–4 months 
postgrafting, when axons have already extended 50 mm into the 
host. Immature axons and synapses conduct action potentials and 
are capable of influencing signal processing in the hippocampus46,47; 
similarly, active immature graft-derived axons could account for the 
functional benefits observed herein. Third, unprecedented numbers 
of new human axons are capable of extending out from the lesion site 
and into the surrounding spinal cord; up to 150,000 axons extend 
from the lesion on one side of the spinal cord, a substantial mass of 
new circuitry that represents a potential mechanism for influencing 
functional outcomes. Observations of functional outcomes through 
9 months following SCI indicate that partial functional recovery 
occurs. It is possible that longer observation periods could result in 
greater recovery. Fourth, we describe the regeneration of corticospinal 
axons, essential for voluntary movement in humans, into a lesion site 
in a primate model for the first time to our knowledge.
Highlighting the importance of scaling up to larger animal models, 
we found that grafting methods that were effective in rodent models 
did not enable graft survival in nonhuman primates. Following several 
modifications to the rodent grafting technique, including modifica­
tions to the grafting matrix, physical measures (operative table tilt 
to drain CSF), and more extensive immunosuppression, successful 
engraftment was achieved. Had we or others attempted human trans­
lation without prior large animal testing, there would have been a 
substantial risk of clinical trial failure not because of a lack of biologi­
cal therapeutic potential for neural stem cells, but as a simple result of 
graft loss. It is important that translational studies of invasive cellular 
transplantation avoid these pitfalls and utilize larger animal models 
when possible24,25.
A key limiting factor in the translational relevance of previous efforts 
to repair SCI has been limited regeneration of corticospinal axons48,49. 
Although enhanced sprouting of host axons in spared host gray matter 
after SCI through manipulation of expression of phosphatase and tensin 
homolog (PTEN) and suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) is 
impressive50,51, these genetic manipulations primarily promoted cor­
ticospinal growth in spared regions of the host spinal cord rather than 
regeneration into spinal cord lesion sites themselves. Yet the majority of 
human injuries are clinically complete, and it is unclear whether target­
ing the relatively low number of corticospinal axons in small regions of 
spared host tissue will be useful52. Thus, achieving corticospinal regen­
eration into a lesion site is likely important in translational human 
therapies for severe injury53. We recently reported that spinal cord 
replacement with homologous spinal cord neural anlage supports cor­
ticospinal axon regeneration into lesion sites in rodents and enhances 
forelimb reaching function19. In the present study, primate corticos­
pinal axons also regenerated into human neural stem cells grafted to 
lesion sites. Given the critical role of corticospinal systems in human 
fine motor control, their regeneration represents an important mile­
stone in translational relevance of a primate model. Corticospinal axons 
regenerated ~0.5 mm into grafts. In future studies, we will determine 
whether greater distances and densities of corticospinal penetration 
might be achieved using therapies that enhance the endogenous growth 
state of host neurons, such as transient treatment with pharmacological 
PTEN inhibitors50,54,55.
Grafts exhibited evidence of continuing maturation over time. 
Astrocytes first expressed the mature marker GFAP at 5 months post­
grafting, and neurons continued to exhibit increasing somal size over 
9 months. The number of grafted neurons fell by approximately 50% 
at the longest observed time point, consistent with patterns observed 
in normal neural development56–58. It is possible that graft neurons 
that failed to form stable synapses were selectively eliminated59. It is 
important that future human clinical trials take into consideration 
© 2018 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

a rt i c l e s
nature medicine  VOLUME 24 | NUMBER 4 | APRIL 2018	
489
the possibility that grafts will mature gradually with potentially late 
effects on functional outcomes.
Finally, a major barrier to achieving adult axon regeneration has 
been the inhibitory nature of adult myelin against axon growth4,5. 
Here we show that axons emerging from human neural stem cells 
extend abundant axons through white matter, overcoming a major 
limiting factor in the regeneration field. In parallel, host adult axons 
regenerated into the myelin-free stem cell environment. Accordingly, 
neural stem cell therapy represents a means of circumventing one of 
the major challenges to axon regeneration in the adult CNS.
Methods
Methods, including statements of data availability and any associated 
accession codes and references, are available in the online version of 
the paper.
Note: Any Supplementary Information and Source Data files are available in the 
online version of the paper.
Acknowledgments
Human 566RSC-UBQT neural stem cells were a gift from NeuralStem, Inc. 
This work was supported by the Veterans Administration (Gordon Mansfield 
Spinal Cord Injury Collaborative Consortium, RR&D B7332R, MHT; RR&D 
RX001045, JHB), the National Institutes of Health (R01 NS042291, MHT; R01 
NS104442, MHT), the Department of Defense (W81XWH-12-1-0592; E.S.R.), the 
Craig H. Neilsen Foundation (M.H.T.), the Bernard and Anne Spitzer Charitable 
Trust (M.H.T.), and the Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Medical Research 
Foundation (M.H.T.). 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
E.S.R., J.H.B., P.L., E.A.S., K.K., L.A.H., Y.S.N.-L., A.R.F., M.S.B., J.C.B., 
and M.H.T. designed the experiments. E.S.R., J.H.B., P.L., H.K., E.A.S., K.K., 
R.M., S.H., Y.S.N.-L., J.C.B., and M.H.T. carried out the experiments. E.S.R., 
J.H.B., H.K., E.A.S., J.L.W., J.J.L., J.R.H., L.A.H., A.R.F., and M.H.T. analyzed 
the data. E.S.R. and M.H.T. wrote the manuscript. E.S.R., J.H.B., P.L., H.K., 
E.A.S., K.K., J.L.W., J.J.L., R.M., S.H., J.R.H., L.A.H., Y.S.N.-L., A.R.F., M.S.B., 
J.C.B., and M.H.T. edited the manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://www.nature.com/
reprints/index.html. Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
1.	 Blesch, A. & Tuszynski, M.H. Spinal cord injury: plasticity, regeneration and the 
challenge of translational drug development. Trends Neurosci. 32, 41–47 
(2009).
2.	 Fawcett, J.W. Overcoming inhibition in the damaged spinal cord. J. Neurotrauma 
23, 371–383 (2006).
3.	 Fitch, M.T. & Silver, J. CNS injury, glial scars, and inflammation: inhibitory 
extracellular matrices and regeneration failure. Exp. Neurol. 209, 294–301 
(2008).
4.	 He, Z. & Koprivica, V. The Nogo signaling pathway for regeneration block. Annu. 
Rev. Neurosci. 27, 341–368 (2004).
5.	 Schwab, M.E. Nogo and axon regeneration. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 14, 118–124 
(2004).
6.	 Lu, P. & Tuszynski, M.H. Growth factors and combinatorial therapies for CNS 
regeneration. Exp. Neurol. 209, 313–320 (2008).
7.	 Filbin, M.T. Recapitulate development to promote axonal regeneration: good or bad 
approach? Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 361, 1565–1574 (2006).
8.	 Kadoya, K. et al. Combined intrinsic and extrinsic neuronal mechanisms facilitate 
bridging axonal regeneration one year after spinal cord injury. Neuron 64, 165–172 
(2009).
9.	 Jakeman, L.B. & Reier, P.J. Axonal projections between fetal spinal cord transplants 
and the adult rat spinal cord: a neuroanatomical tracing study of local interactions. 
J. Comp. Neurol. 307, 311–334 (1991).
10.	Reier, P.J., Stokes, B.T., Thompson, F.J. & Anderson, D.K. Fetal cell grafts into 
resection and contusion/compression injuries of the rat and cat spinal cord. Exp. 
Neurol. 115, 177–188 (1992).
11.	Wictorin, K. & Björklund, A. Axon outgrowth from grafts of human embryonic 
spinal cord in the lesioned adult rat spinal cord. Neuroreport 3, 1045–1048 
(1992).
12.	Coumans, J.V. et al. Axonal regeneration and functional recovery after complete 
spinal cord transection in rats by delayed treatment with transplants and 
neurotrophins. J. Neurosci. 21, 9334–9344 (2001).
13.	Cummings, B.J. et al. Human neural stem cells differentiate and promote locomotor 
recovery in spinal cord–injured mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 
14069–14074 (2005).
14.	Salazar, D.L., Uchida, N., Hamers, F.P.T., Cummings, B.J. & Anderson, A.J. Human 
neural stem cells differentiate and promote locomotor recovery in an early chronic 
spinal cord injury NOD-scid mouse model. PLoS One 5, e12272 (2010).
15.	Bonner, 
J.F. 
et 
al. 
Grafted 
neural 
progenitors 
integrate 
and 
restore 
synaptic connectivity across the injured spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 31, 4675–4686 
(2011).
16.	Courtine, G. et al. Recovery of supraspinal control of stepping via indirect 
propriospinal relay connections after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 14, 69–74 
(2008).
17.	Lu, P. et al. Long-distance growth and connectivity of neural stem cells after severe 
spinal cord injury. Cell 150, 1264–1273 (2012).
18.	Lu, P. et al. Long-distance axonal growth from human induced pluripotent stem 
cells after spinal cord injury. Neuron 83, 789–796 (2014).
19.	Kadoya, K. et al. Spinal cord reconstitution with homologous neural grafts enables 
robust corticospinal regeneration. Nat. Med. 22, 479–487 (2016).
20.	Rosenzweig, E.S. et al. Extensive spinal decussation and bilateral termination 
of cervical corticospinal projections in rhesus monkeys. J. Comp. Neurol. 513, 
151–163 (2009).
21.	Kuypers, H.G.J.M. in Handbook of Physiology (eds. Brooks, V.B., Brookhart, J.M. 
& Mountcastle, V.B.). Anatomy of the descending pathways (The American 
Physiological Society, 1981).
22.	Lacroix, S. et al. Bilateral corticospinal projections arise from each motor cortex in 
the macaque monkey: a quantitative study. J. Comp. Neurol. 473, 147–161 
(2004).
23.	Galea, M.P. & Darian-Smith, I. Manual dexterity and corticospinal connectivity 
following unilateral section of the cervical spinal cord in the macaque monkey. 
J. Comp. Neurol. 381, 307–319 (1997).
24.	Kwon, B.K. et al. Large animal and primate models of spinal cord injury for the 
testing of novel therapies. Exp. Neurol. 269, 154–168 (2015).
25.	Tuszynski, M.H. in Translational Neuroscience 1st edn. (ed. Tuszynski, M.H.) 
Conclusion (Springer US, 2016).
26.	Anderson, A.J., Piltti, K.M., Hooshmand, M.J., Nishi, R.A. & Cummings, B.J. 
Preclinical efficacy failure of human CNS-derived stem cells for use in the pathway 
study of cervical spinal cord injury. Stem Cell Rep. 8, 249–263 (2017).
27.	Rosenzweig, E.S. et al. Extensive spontaneous plasticity of corticospinal projections 
after primate spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 1505–1510 (2010).
28.	Cizkova, D. et al. Functional recovery in rats with ischemic paraplegia after spinal 
grafting of human spinal stem cells. Neuroscience 147, 546–560 (2007).
29.	Guo, X., Johe, K., Molnar, P., Davis, H. & Hickman, J. Characterization of a human 
fetal spinal cord stem cell line, NSI-566RSC, and its induction to functional 
motoneurons. J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 4, 181–193 (2010).
30.	Glass, J.D. et al. Lumbar intraspinal injection of neural stem cells in patients with 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: results of a phase I trial in 12 patients. Stem Cells 
30, 1144–1151 (2012).
31.	Sun, W. et al. SOX9 Is an astrocyte-specific nuclear marker in the adult brain 
outside the neurogenic regions. J. Neurosci. 37, 4493–4507 (2017).
32.	Ren, Y. et al. Ependymal cell contribution to scar formation after spinal cord injury 
is minimal, local and dependent on direct ependymal injury. Sci. Rep. 7, 41122 
(2017).
33.	Golan, N. et al. Identification of Tmem10/Opalin as an oligodendrocyte enriched 
gene using expression profiling combined with genetic cell ablation. Glia 56, 
1176–1186 (2008).
34.	Lu, P. et al. Prolonged human neural stem cell maturation supports recovery in 
injured rodent CNS. J. Clin. Invest. 127, 3287–3299 (2017).
35.	Custo Greig, L.F., Woodworth, M.B., Galazo, M.J., Padmanabhan, H. & Macklis, J.D. 
Molecular logic of neocortical projection neuron specification, development and 
diversity. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14, 755–769 (2013).
36.	Fields, H.L., Heinricher, M.M. & Mason, P. Neurotransmitters in nociceptive 
modulatory circuits. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 14, 219–245 (1991).
37.	Schmidt, B.J. & Jordan, L.M. The role of serotonin in reflex modulation and 
locomotor rhythm production in the mammalian spinal cord. Brain Res. Bull. 53, 
689–710 (2000).
38.	Nout, Y.S. et al. Methods for functional assessment after C7 spinal cord hemisection 
in the rhesus monkey. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 26, 556–569 (2012).
39.	Nout, Y.S. et al. Animal models of neurologic disorders: a nonhuman primate model 
of spinal cord injury. Neurotherapeutics 9, 380–392 (2012).
40.	Salegio, E.A. et al. A unilateral cervical spinal cord contusion injury model in 
non-human primates (Macaca mulatta). J. Neurotrauma 33, 439–459 (2016).
41.	Friedli, L. et al. Pronounced species divergence in corticospinal tract reorganization 
and functional recovery after lateralized spinal cord injury favors primates. 
Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 302ra134 (2015).
42.	Windrem, M.S. et al. Fetal and adult human oligodendrocyte progenitor cell 
isolates myelinate the congenitally dysmyelinated brain. Nat. Med. 10, 93–97 
(2004).
43.	Osorio, M.J. & Goldman, S.A. Glial progenitor cell-based treatment of the childhood 
leukodystrophies. Exp. Neurol. 283 Part B, 476–488 (2016).
© 2018 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

A rt i c l e s
490 
VOLUME 24 | NUMBER 4 | APRIL 2018  nature medicine
44.	Steward, O., Sharp, K.G., Yee, K.M., Hatch, M.N. & Bonner, J.F. Characterization 
of ectopic colonies that form in widespread areas of the nervous system with neural 
stem cell transplants into the site of a severe spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 34, 
14013–14021 (2014).
45.	Tuszynski, M.H. et al. Neural stem cell dissemination after grafting to CNS injury 
sites. Cell 156, 388–389 (2014).
46.	Mongiat, L.A., Espósito, M.S., Lombardi, G. & Schinder, A.F. Reliable activation of 
immature neurons in the adult hippocampus. PLoS One 4, e5320 (2009).
47.	Dieni, C.V. et al. Low excitatory innervation balances high intrinsic excitability of 
immature dentate neurons. Nat. Commun. 7, 11313 (2016).
48.	Hollis, E.R. II., Jamshidi, P., Löw, K., Blesch, A. & Tuszynski, M.H. Induction of 
corticospinal regeneration by lentiviral trkB-induced Erk activation. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 106, 7215–7220 (2009).
49.	Ghosh, M. et al. Extensive cell migration, axon regeneration, and improved function 
with polysialic acid-modified Schwann cells after spinal cord injury. Glia 60, 
979–992 (2012).
50.	Liu, K. et al. PTEN deletion enhances the regenerative ability of adult corticospinal 
neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 1075–1081 (2010).
51.	Jin, D. et al. Restoration of skilled locomotion by sprouting corticospinal axons 
induced by co-deletion of PTEN and SOCS3. Nat. Commun. 6, 8074 (2015).
52.	Tuszynski, M.H., Gabriel, K., Gerhardt, K. & Szollar, S. Human spinal cord retains 
substantial structural mass in chronic stages after injury. J. Neurotrauma 16, 
523–531 (1999).
53.	Lu, P., Ahmad, R. & Tuszynski, M.H. in Translational Neuroscience 1st edn. 
(ed. Tuszynski, M.H.) Neural Stem Cells for Spinal Cord Injury (Springer US, 
2016).
54.	Christie, K.J., Webber, C.A., Martinez, J.A., Singh, B. & Zochodne, D.W. PTEN 
inhibition to facilitate intrinsic regenerative outgrowth of adult peripheral axons. 
J. Neurosci. 30, 9306–9315 (2010).
55.	Schmid, A.C., Byrne, R.D., Vilar, R. & Woscholski, R. Bisperoxovanadium compounds 
are potent PTEN inhibitors. FEBS Lett. 566, 35–38 (2004).
56.	Raff, M.C. et al. Programmed cell death and the control of cell survival: lessons 
from the nervous system. Science 262, 695–700 (1993).
57.	Raff, M.C. Size control: the regulation of cell numbers in animal development. Cell 
86, 173–175 (1996).
58.	Jacobson, M.D., Weil, M. & Raff, M.C. Programmed cell death in animal 
development. Cell 88, 347–354 (1997).
59.	Maor-Nof, M. & Yaron, A. Neurite pruning and neuronal cell death: spatial 
regulation of shared destruction programs. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 23, 990–996 
(2013).
© 2018 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

nature medicine
doi:10.1038/nm.4502
ONLINE METHODS
Subjects. We studied a total of nine male rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) 
aged 6–10 years that had not participated in any previous studies. Post hoc 
anatomical analyses separated the subjects into two groups according to graft 
survival (n = 4 monkeys without grafts; n = 5 monkeys with grafts). Our previ­
ous work in this model of SCI has demonstrated sufficiently low variability 
to achieve statistical significance with groups of this size27. All surgical and 
experimental procedures adhered to the principles outlined by the American 
Association for the Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care and were approved 
by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the California 
National Primate Research Center (Davis, CA). Subjects were housed at the 
California National Primate Research Center (Davis, CA), and surgeries were 
performed there. Subsequent tissue processing and analysis was performed at the 
Center for Neural Repair (University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA).
Lesion surgery. Monkeys were sedated with 1 mg ketamine per kg body 
weight intramuscularly and anesthetized with 1.5–2.5% isoflurane. The caudal 
half of the C5 dorsal lamina and the entire C6 dorsal lamina were removed. 
The dura was slit longitudinally along the midline and retracted gently. 
A surgical microknife was mounted on a stereotaxic arm positioned at the 
spinal midline midway between the C5 and C6 dorsal laminae. This rostro­
caudal position corresponds to the C7 spinal cord segment. The stereotaxic 
manipulator was used to lower the blade through the entire dorsoventral 
extent of the spinal cord without severing the ventral artery. This initial cut 
established the medial position of the lesion. The surgeon then used micro­
scissors to complete the lesion using microscopic observation to ensure 
lateral and ventral lesion completeness. Monkeys retained bowel, bladder, 
and autonomic function after SCI. Lesion reconstructions are shown in 
Supplementary Figure 13.
Immunosuppression. All grafted subjects received a triple-therapy immu­
nosuppressive regimen comprising mycophenolate mofetil (MMF; CellSept), 
tacrolimus (FK-506; ProGraf), and prednisone. Treatment began 1 d before 
grafting, and drugs were administered orally or through a nasogastric tube. In 
all subjects, the initial dose of prednisone was 2 mg per kg body weight per day 
and was reduced to 1 mg per kg body weight per day on the second day after 
transplantation. In Subjects 1–4, the initial dosage of MMF was 50 mg per kg 
body weight per day, and the initial dosage of FK-506 was 0.3 mg per kg per body 
weight per day. Treatment with both drugs was split into 2 doses (a.m. and p.m.). 
Initial dosages of MMF and FK-506 were increased to 100 mg per kg body weight 
per day and 1 mg per kg body weight per day, respectively, owing to poor graft 
survival in Subjects 1–4. Blood trough levels of MMF (target range, 3–6 µg/ml) 
and FK-506 (target range, 4–10 ng/ml) were assessed 1–3 times per week to 
adjust dosages. Immunosuppression continued until date of euthanization.
Grafting. Two weeks after the C7 right lateral hemisection, we grafted 
20 million GFP-expressing human neural progenitor cells into the lesion site. 
This karyotypically stable cell line (566RSC-UBQT) was derived from the 
lower cervical and upper thoracic spinal cord of an 8-week-old fetus that was 
donated in accordance with National Institutes of Health and Food and Drug 
Administration guidelines28. As previously reported29,30, the vast majority 
(94%) of these cells express nestin and are uncommitted to neuronal or glial 
lineage before transplantation. These cells are maintained, authenticated, and 
tested for mycoplasma by NeuralStem, Inc. Human NPCs were shipped at 4 °C 
while suspended at 20,000 cells per µl of a proprietary hibernation medium with 
overnight delivery. Subjects were sedated and anesthetized as described above, 
and the lesion site was re-exposed. Hibernation media were removed, and then 
human NPCs were suspended at 200,000 cells per µl of a two-part fibrin matrix 
(human fibrinogen, Sigma, F3879, 100 mg/ml; human thrombin, Sigma, T7009, 
100 U/ml) containing a cocktail of growth factors: brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF; 50 µg/ml, Peprotech, 452-02), neurotrophin-3 (NT-3; 50 µg/ml, 
Peprotech, 450-03), glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF; 10 µg/ml, 
Sigma, G1401), epidermal growth factor (EGF; 10 µg/ml, Sigma, E1257), 
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF; 10 µg/ml, Sigma, F0291), acidic fibrob­
last growth factor (aFGF; 10 µg/ml, Sigma, F5542), hepatocyte growth factor 
(HGF; 10 µg/ml, Sigma, H9661), insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1; 10 µg/ml, 
Sigma, I8779), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF-AA; 10 µg/ml, Peprotech, 
100-13A), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF; 10 µg/ml; Peprotech, 
100-20), and a calpain inhibitor (MDL28170; 50 µM, Sigma, M6690). For 
Subjects 3–9, immediately before the placement of cells into the lesion site, 
the surgical table was tilted to an approximately 30° angle (head upward). 
This temporarily drains CSF away from the lesion site, providing 5–15 min 
for surgeons to place the cells and for the liquid components of the fibrin matrix 
to form a gel that held the NPCs in the lesion site. After the gel formed, the 
dura, muscles and fascia, and skin were sutured closed in layers.
Corticospinal tracing. Corticospinal tract (CST) axons were traced in 
Subject 9 to assess regeneration into the graft. As previously described20, 
6 weeks before euthanization, the subject was anesthetized and a craniotomy 
was performed to expose the left motor cortex. 300 nl of the anterograde 
neuronal tracer biotinylated dextran amine (BDA; 10,000 molecular weight, 
10% in water; Thermo Fisher) was injected at each of 127 sites (59 different 
surface locations). These sites included motor cortex innervating regions of 
spinal cord controlling the hand, arm, trunk, leg, and foot.
Tissue processing. Subjects were euthanized 2–9 months after receiving human 
NPC grafts. Subjects were deeply anesthetized and transcardially perfused with 
a 4% solution of paraformaldehyde, and the spinal cord was dissected out of the 
spinal column. Spinal cord dura was removed, and the spinal cord was cut in the 
transverse plane into 1- or 1.5-cm-long blocks as described previously27. The 
block containing the lesion was cut into 30-µm-thick horizontal sections using 
a freezing microtome. Additional blocks of tissue were cut into 40-µm-thick 
transverse sections. In Subject 9, the tissue blocks immediately rostral and caudal 
to the lesion block were first partially cut (6 transverse sections that were 50 µm 
thick) using a vibratome; this method is more compatible with electron micro­
scopy. The vibratome-cut sections were then immediately immunolabeled for 
green fluorescent protein (see below), and the remaining tissue in those blocks 
was cut on a microtome in the same fashion as the other spinal cords. Tissue sec­
tions were stored at –20 °C in tissue cryoprotectant solution (TCS; 25% glycerin 
(vol/vol) and 30% ethylene glycol (vol/vol) in 0.5 M phosphate buffer).
Fluorescent immunolabeling. Transverse sections were pretreated with 
50% methanol for 20 min at 22–24 °C, washed in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) 
and blocked for 1 h in TBS containing 5% normal donkey serum and 0.25% 
Triton X-100. Sections were incubated in primary antibodies against GFP 
(rabbit, Thermo Fisher no. 6455, 1:1,500); GFAP (chicken, Encor Bio no. 
CPCA-GFAP, 1:1,500, to label astrocytes); NeuN (mouse, Millipore MAB377, 
1:1,000, to label mature neurons); class III β-tubulin (mouse, Promega 
G-7121, 1:1,000, to label immature and mature neurons); neurofilament light-
chain (NF70, mouse, Millipore MAB1615, 1:300, to label immature axons); 
neurofilament unphosphorylated heavy-chain (SMI32, mouse, Covance 
no. SMI-32P, 1:2,000); neurofilament phosphorylated heavy-chain (NF200, 
mouse, Millipore MAB5262, 1:500); Ki-67 (rabbit, Abcam ab1666, 1:250, to 
label dividing cells); OLIG2 (rabbit, IBL no. 18953, 1:200, to label oligodendro­
cytes and MN precursors); OPALIN (mouse, Santa Cruz Biotechnology no. 
sc-374490, 1:200, to label myelinating oligodendrocytes); SOX9 (goat, R&D 
Systems no. AF3075, 1:1,000, to label astrocytes and ependymal cells); and 
HOMER1 (rabbit, Synaptic Systems no. 160003, 1:1,000, to label postsynaptic 
densities). BDA was detected with Alexa-Fluor 594– or Alexa-Fluor 568–con­
jugated streptavidin (Thermo Fisher S11226, 1:1,000). Sections were washed 
with TBS and then incubated in Alexa-Fluor 488– or Alexa-Fluor 594–conju­
gated anti-goat or anti-donkey secondary antibodies (Thermo Fisher A11055, 
A11058, SA5-10062, SA5-10064, 1:500) for 1 h and DAPI (Sigma D9542, 
0.5 µg/µl, to label nuclei) for 5 min. Sections were washed with TBS, mounted 
on slides, and coverslipped with Mowiol mounting medium (http://cshproto­
cols.cshlp.org/content/2006/1/pdb.rec10255). All antibodies were used previ­
ously in monkeys and/or on the 566RSC-UBQT cell line17,27,28.
Electron microscopy. Some tissue sections from Subject 9 were analyzed 
with a combination of immunolabeling (for GFP) and electron microscopy 
(to identify synaptic structures). Sections were postfixed for 1 h in 0.1% glu­
taraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB), and then endogenous peroxidase 
© 2018 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

nature medicine
doi:10.1038/nm.4502
activity was quenched in 0.6% H2O2 in TBS for 30 min. Sections were permea­
bilized in 50% ethanol in TBS for 30 min, incubated in 1% sodium borohydride 
in TBS for 30 min, and blocked in 5% horse serum and 0.025% Triton X-100 
in TBS for 1 h. Sections were incubated for 3 nights in primary antibody (rab­
bit anti-GFP, Thermo Fisher no. A6455, 1:3,000 in blocking buffer). Sections 
were then incubated for 1 h in Vector Impress Poly-HRP secondary antibody 
(Vector no. MP-7401, 1:1 in TBS). Finally, a visible reaction product was 
developed in 0.05% diaminobenzidene, 0.04% nickel chloride, and 0.012% 
H2O2 in TBS for approximately 4 min. Wet sections were next examined 
by light microscopy, and the portions containing visible reaction prod­
ucts within the spinal cord gray matter were trimmed and processed for 
ultrastructural studies. The trimmed sections were first immersed in a 1% 
osmium tetroxide solution (Ted Pella, Inc.), dehydrated in a graded series of 
ethanol, and immersed in 100% propylene oxide. Sections were next embed­
ded in an epoxy resin using the Eponate 12 kit with DMP-30 as an accelerator 
(Ted Pella, Inc. no. 18010). Ultrathin sections were cut with thickness of 
60–70 nm using an RMC Products PowerTome Ultramicrotome (Boeckeler 
Instruments), and the ultrathin sections were collected on formvar-coated 
one-hole copper grids. The sections were contrasted with uranyl acetate 
and lead citrate. The ultrathin sections were finally examined in a JEOL 
100 CX transmission electron microscope. Neuronal processes containing 
electron-dense reaction products were photographed at a magnification of 
7,200×, and images were captured on an electron microscope film (Electron 
Microscopy Sciences).
Image acquisition. Epifluorescent images were captured using an Optronics 
Microfire A/R digital camera (http://www.optronics.com) or a Keyence BZ-
X710 all-in-one microscope and camera. Confocal images were captured with an 
Olympus Fluoview FV1000 confocal microscope (http://www.olympusamerica.
com) set for sequential scanning. For publication, images were processed uni­
formly for optimal brightness and contrast using Adobe Photoshop CS5 (Adobe 
Systems, San Jose, CA). Images intended for quantification (see below) were not 
modified in this fashion. Composites of multiple focal planes were constructed 
either in Adobe Photoshop CS5 or ImageJ 1.48v (Wayne Rasband, National 
Institutes of Health; http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/).
Quantification of graft volume, neural cell density, and axon number. Graft-
derived cells were quantified in confocal image stacks by counting individual 
cells labeled with GFP and NeuN within a fixed rectangular region of interest 
(ROI) drawn with ImageJ. All cells within the ROI were counted, and the area 
was quantified. For each monkey, 5–14 image stacks (spread in a grid across 
the graft) were quantified (a mean of 766 ± 100 individual cells per subject). 
Cell density was estimated via dividing the number of cells by the ROI volume. 
Additional estimates of the proportion of cells in the graft coexpressing NeuN, 
OLIG2, SOX9, or Ki-67 were made under epifluorescent illumination using 
StereoInvestigator (MicroBrightfield, http://www.mbfbioscience.com). Graft 
area was measured in horizontal tissue sections (1:12 series; a mean of 14.4 ± 0.9 
sections per monkey) under epifluorescent illumination using StereoInvestigator. 
Graft volume was estimated as (summed area across all sections) × (average sec­
tion thickness) × (inverse of the sampling frequency).
Total graft-derived cell counts were estimated through multiplying the cell 
density by the graft volume. The number of GFP-labeled axons was quantified 
under epifluorescent illumination using StereoInvestigator (MicroBrightfield; 
http://www.mbfbioscience.com). In horizontal tissue sections (1:12 series), 
a transverse line was drawn 2 mm caudal to the edge of the graft using a 
4× objective. Axons that intersected the line were marked and counted using a 
60× objective, and the total axon number per subject was estimated by multiply­
ing the axon count by the inverse of the sampling frequency.
Functional testing. Functional recovery was evaluated weekly throughout the 
study in an open-field task previously developed by our group to assess general 
motor function and overground locomotion, climbing and object manipula­
tion38–40. Behavioral assessments in this open field were typically performed live 
with two observers: one videotaping the session (R.M. or S.H.), and one record­
ing behavioral observations on the scoring sheet (E.S. or J.C.B.). Alternatively, 
sessions were scored directly from the video; the videos were also used to 
confirm live scoring results. Inter-rater reliability was evaluated periodically, 
and high levels of agreement were obtained (E.S. and J.C.B.). All assessments 
were performed without knowledge of group inclusion, as the observers had no 
way of knowing which monkeys had surviving transplants. Monkeys entered 
an open field testing enclosure (10 feet long × 6 feet wide × 7 feet high) and had 
access to four ascending perches to reach a food reward placed inside a Kong 
(a hollow rubber toy filled with raisins, apple pieces, peanuts, dry fruit, etc.; 
Kong Co., Golden CO) positioned on the highest perch. Locomotor activity was 
evaluated while the monkeys traversed the perches as well as the floor of the 
open cage. Climbing was assessed during retrieval of similar food objects placed 
in cups hanging at various heights (1.5, 2.7, 3.5, 4.3, and 4.7 feet) along the front 
of the cage. Object manipulation was assessed during manipulation of the Kong 
toy and during the consumption of a large food item to encourage bimanual 
manipulation (for example, an apple or orange; see Supplementary Fig. 10). 
A modified 72-point scale was used and assigned points for behavioral func­
tion. The object manipulation subscale had 22 points and was used to assess 
forelimb function while manipulating objects and to score posture, method 
used to support object (i.e., volar versus nonvolar surface of hand), joint and 
finger movements, digit 1 opposition, and pincer grasp. We compared the 
level of functional performance of monkeys with surviving grafts (n = 5) and 
nonsurviving grafts (n = 4). Because groups were established after euthani­
zation, experimenters were blind to group membership. Although monkeys 
survived for differing lengths of time after grafting, the performance of all 
monkeys reached an asymptote during their survival period (Supplementary 
Fig. 10), as assessed by modified moving averages. Accordingly, we calculated 
the maximal score for each monkey during the period of asymptotic function 
(see Supplementary Figs. 10–12).
Statistical analysis and reproducibility. All immunohistochemical reactions 
were performed at least twice with similar results. Graft cell densities, sizes, and 
axon counts were analyzed with Matlab 2010b (MathWorks). The ‘Corrcoef’ 
function was used to calculate the correlation (R2) of these variables with sur­
vival time and the P values of those correlations. Functional data were analyzed 
by applied biostatisticians (J.R.H. and A.R.F.) who were blinded to experimen­
tal conditions. Nonparametric tests on single (univariate) outcome measures 
were executed using generalized linear modeling (GZLM), and significance 
was assessed using the Wald chi-square test. To assess the multivariate effect 
of behavioral outcome measures, we integrated these data using a modern 
data-driven analytics approach in which a combined behavioral endpoint was 
derived through a multidimensional pattern detector (nonlinear principal-
component analysis; NL-PCA) in an unsupervised manner and blinded to 
experimental condition. Our analytical workflow involved two distinct stages 
of statistical analysis (Supplementary Fig. 12): stage 1, multidimensional end­
point description using PCA and validation of PC loading patterns; and stage 
2, hypothesis testing using the validated multidimensional pattern (PC1) as 
the primary combinatorial endpoint. Stage 1 pattern detection was assessed 
using multidimensional endpoint variable integration into PC1, which was fol­
lowed by examination of variance explained and PC loadings for statistical and 
face validity, respectively. Once that single, PCA-weight-combined endpoint 
axis (PC1) was deemed reproducible and valid, we applied the PC weights to 
derive the unique PC score for each monkey at each time point and rigorously 
validated these using previously established statistical decision rules60–63. The 
PC scores were then plotted over time, and if a monkey’s recovery time did 
not reach 21 weeks, the last observed PC score for that monkey was carried 
forward to 21 weeks using techniques consistent with best practices from the 
clinical literature64. Only after PC scores were mathematically derived for each 
subject and time point (Supplementary Fig. 12a–c) did we move to the stage 
2 hypothesis testing (Supplementary Fig. 12d,e). Hypothesis testing used PC 
scores as the primary endpoint to assess impact of graft condition on behavio­
ral outcome. A linear mixed model (LMM; IBM SPSS ‘Mixed’ subcommand) 
was then applied to assess group differences in PC1 scores over time. This 
variance components approach is resistant to errors caused by missing data 
and independence violations that would otherwise undermine the validity of 
repeated-measures ANOVA in this context. Prior work from our group and 
others have demonstrated that PCA is robust and stable when used in this 
context (even with a small sample size)27,41 as long as the variance explained by 
© 2018 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

nature medicine
doi:10.1038/nm.4502
PC1 is high and the communalities are high. These statistical features indicate 
that the combined information provided by the optimally weighted combina­
tion of variables (PC1) is greater than the sum of the raw endpoint variables 
regardless of sample size62. The statistical analysis plan was carried out by the 
project’s independent statistical analysis core (blinded to treatment until the 
final analysis step). The goal was to maximize information gain in the most 
transparent and statistically appropriate manner given the costs and the desire 
to limit subject numbers in primate studies65. All analyses were carried out in 
SPSS v.23 (IBM). PC loadings were considered significant at |0.4|. Significance 
for GZLM and LMM was assessed at P < 0.05.
Life Sciences Reporting Summary.  Further information on experimental 
design and reagents is available in the Life Sciences Reporting Summary.
Data availability. The data that support the findings of this study are available 
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
60.	Kaiser, H.F. Directional statistical decisions. Psychol. Rev. 67, 160–167 (1960).
61.	Cattell, R.B. The scree test for the number of Factors. Multivariate Behav. Res. 1, 
245–276 (1966).
62.	Guadagnoli, E. & Velicer, W.F. Relation of sample size to the stability of component 
patterns. Psychol. Bull. 103, 265–275 (1988).
63.	Ferguson, A.R. et al. Derivation of multivariate syndromic outcome metrics for 
consistent testing across multiple models of cervical spinal cord injury in rats. PLoS 
One 8, e59712 (2013).
64.	Little, R.J.A. & Rubin, D.B. Statistical Analysis with Missing Data 2nd edn (John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2002).
65.	Bacchetti, P., Deeks, S.G. & McCune, J.M. Breaking free of sample size dogma to 
perform innovative translational research. Sci. Transl. Med. 3, 87ps24 (2011).
© 2018 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

1
nature research  |  life sciences reporting summary
November 2017
Corresponding author(s):
Mark H. Tuszynski
Life Sciences Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form is intended for publication with all accepted life 
science papers and provides structure for consistency and transparency in reporting. Every life science submission will use this form; some list 
items might not apply to an individual manuscript, but all fields must be completed for clarity. 
For further information on the points included in this form, see Reporting Life Sciences Research. For further information on Nature Research 
policies, including our data availability policy, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Please do not complete any field with "not applicable" or n/a.  Refer to the help text for what text to use if an item is not relevant to your study. 
For final submission: please carefully check your responses for accuracy; you will not be able to make changes later.
`    Experimental design
1.   Sample size
Describe how sample size was determined.
This study did not have an a priori control group, as we originally set out to establish 
procedures for grafting into primate SCI. The number of subjects without surviving grafts was 
established post-hoc. Our previous results in other primate studies suggest that the final 
group sizes (N=5 graft, 4 control) are sufficient to detect group differences, especially when 
combined with principal components analysis (when the analysis detects a PC1 with a high 
explained variance, as is the case here).
2.   Data exclusions
Describe any data exclusions.
No data were excluded from the analysis.
3.   Replication
Describe the measures taken to verify the reproducibility 
of the experimental findings.
We describe herein all 9 subjects that received grafts of the 566-RSC cell line. As noted in the 
text, the first 4 grafts failed to survive / integrate with the host spinal cord. The following 5 
subjects were all successful, as shown in Fig. 1 and Suppl. Fig 1. In addition, as now noted in 
'Statistics and reproducibility', All immunohistochemical reactions were performed at least 
twice with similar results.
4.   Randomization
Describe how samples/organisms/participants were 
allocated into experimental groups.
Histological analyses of graft survival determined group membership.
5.   Blinding
Describe whether the investigators were blinded to 
group allocation during data collection and/or analysis.
Functional data were acquired and analyzed in a blinded fashion, as there was not an a priori 
control group. Histological analyses of graft survival determined group membership. 
Anatomical quantification was limited to subjects with surviving grafts, therefore group 
membership was not applicable.
Note: all in vivo studies must report how sample size was determined and whether blinding and randomization were used.
Nature Medicine: doi:10.1038/nm.4502
© 2018 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

2
nature research  |  life sciences reporting summary
November 2017
6.   Statistical parameters 
For all figures and tables that use statistical methods, confirm that the following items are present in relevant figure legends (or in the 
Methods section if additional space is needed). 
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement (animals, litters, cultures, etc.)
A description of how samples were collected, noting whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same 
sample was measured repeatedly
A statement indicating how many times each experiment was replicated
The statistical test(s) used and whether they are one- or two-sided 
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as an adjustment for multiple comparisons
Test values indicating whether an effect is present 
Provide confidence intervals or give results of significance tests (e.g. P values) as exact values whenever appropriate and with effect sizes noted.
A clear description of statistics including central tendency (e.g. median, mean) and variation (e.g. standard deviation, interquartile range)
Clearly defined error bars in all relevant figure captions (with explicit mention of central tendency and variation)
See the web collection on statistics for biologists for further resources and guidance.
`   Software
Policy information about availability of computer code
7. Software
Describe the software used to analyze the data in this 
study. 
StereoInvestigator and NIH ImageJ were used for image analysis as described in Methods. 
Adobe Photoshop CS5 was used for image brightness and contrast adjustment. SPSS v.23 and 
Matlab 2010b were used for statistical analyses as described in Methods.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the paper but not yet described in the published literature, software must be made 
available to editors and reviewers upon request. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). Nature Methods guidance for 
providing algorithms and software for publication provides further information on this topic.
`   Materials and reagents
Policy information about availability of materials
8.   Materials availability
Indicate whether there are restrictions on availability of 
unique materials or if these materials are only available 
for distribution by a third party.
566-RSC cells were a gift from NeuralStem, Inc. Requests for aliquots of these cells should be 
directed toward that company.
Nature Medicine: doi:10.1038/nm.4502
© 2018 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

3
nature research  |  life sciences reporting summary
November 2017
9.   Antibodies
Describe the antibodies used and how they were validated 
for use in the system under study (i.e. assay and species).
Antibody validation: 
GFP (rabbit, Thermo Fisher #6455, 1:1500): Manufacturer’s website lists reactivity in human, 
23 references documenting use in immunohistochemistry. 
GFAP (chicken, Encor Bio #CPCA-GFAP, 1:1500); Manufacturer’s website lists reactivity in 
human, use in immunohistochemistry in 4 references, including the original 1972 paper 
(Bignami et al., Brain Res). 
NeuN (mouse, Millipore MAB377, 1:1000); Manufacturer’s website lists reactivity in human, 
use in immunohistochemistry in >50 references. 
βIIITubulin (mouse, Promega G-7121, 1:1000); Manufacturer’s website lists reactivity in most 
mammalian species, use in immunohistochemistry in 6 references. 
Neurofilament light-chain (NF70, mouse, Millipore MAB1615, 1:300); Manufacturer’s website 
lists reactivity in human, use in immunohistochemistry in 20 references. 
Neurofilament unphosphorylated heavy-chain (SMI32, mouse, Covance #SMI-32P, now 
owned by BioLegend, 1:2000); Manufacturer’s website lists reactivity in human, use in 
immunohistochemistry in 4 references. 
Neurofilament phosphorylated heavy-chain (NF200, mouse, Millipore MAB5262, 1:500); 
Manufacturer’s website lists reactivity in human, use in immunohistochemistry in 16 
references. In addition, we demonstrate in Suppl. Fig. 6 successful use of this antibody to 
label human axons. 
Ki-67 (rabbit, Abcam #ab1666, 1:250); Manufacturer’s website lists reactivity in human, use in 
in 372 references, including many immunohistochemistry applications. 
Olig2 (rabbit, IBL #18953, 1:200); Manufacturer’s website lists reactivity in human, use in 
immunohistochemistry in 6 references. 
Opalin (mouse, Santa Cruz Biotechnology #sc-374490, 1:200); Manufacturer’s website lists 
reactivity in human, use in immunohistochemistry in 7 references. Opalin’s use as a label for 
myelinating oligodendrocytes was demonstrated by Golan, Adamsky, et al. (Glia, 2008). In 
addition, we demonstrate in Suppl. Fig. 2 successul use of this antibody to label myelinating 
oligodendrocytes. 
Sox9 (goat, R&D Systems #AF3075, 1:1000); Manufacturer’s website lists reactivity in human, 
use in immunohistochemistry in 16 references. 
Homer1 (rabbit, Synaptic Systems #160003, 1:1000). Manufacturer’s website lists reactivity in 
human, use in immunohistochemistry in 34 references.
10. Eukaryotic cell lines
a.  State the source of each eukaryotic cell line used.
566RSC-UBQT cells, a gift from NeuralStem, Inc., were derived from the lower cervical / 
upper thoracic spinal cord of an 8 week old embryo donated in accordance with NIH and FDA 
guidelines.
b.  Describe the method of cell line authentication used.
These cells are maintained, authenticated, and tested for mycoplasma by NeuralStem, Inc.
c.  Report whether the cell lines were tested for 
mycoplasma contamination.
These cells are maintained, authenticated, and tested for mycoplasma by NeuralStem, Inc.
d.  If any of the cell lines used are listed in the database 
of commonly misidentified cell lines maintained by 
ICLAC, provide a scientific rationale for their use.
No - 566RSC-UBQT is not in the database, as of version 8.0.
`    Animals and human research participants
Policy information about studies involving animals; when reporting animal research, follow the ARRIVE guidelines
11. Description of research animals
Provide all relevant details on animals and/or 
animal-derived materials used in the study.
We studied a total of nine naïve male rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta), aged 6–10 years. 
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
12. Description of human research participants
Describe the covariate-relevant population 
characteristics of the human research participants.
Study did not involve human subjects.
Nature Medicine: doi:10.1038/nm.4502
© 2018 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

===== Ribeiro2017_OpenBiol_Foxj1a+Ependyma =====
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Research
Cite this article: Ribeiro A, Monteiro JF,
Certal AC, Cristova˜o AM, Sau´de L. 2017 Foxj1a
is expressed in ependymal precursors, controls
central canal position and is activated in new
ependymal cells during regeneration in
zebrafish. Open Biol. 7: 170139.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsob.170139
Received: 7 June 2017
Accepted: 27 October 2017
Subject Area:
developmental biology/cellular biology/
neuroscience
Keywords:
Foxj1a, Shh, ependymal radial glia,
CSF-contacting neurons,
spinal cord injury, zebrafish
Authors for correspondence:
Ana Ribeiro
e-mail: aceribeiro@medicina.ulisboa.pt
Leonor Sau´de
e-mail: msaude@medicina.ulisboa.pt
Electronic supplementary material is available
online at https://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.
figshare.c.3925786.
Foxj1a is expressed in ependymal
precursors, controls central canal position
and is activated in new ependymal cells
during regeneration in zebrafish
Ana Ribeiro1, Joana F. Monteiro3, Ana C. Certal3, Ana M. Cristova˜o1
and Leonor Sau´de2
1Instituto de Medicina Molecular, and 2Instituto de Medicina Molecular e Instituto de Histologia e Biologia do
Desenvolvimento, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Lisboa, 1649-028 Lisboa, Portugal
3Champalimaud Research, Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, Lisboa, Portugal
AR, 0000-0003-0132-9740; JFM, 0000-0002-0057-7307; ACC, 0000-0002-5091-0083;
LS, 0000-0001-5933-8872
Zebrafish are able to regenerate the spinal cord and recover motor and sensory
functions upon severe injury, through the activation of cells located at the epen-
dymal canal. Here, we show that cells surrounding the ependymal canal in the
adult zebrafish spinal cord express Foxj1a. We demonstrate that ependymal
cells express Foxj1a from their birth in the embryonic neural tube and that
Foxj1a activity is required for the final positioning of the ependymal canal.
We also show that in response to spinal cord injury, Foxj1a ependymal cells
actively proliferate and contribute to the restoration of the spinal cord structure.
Finally, this study reveals that Foxj1a expression in the injured spinal cord is
regulated by regulatory elements activated during regeneration. These data
establish Foxj1a as a pan-ependymal marker in development, homeostasis
and regeneration and may help identify the signals that enable this progenitor
population to replace lost cells after spinal cord injury.
1. Introduction
The spinal cord develops from the embryonic neural tube, an initially homo-
geneous neuroepithelium. During development, progenitor cells in the neural
tube acquire different identities depending on their position along the dorsoven-
tral axis. The roof plate on the dorsal side (via BMPs and Wnts) and the floor plate
on the ventral side (via Shh) provide positional information that assigns cells to
distinct progenitor domains [1,2]. Each progenitor domain can give rise to several
cell fates that emerge sequentially. The initial step in neuroepithelial patterning
specifies different neuronal subtypes. Soon after, the progenitor region switches
from a neuronal to a glial fate and begins generating oligodendrocytes and astro-
cytes that support neurons [3]. After the differentiation and migration of neurons
and glial cells from the neuroepithelium, the remaining cells now lining the cen-
tral canal give rise to an additional cell fate—ependymal cells. Ependymal cells
(i.e. all the cells that contact the central canal) descend predominantly from the
ventral progenitor domains p2 and pMN [4,5] and the floor plate [6], and require
the ventral signal Shh for their correct specification [7].
As the remnant of the embryonic neuroepithelium, the ependymal region in
the adult spinal cord retains not only the pseudo-stratified epithelial organization,
but also a stem/progenitor character. These cells have neurosphere-forming
capacity and are able to give rise to neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes
in vitro, both in mouse [8,9] and human [10,11]. By contrast, in vivo ependymal
cells display a more restricted lineage potential, in the context of spinal cord
injury. Upon damage to the spinal cord ependymal cells show a strong
& 2017 The Authors. Published by the Royal Society under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/, which permits unrestricted use, provided the original
author and source are credited.
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

proliferative response, but fail to generate neurons, forming
mostly astrocytes that incorporate the glial scar and a small
number of oligodendrocytes [9,12]. The discrepancy between
the in vitro and in vivo data suggests that neural stem cells in
the ependymal region have the potential to replace all lost
cells, including neurons, but the neuronal fate is inhibited by
the microenvironment in the injured spinal cord. Therefore, if
these inhibitory signals were removed it could be possible to
direct the endogenous stem cells towards a neuronal lineage.
In contrast to mammals, adult zebrafish are able to effi-
ciently regenerate the spinal cord due to its ability to regrow
damaged axons and form new neurons, while avoiding the for-
mation of a glial scar [13]. Injury-induced neurons arise from
the ependymal region [14], suggesting that stem/progenitor
cells in the zebrafish spinal cord have a wider regenerative
potential than in mammals and could be used to identify the
signals that help promote the neuronal fate.
The study of the behaviour of zebrafish ependymal cells
during regeneration would be facilitated by the use of ependy-
mal-specific molecular markers, but these are limited in
zebrafish. A good candidate is Foxj1, which is specifically
expressed by ependymal cells in the mouse spinal cord [9]
and is also detected in the ependymal zone in the human
spinal cord [15]. Moreover, Foxj1-expressing cells were
shown to enter into a proliferative state after spinal cord
injury, contributing mainly to astrocytes in vivo but with the
ability to differentiate into other cell types, including neurons,
when cultured in vitro [9]. In zebrafish, the Foxj1 homologue—
Foxj1a—is expressed in the floor plate of the developing spinal
cord [16] and was shown to be elevated after injury in embryos
[17]. Yet, the cellular details of the Foxj1a distribution and
response to injury in the adult spinal cord were not explored.
In this study we determined if Foxj1a can be used to
identify ependymal cells and whether Foxj1a-expressing
cells participate in the repair of the spinal cord. We report
that Foxj1a expression in the ependymal region is conserved
in zebrafish and accompanies ependymal cells from their
genesis until adulthood. We also show that Foxj1 activity is
important for the formation of the central canal, through
the modulation of the Shh signalling pathway. Moreover,
we confirm that Foxj1a-positive cells expand in response to
injury through a Shh-dependent mechanism and contribute
to the restoration of the spinal cord structure in zebrafish.
2. Results
2.1. Adult zebrafish ERGs express Foxj1a
To determine if Foxj1a is expressed in the adult zebrafish spinal
cord, we used the reporter transgenic line Tg(0.6foxj1a:GFP), in
which a small enhancer sequence drives the expression of the
fluorescent protein GFP [18]. This transgenic line was shown
to reproduce Foxj1a endogenous expression in several tissues,
including the developing neural tube. In transverse sections of
the adult spinal cord, the Foxj1a reporter labelled most cells
surrounding the central canal—ependymal cells (figure 1a,a0).
The majority of GFPþ ependymal cells had ependymo-radial
glia (ERG) morphology [19], with projections that extended to
the pial surface (figure 1a–b0). We also confirmed by fluor-
escent in situ RNA hybridization (FISH) on transgenic
sections that the distribution of the foxj1a:GFP reporter is simi-
lar to the endogenous foxj1a gene, which is also detected in the
cells surrounding the central canal (figure 1c–c000).
A general feature of ependymal cells is the presence of cilia,
and Foxj1(a) is associated with the formation of motile cilia
[16,20–22]. To determine if Foxj1aþ ependymal cells in zebra-
fish are ciliated, we labelled cilia with acetylated a-tubulin,
which revealed long cilia projecting into the central canal
(figure 1d,d0). At a closer view, we detected one or two cilia
per ependymal cell (electronic supplementary material, figure
S1). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) revealed that
most cilia at the apical edge of cells around the central canal
had a central pair of microtubules (n ¼ 21/25) (figure 1e,
arrow), as well as outer dynein arms (figure 1e, arrowhead).
These results confirm that cells lining the central canal have
long and likely motile cilia, features that are consistent with
the expression of Foxj1a.
The adult zebrafish ependymal region was previously
shown to retain an embryonic-like pattern of expression of
several progenitor markers [23]. To assess the dorsoventral
identity of Foxj1aþ cells, we tested the expression of ventral
marker Nkx6.1. This analysis showed the expression of
Foxj1a in both the Nkx6.1þ ventral half of the ERGs and in
the Nkx6.1-negative dorsal region that corresponded to a
Pax6þ domain (figure 1f,f0 ). Foxj1a expression was also more
widespread in the ependymal region than that of other molecu-
lar markers associated with radial glial cells (GFAP and
vimentin; electronic
supplementary material, figure
S2).
Foxj1aþ ERGs were also in close proximity to blood vessels
(BVs) (figure 1g; electronic supplementary material, figure
S2), which provide support to neural stem cell niches [24,25].
These data settle Foxj1a as a general ependymal marker that
labels a heterogeneous group of immature/progenitor cells.
Although the majority of cells surrounding the central
canal had a radial glial morphology, a subset of foxj1a:GFP-
expressing cells displayed a more rounded morphology with
a bulbous apical attachment (figure 1h00). This morphology
is
reminiscent
of
cerebrospinal-fluid-contacting
neurons
(CSF-cNs) [26]. To test if Foxj1a is expressed in CSF-cNs,
we examined the expression of the early neuronal marker
HuC/D and a CSF-cN-specific marker, polycystic kidney dis-
ease 2-like 1 (PKD2L1) [26]. This analysis showed that
foxj1a:GFPþ cells with CSF-cN morphology express HuC/D
(figure 1h–h000) and pkd2l1 (figure 1i–i00), indicating that
Foxj1a is expressed not only in ERGs, but also in CSF-cNs.
This initial characterization of Foxj1a expression in the
adult zebrafish spinal cord demonstrated that, as in mammals,
Foxj1a is expressed in the cells that line the central canal, which
we broadly term as ependymal cells. The Foxj1aþ population is
composed of various cell types, including different subtypes
of radial glial progenitors and more differentiated CSF-cNs
(figure 1j). However, despite the common expression of
Foxj1, zebrafish and mammalian ependymal cells show some
differences, namely in the distribution of markers such as
GFAP (absent in mouse) and vimentin (more widespread in
mouse) and in the proportion of cells with radial morphology
(lower numbers in mouse) [9].
2.2. Foxj1a is expressed in the ERG precursors in the
developing neural tube
We next asked if Foxj1a plays a role in the assembly of the
ependymal region during neural tube development. Foxj1(a) is
expressed in the embryonic floor plate [16,27] and roof plate
[28]. In zebrafish, floor plate and roof plate cells participate in
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Open Biol. 7: 170139
2
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

GFP
Ac. a-tubulin
TEM
CSF-c neurons
Foxj1a+
Hu+
pkd2l1+
dorsal cells
Foxj1a+
ventral-
lateral cells
Foxj1a+
Nkx6.1+
foxj1a:GFP DAPI
foxj1a:GFP foxj1a DAPI
foxj1a:GFP Ac. a-tubulin DAPI
foxj1a:GFP Nkx6.1 DAPI
foxj1a:GFP flk1:mcherry DAPI
foxj1a:GFP pkd2l1 DAPI
foxj1a:GFP Hu DAPI
GFP
GFP
GFP
Hu
foxj1a
GFP
blood
vessels
(a)
(a¢)
(b¢)
(c)
(d)
(b)
(e)
( f )
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(c¢¢)
(c¢)
(c¢¢¢)
(d¢)
(h¢)
(i¢)
(i¢¢)
(h¢¢)
(h¢¢¢)
(f ¢)
Figure 1. Foxj1a is expressed in ependymal cells in the zebrafish adult spinal cord. (a–b0) Confocal stack projection of a spinal cord transverse section (a,a0)
and sagittal section (b,b0) in adult Tg(0.6foxj1a:GFP) transgenic zebrafish. (c–c000) FISH of foxj1a (magenta) in a transverse section of a spinal cord expressing
the foxj1a:GFP reporter (green), showing a similar pattern of expression. (d,d0) Immunostaining with acetylated a-tubulin (magenta) to label cilia present on
the apical surface of Foxj1a-expressing cells (green). (e) TEM image of a cilium at the apical ependymal region, with a central pair of microtubules (arrow) and
outer dynein arms (arrowheads). ( f,f0 ) Ventral foxj1a:GFPþ cells express the progenitor marker Nkx6.1 (magenta). (g) BVs (mCherryþ endothelial cells in
magenta) are present in the proximity of GFPþ ERGs (arrowheads). (h) Pan-neuronal marker HuC/D (Hu, magenta) immunostaining and foxj1a:GFP expression
in a spinal cord transverse section. (h0 –h000) Magnification of the central canal highlighting Hu/Foxj1a double positive cells (arrowheads). (i–i00) FISH of pkd2l1
(magenta) showing co-expression with foxj1a:GFP (arrowheads) in the ependymal region. ( j) Scheme of the spinal cord ependymal region showing subtypes
of Foxj1a-expressing cells, based on molecular expression and cell morphology. The term ependymal cells is not consensual, as other authors suggest that adult
zebrafish spinal cords only contain ERGs. DAPI-labelled nuclei are shown in grey. Scale bars: 20 mm in a,b,f–h; 10 mm in c000; 5 mm in d; 100 nm in e;
10 mm in i.
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Open Biol. 7: 170139
3
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

contraction of the primitive lumen to form the central canal [29],
which occurs between 48and 72 hours post-fertilization(hpf) as
neural precursors exit the ventricular zone [30].
To determine if Foxj1a is expressed in the cells that
help form the central canal, we examined the behaviour of
foxj1a:GFPþ cells during this embryonic period. The tight-
junction protein ZO-1 was used to reveal the outline of the
primitive lumen. Expression of the reporter transgene was
detectable in the floor plate at 24 hpf (figure 2a,a0) and contin-
ued to be expressed in the ventral midline at the subsequent
time-points analysed (figure 2b–f0 ). At 48 hpf foxj1a:GFP
started to be expressed in roof plate cells (figure 2b,b0), indicat-
ing that the expression pattern observed in chick is conserved
in zebrafish [28]. Endogenous foxj1a expression in the roof
plate was confirmed by FISH in sections of 54 hpf embryos
(figure 2h). However, the analysis of the distribution of foxj1a
transcripts also uncovered a domain of foxj1a expression that
was not reproduced by the reporter transgene—a region of
strong expression in the middle of the neural tube (figure 2h;
electronic supplementary material, figure S3). Nevertheless,
the reporter could still be used to follow the behaviour of the
roof plate and floor plate during lumen contraction. At
52 hpf, the roof plate started to extend as the primitive lumen
started to contract, and the apical projection of roof plate cells
continued to stretch until the conversion of the lumen into
the central canal was completed by 72 hpf (figure 2c–e0). By
contrast, the floor plate showed little change during this pro-
cess. The quantification of the size of the lumen in different
embryos showed that the reduction of the lumen reproducibly
occurred from 48 to 72 hpf, with a dorsal-to-ventral zipping
mechanism (figure 2g). After lumen contraction at 72 hpf, the
size of the ventral and dorsal regions remained constant until
the last time-point analysed, 120 hpf (figure 2f,f0 ).
The initiation of Foxj1a expression in the neural tube also
coincided with the appearance of long cilia. When Foxj1a
started to be expressed in the floor plate (24 hpf) and the roof
plate (48 hpf), GFPþ cells exhibited long cilia (figure 2i–j0).
The correlation between Foxj1a expression and appearance of
long cilia is consistent with the role of Foxj1a in the regulation
of motile ciliogenesis.
24 hpf
48 hpf
52 hpf
54 hpf
*
*
56 hpf
60
40
20
distance from lumen
centre (mm)
0
–20
–40
20
30
40
50
60
70
hours post-fertilization
80
90
100
110
120
dorsal region
lumen
ventral region
foxj1a:GFP ZO-1 DAPI
 foxj1a DAPI
 foxj1a:GFP Ac. a-tubulin DAPI
72 hpf
120 hpf
24 hpf
52 hpf
(a)
(d)
(g)
(e)
(i)
(j)
(j¢)
(j¢)
( f )
(b)
(c)
(h)
(a¢)
(d¢)
(e¢)
(f ¢)
(b¢)
(c¢)
Figure 2. Foxj1aþ cells participate in the formation of the spinal cord central canal. (a–f0) Representative images of the neural tube region in transverse sections of
Tg(0.6foxj1a:GFP) transgenic zebrafish embryos/larvae ranging from 24 to 120 hpf. The apical edge of the cells surrounding the lumen is identified by ZO-1 immu-
nostaining (magenta) and the GFP reporter labels Foxj1a-expressing cells (green). (g) Quantification of lumen closure from 24 to 120 hpf. The positions of the floor
plate, ventral and dorsal points of the lumen and roof plate are normalized to the middle point of the lumen. Sample number: 24 hpf (n ¼ 12); 48 hpf (n ¼ 6);
52 hpf (n ¼ 9); 56 hpf (n ¼ 9); 72 hpf (n ¼ 11); 120 hpf (n ¼ 8). (h) Confocal image of a FISH of foxj1a (magenta) in a 54 hpf embryo. foxj1a is expressed in
the floor plate, ventro-lateral cells, roof plate (arrowhead) and pronephric (asterisks). (i,j,j0) Long cilia (arrowhead), labelled by acetylated a-tubulin (magenta), are
present in Foxj1a-positive floor plate cells at 24 hpf (i) and in Foxj1a-expressing roof plate cells in the roof plate at 52 hpf ( j,j0). DAPI-labelled nuclei are shown in
grey. Scale bars: 10 mm in a–j; 5 mm in j0.
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Open Biol. 7: 170139
4
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

These results show that Foxj1a is expressed in ERG precur-
sors in the floor plate, roof plate and in cells close to the lumen
in the middle region, which continue to surround the central
canal after lumen contraction. These data also revealed that
the foxj1a:GFP reporter transgene is expressed only in a
subset of the endogenous foxj1a domains (floor plate and
roof plate) in the neural tube, indicating that the enhancer in
the construct lacks some of the foxj1a regulatory elements.
2.3. Loss of Foxj1a activity affects the timing of lumen
contraction
To test if Foxj1a is required for the transition from primitive
lumen to central canal, we examined the morphology of the
lumen (visualized with ZO-1) in larvae injected with antisense
morpholino oligonucleotides (MO) designed to block Foxj1a
protein translation by targeting the start codon [16,31,32] (elec-
tronic supplementary material, figure S3). We first analysed
larvae at 3 days post-fertilization (dpf), which showed a
round and narrow lumen when injected with a standard
control MO (figure 3a,a0). By contrast, foxj1a MO-injected
larvae exhibited an elongated lumen, indicating that lumen
contraction was delayed when compared to the controls
(figure 3d,d0,g,g0). The degree of the delay varied between
morphant larvae, but the size of the lumen was significantly
larger and the dorsal region significantly smaller when com-
pared to controls (figure 3j,k). These data suggest that the
delay in lumen contraction observed in morphants results
from a lagging dorsal zipping.
To determine if foxj1a morphants are able to complete the
zipping of the lumen, we analysed MO-injected larvae at
5 dpf. At this stage control larvae displayed a small and ven-
trally positioned central canal (figure 3b,b0). In morphant
larvae, the size of the lumen was equivalent to controls, but
the position of the canal was altered (figure 3j,k). In foxj1a mor-
phants with a milder phenotype, the position of the central
canal was only modestly dorsalized (figure 3e,e0), but in
more severe phenotypes the canal was displaced to the
middle of the spinal cord (figure 3h,h0). The measurement of
the size of the ventral region showed that floor plate cells in
the morphant had stretched significantly (figure 3j,k). These
results indicate that the lumen size phenotype observed in
3 dpf morphants is caused by a delay that ultimately affects
the final position of the canal. The co-injection of the foxj1a
MO with a MO-resistant form of the foxj1a mRNA resulted in
the rescue of the curved body phenotype and the position of
the central canal in a subset of larvae (electronic supplementary
material, figures S4 and S5). Moreover, the injection of Cas9/
gRNA complexes targeting the foxj1a locus resulted in a
small number of larvae with a curved body and a central
canal shifted dorsally (electronic supplementary material,
figure S6). Together, these data argue that the morphant
phenotype is specific to Foxj1a downregulation.
To determine if the dorsalization of the central canal in foxj1a
morphants affects the identity of the cells encircling the canal,
we analysed the expression of the ventral marker Nkx6.1. At
5 dpf, Nkx6.1 was expressed in cells lining the ventral side of
the central canal in both control and morphant larvae
(figure 3c,c0,f,f0,i,i0), suggesting that the dorsoventral identity of
ependymal cells was not changed by the loss of Foxj1a function.
Together, these results indicate that Foxj1a activity influ-
ences the position of the central canal, but not the specification
of the ependymal precursor cells surrounding the canal.
2.4. Foxj1a attenuates Shh activity and prolongs the
proliferative phase
The lumen closure phenotype observed in foxj1a morphants
was reminiscent of larvae lacking the microRNA miR-219
[30]. In miR-219 morphants, the extended lumen was associ-
ated
with
enhanced
Shh
activity
and
Shh-induced
proliferation [33]. To test if Foxj1a also affects the activity of
the Shh pathway, we assayed the expression of the Shh target
gene patched2 [34] by FISH in 54 hpf embryos, when the
lumen is closing. Standard MO-injected larvae presented a
ventral-to-dorsal accumulation of patched2 transcripts near
the lumen (figure 4a,c), which was increased in foxj1a mor-
phants (figure 4b,d). This increase in the expression of a Shh
target gene in the absence of Foxj1a is consistent with the
hypothesis that Foxj1 dampens Shh signal transduction [27].
The increase in patched2 expression is not a result of increased
shh levels in the floor plate of foxj1a morphants, as assessed
by FISH (electronic supplementary material, figure S7).
The Shh-signalling pathway has both patterning and mito-
genic roles in the neural tube [35] and the attenuation of Shh
activity is required for progenitor cells to exit the cell cycle and
differentiate [33]. To test if the loss of Foxj1a affectsthe transition
from proliferation to differentiation, we quantified the number
of mitotic cells (labelled by phospho-histone H3(pHH3)) in con-
trol and morphant 54 hpf embryos. At this stage, very few
mitotic cells were detected in the neural tube of Standard MO
embryos (0.1744+0.0437 cells/section) (figure 4e,g), but in
foxj1a morphants the number of pHH3þ cells was significantly
increased (1.25+0.1326 cells/section) (figure 4f,g). This result
suggests that a decrease in Foxj1a activity leads to an extended
period of neural progenitor proliferation, likely due to the ecto-
pic activation of the Shh pathway. This delay in the transition to
differentiation may explain the delay in lumen closure observed
in Foxj1a morphants. Together, these data propose a role for
Foxj1a in the triggering of progenitor cell cycle exit and induc-
tion of lumen contraction, through the modulation of the Shh
signal transduction.
2.5. Foxj1a-expressing cells participate in the
regeneration of the spinal cord
To determine if adult zebrafish Foxj1aþ ependymal cells con-
tribute to the repair of the spinal cord after an injury, we
examined the proliferative response of Fox1aþ cells after a com-
pression injury protocol. In this protocol, the vertebral column
was exposed and the spinal cord was compressed along the
dorsoventral axis using forceps [36]. The site of the injury
and the adjacent rostral and caudal regions (350 mm from the
injury centre) were analysed in transverse sections. Prolifer-
ation was assayed using proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA) antibody to label cells in G1 and S phases of the cell
cycle [14]. In adult fish that had undergone only sham-injury,
the number of PCNAþ cells was very low (figure 5a). The
quantification of number and position of PCNA and GFP-
expressing cells, plotted in a composite map of all samples,
showed foxj1a:GFPþ cells around the central canal and very
few PCNAþ cells (figure 5a0,h). At 3 and 7 days post-injury
(dpi), the sections at the injury site were too disrupted to ana-
lyse; therefore, only the adjacent sections were quantified. At
3 dpi the number of proliferating cells had significantly
increased (figure
5b,h)
and dividing
foxj1a:GFPþ
ERGs
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Open Biol. 7: 170139
5
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

around the central canal comprised almost 50% of all
proliferating cells (47.05%+4.2%) (figure 5b0). At day 7 the
number of proliferating cells had further increased, but the
proportion of PCNAþ cells that expressed foxj1a:GFP was
lower than at 3 dpi (23.5%+7%) (figure 5c,c0,h). The expan-
sion of the ependymal area argued that new ependymal cells
dorsal
region
Foxj1a_MO
Standard_MO
Standard_MO
foxj1a:GFP ZO-1 DAPI
foxj1a:GFP Nkx6.1 DAPI
Foxj1a_MO
ventral
region
0
60
40
size (mm)
20
3 dpf
3 dpf
n = 28
n = 22
n = 28
n = 21
3 dpf
5 dpf
5 dpf
5 dpf
5 dpf
n.s.
n.s.
****
****
****
****
5 dpf
3 dpf
Standard_MO
mild phenotype
strong phenotype
Foxj1a_MO
5 dpf
5 dpf
60
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
distance from lumen centre (mm)
40
50
3 dpf
3 dpf
lumen
(k)
(j)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a¢)
(b¢)
(c¢)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(g¢)
(h¢)
(i¢)
(d)
(e)
( f )
(d¢)
(e¢)
( f ¢)
Figure 3. Neural tube lumen closure is perturbed in the absence of Foxj1a. (a–i0) Representative images of transverse sections of the neural tube of
Tg(0.6foxj1a:GFP) transgenic larvae injected with Standard Morpholino (MO) (a–c0) or foxj1a MO (d–i0) at one-cell stage and analysed at 3 and 5 dpf. foxj1a
MO-injected larvae showed lumen closure phenotypes with variable degrees of severity, between mild (d–f0 ) and strong (g–i0), as highlighted by the apical
ZO-1 immunostaining (magenta) (a,b0,d,e0,g,h0). (c,c0,f,f0,i,i0) Nkx6.1þ cells (magenta) are still present lining the ventral half of the central canal in foxj1a mor-
phants. DAPI-labelled nuclei are shown in grey. Scale bars: 10 mm. ( j) Quantification of lumen closure in Standard MO and foxj1a MO larvae at 3 and 5 dpf. The
positions are normalized to the middle point of the lumen. Sample number is shown in the graph and includes data from three independent experiments. (k)
Quantification of the size of the lumen and the ventral and dorsal regions, derived from the data shown in ( j). Each point represents one individual and the mean
and s.d. bars are also shown. p values calculated using two-tailed unpaired t-test (****p , 0.0001; n.s., not significant).
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Open Biol. 7: 170139
6
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

were being formed, but not all new cells expressed foxj1a:GFP.
The transgene was also downregulated in new neurons as they
left the ependymal zone and remained expressed only in CSF-
cNs (electronic supplementary material, figure S8). At 14 dpi a
large number of cells, mostly foxj1a:GFP-low or negative, was
still proliferating at the injury epicentre (figure 5e,e0,h),
but the number of dividing cells had decreased in adjacent
regions (figure 5d,d0,h). By 30 dpi, the ependymal zone
remained expanded, but the number of proliferating cells had
considerably decreased, both far and close to the injury
(figure 5f–g0,h). The dynamic behaviour of ERGs contrasted
with the population of CSF-cNs in the ependymal region,
which remained almost unchanged in response to injury
(electronic supplementary material, figure S9).
These data reveal that the Foxj1aþ ERG population is sensi-
tive to injury and initiates a proliferative programme that
contributes to the expansion of the ependymal area. However,
the presence of GFP-low or negative cells in the ependymal
region raised the possibility that Foxj1a expression was not
induced in new ERGs or that the reporter transgene was
not responsive in these cells because it lacks the necessary
regulatory elements, as observed in the embryonic neural tube.
2.6. Shh signalling activity induces Foxj1a expression
during regeneration
To determine if foxj1a:GFP expression reproduced endo-
genous foxj1a in proliferating ERGs during regeneration,
we compared the expression of the GFP reporter and the
distribution of foxj1a transcripts in 7 dpi spinal cords.
In sham-injury spinal cords, foxj1a:GFP labelled all cells
around the central canal (figure 6a,a0). In adjoining sections,
FISH for foxj1a revealed low levels of transcripts distributed
around the central canal (figure 6b,b0). In injured spinal
cords, the foxj1a:GFP reporter displayed high levels in the
ventral and dorsal regions and low or absent expression in
the middle region, where most PCNAþ cells were located
(figure 6c,c0). The reverse pattern was seen for foxj1a tran-
scripts: high transcript levels in the PCNAþ lateral cells and
low signal in the dorsal and ventral regions (figure 6d,d0).
These data show that Foxj1a is highly expressed by prolifera-
ting cells after an injury, confirming that Foxj1aþ ERGs
actively participate in the repair of the lesioned spinal cord.
In addition, these results reveal that the upregulation of
foxj1a expression in response to injury is not replicated by
the reporter transgene, suggesting that the injury-dependent
expression of Foxj1a requires regulatory regions that are not
present in the promoter sequence used in this transgenic line.
The activation of Foxj1a expression in new ependymal cells
during regeneration raises the question of whether the injury-
associated expression of Foxj1a is modulated by the signals
used during development. Since in the developing neural
tube Foxj1a expression in the floor plate is regulated by the
Shh signalling pathway [16], we examined Foxj1a expression
in lesioned spinal cords exposed to an inhibitor of the Shh
pathway—cyclopamine. This experiment was carried out in
larvae, which are more tractable than adults in terms of
compound delivery and tissue penetrance [37–39]. We per-
formed spinal cord transection in 5 dpf Tg(0.6foxj1a:GFP)
larvae (figure 6e) and confirmed that foxj1a expression is also
induced after spinal cord injury in 3 dpi larvae (figure 6g,i).
Moreover, the distribution of foxj1a transcripts coincided with
the accumulation of PCNAþ cells induced by the lesion
(figure 6f,h), resembling the adult spinal cord.
We next examined therole of the Shhpathway inthe upregu-
lation of foxj1a in the injured tissue. Injured larvae were treated
with 200 mM of cyclopamine or an equivalent volume of
DMSO from day 1 to 3 post-injury (figure 6j). The concentration
of cyclopamine used was sufficient to inhibit injury-induced
proliferation in larvae (electronic supplementary material,
figure S10). Foxj1a expression was detected by FISH in spinal
54 hpf
Standard_MO
Foxj1a_MO
14/17
10/12
4
****
0
1
2
3
no. pHH3+
cells/section
Standard_MO
Standard_MO
Foxj1a_MO
Foxj1a_MO
54 hpf
foxj1a:GFP pHH3 DAPI
patched2
patched2
expression pattern
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(g)
(e)
( f )
Figure 4. Shh signalling and proliferation are enhanced in the absence of Foxj1a. (a,b) Expression of patched2 by ISH in 54 hpf embryos injected with Standard
Morpholino (MO) (a) or foxj1a MO (b). Two types of expression patterns were observed, which are schematically represented in (c,d). The majority of foxj1a mor-
phants display increased patched2 expression in ventral cells surrounding the lumen. (e,f) Confocal images of transverse sections of Tg(0.6foxj1a:GFP) 54 hpf embryos
injected with Standard MO (e) or foxj1a MO (f) and immunostained against phospho-histone H3 (pHH3) to detect mitotic cells (magenta). The foxj1a:GFP reporter
is shown in green and DAPI-labelled nuclei are shown in grey. Scale bars, 10 mm. (g) Quantification of the number of pHH3þ cells per section (Standard MO, n ¼
43; foxj1a MO, n ¼ 46). Data obtained from three independent experiments. Each point represents the average of two non-consecutive sections per embryo and the
mean and s.d. bars are also shown. p value calculated using the two-tailed unpaired t-test (****p , 0.0001).
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Open Biol. 7: 170139
7
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

cord sections of injured larvae and the fluorescence intensity
of foxj1a transcripts was quantified in cells along the dorso-
ventral
axis
(figure
6k).
In
DMSO-treated
larvae
foxj1a
transcripts were present at high levels in cells lining the lumen
(figure 6l), with peak intensity at middle/dorsal positions
(figure 6n,o). By contrast, the fluorescence intensity levels of
foxj1a:GFP PCNA DAPI
sham
3 dpi
350 mm rostral
350 mm rostral
350 mm rostral
injury centre
7 dpi
14 dpi
DAPI
GFPSP
PCNASP
PCNA&GFP
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
150
DV position (mm)
100
50
0
–50
–100
–100
–50
0
50
100
LR position (mm)
150
DV position (mm)
100
50
0
–50
–100
150
70
350 mm from the injury
injury centre
0
sham 3 dpi
7 dpi 14 dpi 30 dpi
14 dpi 30 dpi
sham 3 dpi
7 dpi 14 dpi 30 dpi
14 dpi 30 dpi
40
30
no. cells/section
no. cells/section
PCNA and GFP
PCNASP
0
10
20
10
20
30
40
50
60
*
***
ANOVA: F = 14.86, P < 0.0001 (****)
ANOVA: F = 6.968, P = 0.0009 (***)
**
**
*
***
***
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
100
50
0
–50
–100
–100
–50
0
50
100
LR position (mm)
–100
–50
0
50
100
LR position (mm)
–100
–50
0
50
100
LR position (mm)
injury centre
30 dpi
350 mm rostral
–100
–50
0
50
100
LR position (mm)
–100
–50
0
50
100
LR position (mm)
–100
–50
0
50
100
LR position (mm)
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
(a’)
(b’)
(c’)
(d’)
(e’)
foxj1a:GFP PCNA DAPI
( f )
( f ¢)
(g)
(g ¢)
(h)
Figure 5. Spinal cord injury in adult zebrafish triggers proliferation of Foxj1aþ ERGs. (a–g) Representative confocal images of transverse sections of spinal cords of
Tg(0.6foxj1a:GFP) transgenic zebrafish from 3 to 30 dpi. The control spinal cord in (a) was collected 7 days after a sham injury. The sections were located at 350 mm
rostral to the injury centre (b–d,f) or at the injury site (e,g). Proliferative cells (in magenta) were labelled using an antibody against PCNA and cells expressing the
GFP reporter are shown in green. DAPI-labelled nuclei are shown in grey. Scale bars, 20 mm. (a0 –g0) Composite maps of cell positions quantified in transverse
section images of different spinal cords for each time point (sham, 7 dpi, 14 dpi: n ¼ 6; 3 dpi, 30 dpi: n ¼ 5). DV, dorsal/ventral; LR, left/right; SP, single positive.
(h) Quantification of the number of PCNASP (top plot) and PCNAþ/GFPþ (bottom plot) cells per section. Each circle represents one section at 350 mm rostral or
caudal from the injury centre (left side of plot) or at the injury site (right side of plot). The mean and s.d. bars are also shown and a one-way ANOVA F-test was
performed between groups, followed by a Dunnett test to compare every mean to the control mean (*p , 0.05; **p , 0.01; ***p , 0.001; n.s., non-significant).
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Open Biol. 7: 170139
8
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

foxj1a transcripts were dampened in larvae exposed to cyclopa-
mine (figure 6m), with significantly lower levels in the middle/
dorsal region when compared to the controls (figure 6n,o). This
result suggests that Shh signalling activity is required for the
injury-dependent expression of Foxj1a in ependymal cells.
Together, these data reveal that activation of the Shh sig-
nalling pathway after injury triggers upregulation of Foxj1a
expression and promotes proliferation in the regenerating
spinal cord.
3. Discussion
Ependymal cells were viewed simply as the lining of the cen-
tral canal until the discovery of neural stem cells within this
spinal cord population [8,10]. The identification of resident
stem cells in the mammalian spinal cord led to a new thera-
peutic perspective in which ependymal cells could be used as
an alternative to stem cell transplantation to help replace cell
types lost after spinal cord injury [40]. However, further work
is needed to understand how to overcome the astrocytic
differentiation bias of these endogenous stem cells and to
favour their differentiation into new neurons. Insight may
be gained from the study of organisms that are able to
spontaneously form new neurons and regain motor function
after spinal cord injury, such as zebrafish [14].
Here, we identify Foxj1a as a general ependymal marker
in zebrafish that can help follow the response of ependymal
cells during spinal cord regeneration. Unlike other described
molecular markers such as Sox2, GFAP and vimentin [41],
Foxj1a is not restricted to subsets of ependymal cells. The
expression of Foxj1a in the adult zebrafish spinal cord, together
with the expression of other ependymal markers, reinforces
the molecular similarities of stem/progenitor cells found in
zebrafish and mammals. Nevertheless, when comparing our
results obtained in zebrafish with the ones reported in mouse
we could see differences in the ependymal region in terms of
protein distribution (GFAP and vimentin) and radial glial mor-
phology, which may be associated with differences in cellular
function and could have an impact on their regenerative poten-
tial. We further show that Foxj1a is expressed by neurons that
maintain attachments to the apical surface (CSF-cNs), indicat-
ing that Foxj1a labels not just ERGs but all cells contacting
the central canal.
This study also reveals that Foxj1a is expressed in ependy-
mal cells not only in the adult spinal cord but from the time of
formation of the central canal in the embryonic neural tube. We
show that Foxj1a is induced in the floor plate and roof plate
(a)
(b)
(a¢)
(b¢)
(c)
(d)
(c¢)
(d ¢)
(e)
( f )
(g)
(h)
(i)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(j)
(k)
sham
uninjured (8 dpf)
3 dpi (8 dpf)
SCI
analysis
100
[80–100]
DMSO
Cyc
DMSO
Cyc
[20–80]
[0–20]
0
10 mm
60
0
n.s.
40
0
[0–20]
[20–80]
[80–100]
relative position
10
20
30
100
relative position
dorsal
ventral
90
80
70
****
***
60
50
40
30
20
10
10
20
30
40
50
(n)
(o)
5 dpf
1 dpi
2 dpi
3 dpi
(8 dpf)
200 mM
Cyc
200 mM
Cyc
DMSO
cyclopamine
3 dpi
7 dpi
foxj1a:GFP PCNA/BV DAPI
foxj1a:GFP PCNA DAPI
foxj1a DAPI
foxj1a:GFP PCNA DAPI
foxj1a fluorescence intensity
(arb. units)
foxj1a fluorescence intensity
(arb. units)
foxj1a DAPI
foxj1a DAPI
foxj1a:GFP PCNA/BV DAPI
foxj1a PCNA DAPI
foxj1a PCNA DAPI
Figure 6. Endogenous Foxj1a expression is increased in response to injury in a Shh-dependent manner. (a–d0) Confocal images of transverse sections of
Tg(0.6foxj1a:GFP) spinal cords immunostained against GFP (a,c) and FISH for foxj1a transcripts (b,d) in adjacent sections of sham-injury spinal cord (a,b)
(n ¼ 2) and 7 dpi spinal cord (c,d) (n ¼ 8). The co-labelling with an antibody against PCNA (in magenta) shows that the majority of proliferative ERGs express
foxj1a (d,d0) but not the foxj1a:GFP transgene (c,c0). BVs are also visible in (a) and (c) due to the expression of the transgene Tg(flk1:mCherry). (e) Illustration of the
site of spinal cord transection in 5 dpf larvae. ( f–i) Representative confocal images of sections of 8 dpf Tg(0.6foxj1a:GFP) transgenic larvae, uninjured ( f,g) (n ¼ 8)
or 3 dpi (h,i) (n ¼ 10). Adjoining sections were either immunostained against GFP (green) and PCNA (magenta) ( f,h) or processed with FISH for foxj1a transcripts
(green) (g,i). ( j) Schematic of the cyclopamine (Cyc) treatment experiments in injured larvae. (k) Schematic of the neural tube region selected to quantify the
fluorescence levels of foxj1a transcripts plotted in (n) and (o). (l,m) Representative confocal images of transverse sections of 3 dpi spinal cords of larvae treated for 2
days with DMSO (l ) or 200 mM cyclopamine (m) in the medium. The sections were collected 100 mm rostral to the injury site and foxj1a transcripts were detected
with FISH. (n) Fluorescence intensity (f.i.) profile of foxj1a transcripts along the dorsoventral axis (relative to the size of the neural tube) show reduced foxj1a levels
in Cyc-treated larvae (blue) (DMSO: n ¼ 14; Cyc: n ¼ 13) (a.u., arbitrary units). The line represents the mean f.i. and shaded regions correspond to the standard
deviation intervals. (o) Quantification of the average foxj1a f.i. in the regions shown in (k). The mean and s.d. bars are also shown in (n,o) and the p values were
calculated using two-tailed unpaired t-test (n.s., not significant; ***p , 0.001; ****p , 0.0001). DAPI-labelled nuclei are shown in grey. Scale bars, 20 mm.
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Open Biol. 7: 170139
9
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

before the initiation of lumen contraction. Foxj1a is also
expressed in a subset of cells lining the lumen in the middle
region of the neural tube. The different domains of Foxj1a-
expressing cells later contribute to the ependymal region after
the narrowing of the lumen. Although the expression of
Foxj1 in the floor plate (in mouse, [27]) and in the roof plate
(in chick, [28]) had been reported previously, here we show
for the first time that Foxj1a expression is maintained in these
two domains and in the previously unreported middle
domain until the formation of the central canal. Moreover,
we show that Foxj1a remains expressed in the ependymal
region until adulthood.
Foxj1a is not only expressed by the cells that make up the
ependymal zone, but is also required for the correct position-
ing of the central canal. In the absence of Foxj1a activity the
dorsal to ventral zipping of the lumen is delayed resulting
in a dorsally located canal. Foxj1a appears to be involved in
the attenuation of the Shh-dependent mitogenic activity
that is necessary for cells to exit the cell cycle and migrate
away from the ventricular zone [33]. If this transition is
affected, progenitor cells remain longer in the ventricular
zone and the constriction of the primitive lumen is stalled.
Although
delayed,
lumen
contraction
is
completed
in
Foxj1a morphants. However, the final position of the central
canal is moved dorsally, through a mechanism that is still
unclear. The expanded Shh activity may affect the timing of
differentiation along the dorsoventral axis, either by delaying
the transition from proliferation to cell cycle exit or by chan-
ging the dorsoventral identity of progenitor cells, which
influences their rate of differentiation [42]. If cells exit the
lumen at the wrong time and/or order and the zipping of
the lumen is not coordinated (for example, ventral and
dorsal cells exiting at the same time), the central canal can
end up in the wrong position. Nevertheless, the shifted epen-
dymal region in the Foxj1a morphants displays a normal
dorsoventral pattern, suggesting that ependymal cells orig-
inate from the correct progenitor domains. However, we
cannot confirm that ependymal specification occurred with-
out defects, since we did not test markers associated with
mature ependymal cells. Therefore, further work is needed
to assess if Foxj1a is required for the differentiation of
ependymal cells, as shown in the mouse brain [43]. The
mechanism through which Foxj1a dampens Shh signalling
activity is also not known. The role of Foxj1 in the attenuation
of Shh activity had been previously proposed in the chick
neural tube [27], although the later effect on the position of
the central canal had not been described. Foxj1 function in
Shh pathway regulation is expected to involve changes
in cilia structure that affect signal transduction downstream
of Shh binding and make cells less responsive to Shh [27].
Foxj1a expression is also activated in new ependymal cells
formed in response to injury, as had been suggested in embryos
[17]. Injury-induced proliferation is first detected in the Foxj1aþ
ependymal zone and results in the expansion of the ependymal
layer. Many of the newly added ependymal cells continue to
proliferate and reinforce the expression of Foxj1a, suggesting
that these cells maintain a progenitor status. The upregulation
of Foxj1a levels in the injured spinal cord depends on Shh
activity, arguing that the regulation of Fox1a expression
during regeneration relies on the same cues used during devel-
opment. Shh expression is also increased in response to injury
[23], but the trigger for the upregulation of Shh levels is still
unknown. Shh activity also promotes proliferation in the
regenerating spinal cord, and it will be of interest to investigate
if Foxj1a function is required for the injury-induced proliferation
or if, conversely, it is involved in the transition to differentiation
in resemblance to its role during development.
The characterization of Foxj1aþ cells during spinal cord
development and repairalso revealed that the foxj1a:GFP repor-
ter, which uses a 600 bp regulatory sequence to drive GFP
expression [18], only partially reproduces the endogenous
foxj1a expression. In the developing neural tube the reporter
transgene fails to label Foxj1aþ cells in the middle region, and
in the regenerating spinal cord the reporter is not induced in
ependymal cells formed after injury. These results indicate
that additional regulatoryelements are necessary to fully repro-
duceendogenousFoxj1aexpression,butfurtherworkisneeded
to identify these elements. It will be of particular interest to
investigate if Foxj1a expression in response to injury requires
dedicated regulatory sequences. Regeneration-specific enhan-
cer elements were recently reported in zebrafish in the context
of heart and caudal fin regeneration [44], and our data suggest
that Foxj1aexpressionduringspinal cord regeneration mayalso
be regulated by specific enhancers.
A better understanding of the Foxj1a regulatory regions will
also be important to develop new tools to follow ependymal
cells after an injury. It is known that ependymal cells not only
self-renew in response to injury, but also give rise to new neur-
ons [14]. Given that Foxj1a is expressed by the majority of cells
in the ependymal region, it is likely that Foxj1aþ cells are able to
generate neurons. However, we were unable to identify the pro-
genyof Foxj1aþ cells using the Tg(0.6foxj1a:GFP) transgenic line,
due to the rapid downregulation of GFP expression in differen-
tiated cells. To track the fate of Foxj1a descendants after they
leave the ependymal region, it will be necessary to use a
lineage-tracing approach, which will require a reliable Foxj1a
promotor sequence. The lineage tracing of Foxj1aþ cells will
help confirm if ERGs are multipotent (generating neurons, oli-
godendrocytes and astrocytes) and if all new neurons formed
after injury arise from the ependymal population. In addition,
the complete Foxj1a promoter can also be used to create cell
ablation transgenic lines to evaluate the contribution of the
ependymal population to the repair of the damaged tissue.
The role of Foxj1 as an ependymal marker is well estab-
lished in amniotes [9,43]. Our study demonstrates that this
role is conserved in zebrafish and shows that Foxj1a expression
in ependymal cells is initiated in the developing spinal cord.
Foxj1a also has an active role in the formation of the ependymal
canal during development, through the modulation of the Shh-
signalling pathway. Finally, this work shows that spinal cord
injury induces the formation of new ependymal cells that con-
tribute to tissue repair and Foxj1a expression is activated in
these new cells through the use of specific regulatory elements.
Thus, Foxj1 is a useful marker to help understand how similar
populations of cells—ependymal cells in zebrafish and
amniotes—display such strikingly different behaviours in
response to injury that lead to regeneration in zebrafish and
scarring in amniotes.
4. Material and methods
4.1. Fish husbandry and zebrafish lines
Adult and embryo zebrafish (Danio rerio) were maintained at
288C in standard conditions. The zebrafish transgenic lines
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Open Biol. 7: 170139
10
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

used in this study were previously reported: Tg(0.6fox-
j1a:GFP) [18], Tg(flk1:mCherry) [45] and Tg(fli1:EGFP)y1 [46].
Procedures with zebrafish were approved by the Portuguese
DGV (Direc¸a˜o Geral de Veterina´ria).
4.2. Morpholino oligonucleotide and mRNA
microinjection
Foxj1a antisense MO ([16]; obtained from Gene Tools)
and standard control MO (Gene Tools) were injected in
Tg(0.6foxj1a:GFP) embryos at the one-cell stage. Each embryo
was microinjected with a volume of 1.4 nl containing 2 ng of
either Foxj1a or standard control MOs. Foxj1a MO-injected
embryos were screened at 48 hpf to select only individuals
displaying a curved body phenotype, which is indicative of
problems in ciliogenesis [47]. To perform the rescue exper-
iments, one-cell stage embryos were injected with 2 ng of
foxj1a MO alone or together with either 500 pg or 1 ng of a
MO-resistant form of the full length foxj1a mRNA.
4.3. Generation of a morpholino oligonucleotide-
resistant full length foxj1a mRNA
The MO-binding region of the foxj1a coding sequence was
altered by introducing silent mutations (forward primer:
50-CGCGGGATCCGTCAGGACTATGTTAAGTATGTCTAGC
ATGGACCCCTGGCCGGA-30; reverse primer: 50-GCGCG
CGGCCGCAAAGCAGAGTCTCGATTTTAC-30).
The
tran-
scription of the full length mRNA was performed using the
SP6 mMESSAGE mMACHINE kit (ThermoFisher Scientific).
4.4. Generation of CRISPR gRNAs to target the foxj1a
locus
CRISPR gRNAs targeting the sequence coding the fork head
domain of the foxj1a gene were designed using the CRISPRscan
algorithm for gRNA_FD1 [48] and the CRISPRdirect software
for gRNA_FD2 [49]. The sgRNAs were generated according
to Gagnon et al. [50]. Briefly, gene-specific oligonucleotides
containing the T7 promoter, the target DNA sequence (under-
lined) and a complementary region (sgRNA_FD1: 50-TAATA
CGACTCACTATAGGCAGGTGGGATCTGCGTGGGTTTTA
GAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG-30; sgRNA_FD2: 50-TAATACGA
CTCACTATAGGCAGGTGGGATCTGCGTGGGTTTTAGAG
CTAGAAATAGCAAG-30) were annealed to an invariant
oligonucleotide encoding the reverse complement of the
tracrRNA tail (50-AAAAGCACCGACTCGGTGCCACTTTTT
CAAGTTGATAACGGACTAGCCTTATTTTAACTTGCTATTT
CTAGCTCTAAAAC-30)
and
T4 DNA polymerase (NEB
#M0203S) was used to fill in the ssDNA overhangs. The
double stranded sgRNA templatewas purified using QIAquick
PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen #28104) and transcribed using
MEGAshortscriptTM
T7
Transcription
Kit
(Ambion
#AM1354). Finally, the sgRNAs were DNAse treated and pur-
ified with phenol:chloroform extraction followed by alcohol
precipitation, according to the transcription kit. Cas9 protein
was produced by the Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel as
a purified batch at 1 mg ml21 in 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM
MgCl2, 0.2 M KCl. For the gRNA/Cas9 microinjections, the
two sgRNAs (FD1 and FD2) were mixed with Cas9 protein
(360 ng ml21 per sgRNA and 800 ng ml21 of Cas9 protein)
and incubated at 378C for 5 min to allow for the sgRNA/
Cas9 complexes to form. Embryos at one-cell stage were
injected with 1.4 nl of this solution.
4.5. Spinal cord injury in adult zebrafish
Adult zebrafish of either sex (4–12 month-old) were anaesthe-
tized by immersion in 0.016% tricaine (MS222, Sigma) in tank
water. A longitudinal incision was made on the side of anaes-
thetized zebrafish, midway between the base of the skull and
the dorsal fin. After exposing the vertebral column, the spinal
cord was compressed dorsoventrally using forceps (Dumont
#55, FST). The wound was sealed with Vetbond (3M) and the
fish allowed to recover in individual tanks. In control fish a
sham injury was performed by making an incision at the side
of the animal but leaving the spinal cord intact before sealing
the wound.
4.6. Spinal cord injury and cyclopamine treatment in
zebrafish larvae
The protocol to perform spinal cord injury in zebrafish larvae
was previously described [38]. Transgenic larvae (Tg(0.6fox-
j1a:GFP)) at 5 dpf were anaesthetized in 0.016% tricaine in
embryo medium and placed on their side in a drop of
medium in a Petri dish. The injury was performed at the
level of the anal pore using a 20G  100 syringe needle
(Terumo) to transect the region dorsal to the notochord that
contains the spinal cord. Injured larvae were carefully trans-
ferred to fresh embryo medium and maintained at 288C
until the time of analysis.
To inhibit the Shh signalling pathway in injured larvae,
cyclopamine (Sigma, C4116) was added at a concentration
of 200 mM to the medium 1 day after the injury and fresh
medium with cyclopamine was added again at 2 dpi. A con-
trol group of injured larvae was treated with an equivalent
volume of DMSO (cyclopamine vehicle). The drug-treated
larvae were kept in the dark at 288C until the time of analysis.
4.7. Histology
The vertebral column of adult zebrafish was dissected and
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) at 48C overnight. After
fixation the spinal cord was isolated from the vertebral
column. Embryos/larvae collected at different developmental
stages were also fixed in 4% PFA at 48C overnight. The samples
were washed for 3  5 min in PBS and equilibrated in 15%
sucrose/0.12 M phosphate buffer (PB) pH 7.2 solution at 48C
overnight, embedded in 7.5% gelatin/15% sucrose/0.12 M
PB pH 7.2 at 428C and frozen. The samples were cryosectioned
in 14 mm-thick slices and processed for immunohistochemistry
and in situ hybridization.
4.8. Transmission electron microscopy
The vertebral column of adult zebrafish was dissected and the
spinal cord isolated from the vertebrae before fixation over-
night at 48C in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4,
containing 2.5% (v/v) glutaraldehyde. The samples were
post-fixed in 1% (aqueous) osmium tetroxide for 1 h and
contrasted in 1% (aqueous) uranyl acetate for 30 min. Dehy-
dration was made using ethanol gradient (50–70–95–100%)
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Open Biol. 7: 170139
11
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

and infiltration was aided using propylene oxide and a mixture
(1 : 1) of propylene oxide and EPON 812 resin (EMS). Samples
were embedded in EPON resin and hardened at 608C for 36 h.
Sections were obtained using an ultramicrotome Reichert
Supernova (Leica Microsystems), and semi-thin sections
(500 nm) were stained with toluidine blue for light microscope
evaluation. Ultra-thin sections (70 nm) were collected in For-
mvar (AGAR Scientific) coated copper slot grids, and
counter-stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate (Reynold
recipe), and screened in a Hitachi H-7650 transmission electron
microscope at 100 kV acceleration.
4.9. Immunohistochemistry
To perform immunostaining in sections the gelatin was
removed from the cryosections using PBS heated to 428C (4 
5 min washes). After incubation with a blocking solution (1%
bovine serum albumin in PBS/0.01% Triton X-100 (PBSTx))
for 1 h at room temperature (RT), the sections were incubated
in primary antibody solution at 48C overnight. After 5 
5 min washes in PBSTx, the sections were incubated with the
secondary
antibody
(1 : 1000
in
blocking
solution)
and
1 mg ml21 DAPI (Sigma, D9564) for 2 h at RT. Details of the
primary and secondary antibodies used are described in the
electronic supplementary material, tables S1 and S2. After incu-
bation with the secondaryantibodies, the sections werewashed
in PBS and mounted in Mowiol mounting medium. Antigen
retrieval was performed for the anti-PCNA antibodyby placing
the slides in 10 mM sodium citrate pH 6/0.1% Triton X-100 and
heating in a microwave at sub-boiling temperature for 5 min
before proceeding with gelatin removal and immunostaining.
4.10. In situ hybridization
In situ hybridization (ISH) was performed in sections using
probes against foxj1a [51], pkd2l1 (kindly provided by Mo´nica
Roxo-Rosa) or patched2 [34]. Digoxigenin or fluorescein
(Fluo)-labelled probes were transcribed using T7 or SP6 RNA
polymerase (Roche). The ISH protocol followed was adapted
from a described protocol [52] and is detailed in the electronic
supplementary material. In sections that were processed with a
colorimetric reaction, the probe was developed using BM
Purple AP substrate (Roche, 11442074001). In sections devel-
oped with a fluorescent reaction (FISH), the TSA Plus TMR/
Fluorescein system (PerkinElmer, NEL756001KT) was used
instead, following the manufacturer’s protocol. Nuclei were
counterstained with 1 mg ml21 DAPI and the slides were
mounted in Mowiol medium. In some cases, the FISH was fol-
lowed by immunostaining against GFP or PCNA. In these
sections, the development of the probe with the TSA plus
system was followed by the immunohistochemistry procedure
described above.
4.11. Imaging
Immunostained and FISH sections were imaged using Zeiss
LSM 710 or LSM 880 confocal microscopes with Plan-Neofluor
40/1.3 Oil or Plan-Apochromat 63/1.4 Oil objectives. Each
image is a maximum intensity projection of a z-stack acquired
from the 14 mm cryosection. Images of the neural tube region in
transverse sections of larvae were acquired at the level of
somites 5–10. The images of ISH sections developed with col-
orimetric reaction were acquired using a Leica DM2500
brightfield microscope with a HCX PL FLUOTAR 100/1.3
Oil objective. The processing of acquired images was per-
formed using the image analysis software FIJI [53] and Adobe
PHOTOSHOP and ILLUSTRATOR were used for assembly of figures.
4.12. Quantification of lumen closure
The positions of the dorsal and ventral points of the lumen and
the ventral and dorsal edges of the neural tube (floor plate and
roof plate, respectively) were quantified manually using FIJI.
MATLAB was used to register the positions in each neural tube
to the centre of the lumen and to plot the grouped positions
according to stage (hpf) and condition (Foxj1a MO versus Stan-
dard MO). GraphPad PRISM 5 was used to generate the scatter
plot of the size of the lumen and ventral and dorsal regions and
to perform statistical analysis between conditions.
4.13. Quantification of cell number and positions
The number of phospho-histone H3þ cells per section was
quantified manually and obtained data were plotted and
analysed statistically using GraphPad PRISM v. 5.
The number and position of PCNAþ (or Huþ), foxj1a:GFPþ
and DAPIþ cells in the injured spinal cords were quantified
using the 3D Objects Counter plugin available in FIJI [54].
Briefly, a maximum projection image was generated from
three optical sections with 1 mm between sections. The image
of the DAPI channel was then used to automatically segment
individual nuclei using the plugin. In nuclei that overlapped
and were not segmented automatically, the boundary between
nuclei was defined manually. The segmentation mask that
identified individual objects (nuclei) in the DAPI channel
was then used to extract the fluorescence intensity in the
other two channels (GFP and PCNA/Hu). The plugin output
included the position of each nucleus and the average fluor-
escence intensity in the GFP and PCNA/Hu channels. We
defined that a nucleus was positive for a specific channel if
the average intensity was above the background levels
(measured manually). MATLAB was used to analyse the
obtained data and to generate scatter plots of cell positions
for each time-point after injury (composite maps).
GraphPad PRISM 5 was used to plot the total number of
different cell types per section, to compare between different
conditions and different time-points post-injury and to
perform statistical analysis.
4.14. Quantification of fluorescence intensity of foxj1a
and shh transcripts
Images of sections labelled by FISH with a probe against
foxj1a or shh were used to measure the profiles of the fluor-
escence intensity of foxj1a or shh transcripts along the
dorsoventral axis. A 10 mm-wide box was placed on one of
the sides of the lumen from the ventral to the dorsal edges
of the neural tube and the dorsoventral profile of foxj1a or
shh fluorescence intensity (in arbitrary units, a.u.) was
measured inside the box using the Plot Profile plugin in
FIJI. MATLAB was used to normalize the dorsoventral positions
to the size of the neural tube and to bin the raw fluorescence
intensity values into 5% intervals relative to the total size of
the neural tube. The binned fluorescence intensity was aver-
aged between individuals and plotted as a function of the
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Open Biol. 7: 170139
12
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

relative dorsoventral position. MATLAB was also used to quan-
tify the foxj1a or shh fluorescence intensity in different
dorsoventral regions of the neural tube. GraphPad PRISM 5
was used to plot the average foxj1a fluorescence intensity in
each
region,
to
compare
between
different
conditions
(DMSO versus Cyc) and perform statistical analysis.
Ethics. All experiments involving animals were approved by the
Animal User and Ethical Committees at Instituto de Medicina Mol-
ecular, in accord with directives from Direcc¸a˜o Geral Veterina´ria
(PORT 1005/92).
Data accessibility. The datasets supporting this article have been
uploaded as part of the electronic supplementary material.
Authors’ contributions. A.R. performed all the experiments and analysed
the data. A.R. and L.S. conceived the project and wrote the
manuscript. J.F.M. and A.C.C. produced the gRNAS under the
Congento consortium. A.M.C. performed the FISH experiments.
Competing interests. We declare we have no competing interests.
Funding. This research was supported by FCT (Portugal) grants
(PTDC/BIM-MED/1375/2012
and
PTDC/BIM-MED/3295/2014)
given to L.S. L.S. was supported by an IF contract from FCT (Portu-
gal). A.R. was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship of the FCT
(Portugal) (SFRH/BPD/100162/2014) and EMBO (605-2012).
Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Ana Farinho for technical support.
We thank the support given by the Histology and Comparative Pathol-
ogy Laboratory, the Fish Facility and the Bioimaging Unit of the
Instituto de Medicina Molecular. We also thank the Electron
Microscopy Facility at the Instituto Gulbenkian de Cieˆncia for the use
of the transmission electron microscope and Andreia Pinto for all
TEM data. We further thank Susana Lopes for sharing the foxj1a MO
and the pkd2l1 probe and Xueying Li for the Tg(0.6foxj1a:GFP) line.
References
1.
Jessell TM. 2000 Neuronal specification in the spinal
cord: inductive signals and transcriptional codes.
Nat. Rev. Genet. 1, 20–29. (doi:10.1038/35049541)
2.
Helms AW, Johnson JE. 2003 Specification of dorsal
spinal cord interneurons. Curr. Opin Neurobiol. 13,
42–49. (doi:10.1016/S0959-4388(03)00010-2)
3.
Rowitch DH, Kriegstein AR. 2010 Developmental
genetics of vertebrate glial-cell specification. Nature
468, 214–222. (doi:10.1038/nature09611)
4.
Fu H, Qi Y, Tan M, Cai J, Hu X, Liu Z, Jensen J, Qiu
M. 2003 Molecular mapping of the origin of
postnatal spinal cord ependymal cells: evidence that
adult ependymal cells are derived from Nkx6.1þ
ventral neural progenitor cells. J. Comp. Neurol. 456,
237–244. (doi:10.1002/cne.10481)
5.
Masahira N et al. 2006 Olig2-positive progenitors in
the embryonic spinal cord give rise not only to
motoneurons and oligodendrocytes, but also to a
subset of astrocytes and ependymal cells. Dev. Biol.
293, 358–369. (doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.02.029)
6.
Khazanov S, Paz Y, Hefetz A, Gonzales BJ, Netser Y,
Mansour AA, Ben-Arie N. 2016 Uncovering floor
plate descendants in the ependyma of adult mouse
CNS using mapping of Nato3-expressing cells.
Int. J. Dev. Biol. 61, 257–265. (doi:10.1387/ijdb.
160232nb)
7.
Yu K, McGlynn S, Matise MP. 2013 Floor plate-derived
sonic hedgehog regulates glial and ependymal cell
fates in the developing spinal cord. Development 140,
1594–1604. (doi:10.1242/dev.090845)
8.
Johansson CB, Momma S, Clarke DL, Risling M,
Lendahl U, Frise´n J. 1999 Identification of a neural
stem cell in the adult mammalian central nervous
system. Cell 96, 25–34. (doi:10.1016/S0092-
8674(00)80956-3)
9.
Meletis K, Barnabe´-Heider F, Carle´n M, Evergren E,
Tomilin N, Shupliakov O, Frise´n J. 2008 Spinal cord
injury reveals multilineage differentiation of
ependymal cells. PLoS Biol. 6, e182. (doi:10.1371/
journal.pbio.0060182)
10. Dromard C et al. 2008 Adult human spinal cord
harbors neural precursor cells that generate neurons
and glial cells in vitro. J. Neurosci. Res. 86,
1916–1926. (doi:10.1002/jnr.21646)
11. Mothe AJ, Zahir T, Santaguida C, Cook D, Tator CH.
2011 Neural stem/progenitor cells from the adult
human spinal cord are multipotent and self-
renewing and differentiate after transplantation. PLoS
ONE 6, e27079. (doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0027079)
12. Mothe AJ, Tator CH. 2005 Proliferation, migration,
differentiation of endogenous ependymal region
stem/progenitor cells following minimal spinal cord
injury in the adult rat. Neuroscience 131, 177–187.
(doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.10.011)
13. Fleisch VC, Fraser B, Allison WT. 2011 Investigating
regeneration and functional integration of CNS
neurons: lessons from zebrafish genetics and other
fish species. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1812,
364–380. (doi:10.1016/j.bbadis.2010.10.012)
14. Reimer MM, So¨rensen I, Kuscha V, Frank RE, Liu C,
Becker CG, Becker T. 2008 Motor neuron
regeneration in adult zebrafish. J. Neurosci. 28,
8510–8516. (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1189-08.2008)
15. Garcia-Ovejero D, Arevalo-Martin A, Paniagua-Torija
B, Florensa-Vila J, Ferrer I, Grassner L, Molina-
Holgado E. 2015 The ependymal region of the adult
human spinal cord differs from other species and
shows ependymoma-like features. Brain 138,
1583–1597. (doi:10.1093/brain/awv089)
16. Yu X, Ng CP, Habacher H, Roy S. 2008 Foxj1
transcription factors are master regulators of
the motile ciliogenic program. Nat. Genet. 40,
1445–1453. (doi:10.1038/ng.263)
17. Hellman NE et al. 2010 The zebrafish foxj1a
transcription factor regulates cilia function in
response to injury and epithelial stretch. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 107, 18 499–18 504. (doi:10.1073/
pnas.1005998107)
18. Caron A, Xu X, Lin X. 2012 Wnt/b-catenin signaling
directly regulates Foxj1 expression and ciliogenesis
in zebrafish Kupffer’s vesicle. Development 139,
514–524. (doi:10.1242/dev.071746)
19. Becker CG, Becker T. 2015 Neuronal regeneration
from ependymo-radial glial cells: cook, little pot,
cook!. Dev. Cell 32, 516–527. (doi:10.1016/j.devcel.
2015.01.001)
20. Brody SL, Yan XH, Wuerffel MK, Song SK, Shapiro SD.
2000 Ciliogenesis and left-right axis defects in
forkhead factor HFH-4-null mice. Am. J. Respir. Cell
Mol. Biol. 23, 45–51. (doi:10.1165/ajrcmb.23.1.4070)
21. Chen J, Knowles HJ, Hebert JL, Hackett BP. 1998
Mutation of the mouse hepatocyte nuclear factor/
forkhead homologue 4 gene results in an absence
of cilia and random left-right asymmetry. J. Clin.
Invest. 102, 1077–1082. (doi:10.1172/JCI4786)
22. Stubbs JL, Oishi I, Izpisua Belmonte JC, Kintner C.
2008 The forkhead protein Foxj1 specifies node-like
cilia in Xenopus and zebrafish embryos. Nat. Genet.
40, 1454–1460. (doi:10.1038/ng.267)
23. Reimer MM, Kuscha V, Wyatt C, So¨rensen I,
Frank RE, Knu¨wer M, Becker T, Becker CG. 2009
Sonic hedgehog is a polarized signal for motor
neuron regeneration in adult zebrafish. J. Neurosci.
29, 15 073–15 082. (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4748-
09.2009)
24. Shen Q, Wang Y, Kokovay E, Lin G, Chuang SM,
Goderie SK, Roysam B, Temple S. 2008 Adult SVZ
stem cells lie in a vascular niche: a quantitative
analysis of niche cell–cell interactions. Cell Stem
Cell 3, 289–300. (doi:10.1016/j.stem.2008.07.026)
25. Tavazoie M, Van der Veken L, Silva-Vargas V,
Louissaint M, Colonna L, Zaidi B, Garcia-Verdugo
JM, Doetsch F. 2008 A specialized vascular niche for
adult neural stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 3, 279–288.
(doi:10.1016/j.stem.2008.07.025)
26. Djenoune L et al. 2014 Investigation of spinal
cerebrospinal fluid-contacting neurons expressing
PKD2L1: evidence for a conserved system from fish
to primates. Front. Neuroanat. 8, 26. (doi:10.3389/
fnana.2014.00026)
27. Cruz C et al. 2010 Foxj1 regulates floor plate cilia
architecture and modifies the response of cells to
sonic hedgehog signalling. Development 137,
4271–4282. (doi:10.1242/dev.051714)
28. Nitzan E, Avraham O, Kahane N, Ofek S, Kumar D,
Kalcheim C. 2016 Dynamics of BMP and Hes1/
Hairy1 signaling in the dorsal neural tube underlies
the transition from neural crest to definitive
roof plate. BMC Biol. 14, 23. (doi:10.1186/s12915-
016-0245-6)
29. Kondrychyn I, Teh C, Sin M, Korzh V. 2013
Stretching morphogenesis of the roof plate and
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Open Biol. 7: 170139
13
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

formation of the central canal. PLoS ONE 8, e56219.
(doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0056219)
30. Hudish LI, Blasky AJ, Appel B. 2013 miR-219
regulates neural precursor differentiation by direct
inhibition of apical par polarity proteins. Dev. Cell
27, 387–398. (doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2013.10.015)
31. Dutta S, Sriskanda S, Boobalan E, Alur RP, Elkahloun
A, Brooks BP. 2015 nlz1 is required for cilia
formation in zebrafish embryogenesis. Dev. Biol.
406, 203–211. (doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.08.019)
32. Lu H, Toh MT, Narasimhan V, Thamilselvam SK, Choksi
SP, Roy S. 2015 A function for the Joubert syndrome
protein Arl13b in ciliary membrane extension and
ciliary length regulation. Dev. Biol. 397, 225–236.
(doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.11.009)
33. Hudish LI, Galati DF, Ravanelli AM, Pearson CG,
Huang P, Appel B. 2016 miR-219 regulates neural
progenitors by dampening apical Par protein-
dependent Hedgehog signaling. Development 143,
2292–2304. (doi:10.1242/dev.137844)
34. Concordet J, Lewis KE, Moore JW, Goodrich LV,
Johnson RL, Scott MP, Ingham PW. 1996 Spatial
regulation of a zebrafish patched homologue
reflects the roles of sonic hedgehog and protein
kinase A in neural tube and somite patterning.
Development 2846, 2835–2846.
35. Ulloa F, Briscoe J. 2007 Morphogens and the control of
cell proliferation and patterning in thespinal cord. Cell
Cycle 6, 2640–2649. (doi:10.4161/cc.6.21.4822)
36. Hui SP, Dutta A, Ghosh S. 2010 Cellular response
after crush injury in adult zebrafish spinal cord. Dev.
Dyn. 239, 2962–2979. (doi:10.1002/dvdy.22438)
37. Bhatt DH, Otto SJ, Depoister B, Fetcho JR. 2004
Cyclic AMP-induced repair of zebrafish spinal
circuits. Science 305, 254–258. (doi:10.1126/
science.1098439)
38. Briona LK, Dorsky RI. 2014 Spinal cord transection
in the larval zebrafish. J. Vis. Exp. 87, 1479. (doi:10.
3791/51479)
39. Ohnmacht J, Yang Y, Maurer GW, Barreiro-Iglesias A,
Tsarouchas TM, Wehner D, Sieger D, Becker CG,
Becker T. 2016 Spinal motor neurons are
regenerated after mechanical lesion and genetic
ablation in larval zebrafish. Development 143,
1464–1474. (doi:10.1242/dev.129155)
40. Sabelstro¨m H, Stenudd M, Frise´n J. 2014 Neural
stem cells in the adult spinal cord. Exp. Neurol. 260,
44–49. (doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2013.01.026)
41. Hui SP, Nag TC, Ghosh S. 2015 Characterization of
Proliferating neural progenitors after spinal cord
injury in adult zebrafish. PLoS ONE 10, e0143595.
(doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0143595)
42. Kicheva A, Bollenbach T, Ribeiro A, Valle HP, Lovell-
Badge R, Episkopou V, Briscoe J. 2014 Coordination
of progenitor specification and growth in mouse
and chick spinal cord. Science 345, 1254927.
(doi:10.1126/science.1254927)
43. Jacquet BV et al. 2009 FoxJ1-dependent gene
expression is required for differentiation of radial
glia into ependymal cells and a subset of
astrocytes in the postnatal brain. Development
136, 4021–4031. (doi:10.1242/dev.041129)
44. Kang J et al. 2016 Modulation of tissue repair
by regeneration enhancer elements. Nature 532,
201–206. (doi:10.1038/nature17644)
45. Hogan BM, Bos FL, Bussmann J, Witte M, Chi NC,
Duckers HJ, Schulte-Merker S. 2009 Ccbe1 is
required for embryonic lymphangiogenesis and
venous sprouting. Nat. Genet. 41, 396–398.
(doi:10.1038/ng.321)
46. Lawson ND, Weinstein BM. 2002 In vivo imaging of
embryonic vascular development using transgenic
zebrafish. Dev. Biol. 248, 307–318. (doi:10.1006/
dbio.2002.0711)
47. Tian T, Zhao L, Zhang M, Zhao X, Meng A. 2009
Both foxj1a and foxj1b are implicated in left-right
asymmetric development in zebrafish embryos.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 380, 537–542.
(doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.01.111)
48. Moreno-Mateos MA, Vejnar CE, Beaudoin JD,
Fernandez JP, Mis EK, Khokha MK, Giraldez AJ. 2015
CRISPRscan: designing highly efficient sgRNAs for
CRISPR-Cas9 targeting in vivo. Nat. Methods 12,
982–988. (doi:10.1038/nmeth.3543)
49. Naito Y, Hino K, Bono H, Ui-Tei K. 2015 CRISPRdirect:
software for designing CRISPR/Cas guide RNA with
reduced off-target sites. Bioinformatics 31, 1120–
1123. (doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu743)
50. Gagnon JA et al. 2014 Efficient mutagenesis by Cas9
protein-mediated oligonucleotide insertion and
large-scale assessment of single-guide RNAs. PLoS
ONE 9, e98186. (doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0098186)
51. Neugebauer JM1,Amack JD, Peterson AG, Bisgrove BW,
Yost HJ. 2009 FGF signalling during embryo
development regulates cilia length in diverse epithelia.
Nature 458, 651–654. (doi:10.1038/nature07753)
52. Lauter G, So¨ll I, Hauptmann G. 2011 Two-color
fluorescent in situ hybridization in the embryonic
zebrafish brain using differential detection
systems. BMC Dev. Biol. 11, 43. (doi:10.1186/1471-
213X-11-43)
53. Schindelin J et al. 2012 Fiji: an open-source
platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods
9, 676–682. (doi:10.1038/nmeth.2019)
54. Bolte S, Cordelie`res FP. 2006 A guided tour into
subcellular colocalization analysis in light
microscopy. J. Microsc. 224, 213–232. (doi:10.
1111/j.1365-2818.2006.01706.x)
rsob.royalsocietypublishing.org
Open Biol. 7: 170139
14
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021

===== Ringers2019_PhilTransRSocB_MotileCilia+CNS =====
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Review
Cite this article: Ringers C, Olstad EW,
Jurisch-Yaksi N. 2019 The role of motile cilia in
the development and physiology of the
nervous system. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 375:
20190156.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0156
Accepted: 24 September 2019
One contribution of 17 to a Theo Murphy
meeting issue ‘Unity and diversity of cilia in
locomotion and transport’.
Subject Areas:
cellular biology, developmental biology,
genetics, molecular biology, neuroscience
Keywords:
cilia, Foxj1, cerebrospinal fluid, olfaction,
nervous system, ependymal cell
Author for correspondence:
Nathalie Jurisch-Yaksi
e-mail: nathalie.jurisch-yaksi@ntnu.no
†These authors contributed equally to this
work.
The role of motile cilia in the
development and physiology of the
nervous system
Christa Ringers1,†, Emilie W. Olstad1,† and Nathalie Jurisch-Yaksi1,2,3
1Kavli Institute for Systems Neuroscience and Centre for Neural Computation, and 2Department of Clinical and
Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Olav Kyrres Gate 9, 7030 Trondheim,
Norway
3Department of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology, St Olavs University Hospital, Edvard Griegs Gate 8,
7030 Trondheim, Norway
NJ-Y, 0000-0002-8767-6120
Motile cilia are miniature, whip-like organelles whose beating generates a
directional fluid flow. The flow generated by ciliated epithelia is a subject
of great interest, as defective ciliary motility results in severe human diseases
called motile ciliopathies. Despite the abundance of motile cilia in diverse
organs including the nervous system, their role in organ development and
homeostasis remains poorly understood. Recently, much progress has been
made regarding the identity of motile ciliated cells and the role of motile-
cilia-mediated flow in the development and physiology of the nervous
system. In this review, we will discuss these recent advances from sensory
organs, specifically the nose and the ear, to the spinal cord and brain
ventricles.
This article is part of the Theo Murphy meeting issue ‘Unity and diversity
of cilia in locomotion and transport’.
1. Introduction
The motile cilium is an evolutionarily conserved organelle. Even unicellular
organisms harbour multiple motile cilia (Paramecium and Tetrahymena) or a
single pair of flagella (Chlamydomonas) that are structurally similar to vertebrate
cilia [1]. The conserved ciliary core, known as the axoneme, consists of nine
microtubule doublets that surround a central microtubule pair and is referred
to as a 9 + 2 structure. Ciliary motility is driven by axonemal dyneins, which
create sliding interactions between outer microtubules, while other motor pro-
teins, intraflagellar transport proteins, carry cargo into and out of the cilium [1].
Ciliates can interact with their environment in complex ways [2]. Hence, it is not
surprising that occasionally sensory components, such as insulin-like receptors
[3], are found on the cilium together with other components of signal transduc-
tion cascades [4]. In metazoans, besides the motile cilium, another type of
sensory cilium exists: the immotile primary cilium. This cilium lacks dynein
arms, accounting for its immotility [5], and often the central microtubule pair
[6]. Hence, they are referred to as 9 + 0 cilia. Primary cilia are major signalling
hubs [7], exhibiting receptors for serotonin [8], Hedgehog [9] and various
odours [10]. The sensory role, however, is not limited to primary cilia, as
motile cilia express signalling components too, such as bitter taste-like receptors
in respiratory cilia [11] or progesterone receptors in oviductal cilia [12]. Whether
cilia harness dynein arms or not is largely determined by specific expression of
the Foxj1 transcription factor. This transcription factor alone is sufficient to gen-
erate motile cilia [13–15] and is therefore regarded as a marker for motile
ciliated cells. Cells, harbouring either a single, two or multiple motile cilia
[16], exist in various parts of the nervous system where they generate specific
flow patterns. We will here describe the identity and function of motile ciliated
cells in the nose, the ear, the spinal cord and the brain primarily in animal
models used in research and in humans.
© 2019 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

2. Cilia in the nose
Chemosensation in vertebrates occurs in dedicated olfactory
and gustatory organs. In the nose, bipolar olfactory sensory
neurons (OSNs) [17] protrude several olfactory cilia from
their dendritic knobs into the nasal cavity and are indispen-
sable to the nasal epithelium across animal species. Indeed,
mutations affecting ciliogenesis or intraflagellar transport of
transduction components into the olfactory cilia [10,18]
result in anosmia in humans, mice [19] and zebrafish [20]. In
addition, the olfactory epithelium contains microvillous odorant
receptor cells, glia-like support cells (sustentacular cells) and
basal cells which replenish the OSNs. The anatomically separ-
ated respiratory epithelium consists of mucus-producing goblet
cells and multiciliated support cells [21–24]. This arrangement is
observed in all vertebrates and has been documented for
humans [23], mice [24], clawed frogs [21] and zebrafish [22]
(figures 1 and 2a). Nevertheless, vertebrate olfactory organs
are highly variable. Fish exhibit an aquatic nose, mammals
an airborne nose and amphibians a combination of the two
[17]. Despite vast differences in their environment, odorant
receptors are conserved between aquatic and terrestrial ani-
mals [17] and localize specifically to the cilia of the OSNs
[10]. Olfactory cilia lack dynein arms in many species includ-
ing humans [23], rodents [30] and zebrafish [22], and are
therefore considered immotile. Yet, OSNs express the motile
ciliary marker Foxj1 in mice [31,32] and olfactory placodes
express foxj1b in zebrafish [33,34]. Strikingly, olfactory cilia
were observed to be motile in frog [35] and trout [36]. The
motile nature of those cilia, however, remains puzzling.
Nonetheless, multiciliated cells are found near the olfac-
tory epithelium in many species (figure 2a). Their function,
however, remains poorly understood. Motile cilia may
remove pathogens entrapped in mucus away from the olfac-
tory epithelium [37], in a process similar to the mucociliary
clearance of the lung epithelium [38]. Olfactory cilia are the
single direct entry point into the central nervous system
from the outside [39] and are specifically targeted by
pathogens [40]. Thus, mucociliary clearance [38] may comp-
lement
other
defence
mechanisms
including
enzymatic
activity targeting pathogens [41] and sneeze reflexes [42].
Additionally, motile-cilia-mediated flow may contribute to
odour sampling in the nose. In the aquatic environment, odour
molecules flow through the olfactory organ, either by diffusion
or by active mechanisms including motile cilia [43–45]. Motile
cilia not only attract odorants into the nasal cavity to aid odour
detection, but simultaneously repel odours to enhance detec-
tion of rapidly succeeding odour plumes in the zebrafish
nose pit (figure 2a) [44]. Cilia-mediated flow may also support
the sequential enzymatic conversion and delivery of odorants,
such as ATP, to the nose [45]. For mammals and other terres-
trials, such as insects, volatile odours first need to reach
OSNs through diffusion or active transport into the mucus or
fluid surrounding OSNs [17]. In mammals, sniffing not only
aids odorant transport to the olfactory epithelium, but also
induces sniff-cycle-related temporal dynamics in the olfactory
bulb that facilitate odour coding [46,47]. Such a process may
be mediated by mechanosensitivity of olfactory cilia [48].
To further aid phase transition of odorants, both mammals
and insects express odorant-binding proteins, which travel
freely in the mucus and help capture volatile odours into the
mucus layerclose to the sensory cilia [41,49]. It remains unclear
whether motile-cilia-mediated mucus flow in the nasal cavity
of mammals contributes to the clearance of odours, and
thereby plays similar roles as in fish.
3. Cilia in the inner ear
Whereas OSNs are key to olfaction, hair cells are essential to
auditory and vestibular processing [50]. The hair cell bundle
consists of multiple tapering stereocilia and sometimes a
single kinocilium, the only true cilium. Both vestibular and
cochlear kinocilia do not directly transduce sensory infor-
mation (for a review of cilia in the development of the
inner ear, see [51]). Even more so, hair cells in the cochlea
olfactory organ
inner ear organ
50 mm
500 µm
50 mm
500 µm
DV
TeV
LV
3V
4V
MV
LV
3V
4V
LV
3V
4V
(a)
(b)
TV
DV-TeV
RV
500 µm
(a′′)
(b′)
(d′)
(a′)
(c)
(d)
TV
RV
(c′)
ventricular system 
Figure 1. Schematic depiction of sensory and ventricular systems across vertebrates. (a–d) Olfactory organs (green), inner ears (orange), ventricular systems (blue)
and central nervous systems (pink) in zebrafish (a), frog (b), mouse (c) and human (d) are shown. Sensory regions in olfactory organs are coloured dark green, while
non-sensory regions are light green. Three-dimensional renderings of brain ventricular systems of (a0) a 2-day old zebrafish [25], (a00) a three-month-old zebrafish
[26], (b0) a stage 45 Xenopus tropicalis [27], (c0) an average adult mouse [28] and (d0) an adult human [29] are shown. TV, telencephalic; DV, diencephalic ventricle;
TeV, tectal ventricle; RV, rhombencephalic ventricle; LV, lateral ventricle; 3V, 3rd ventricle; MV, mesencephalic ventricle; 4V, 4th ventricle.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 375: 20190156
2
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

of mammalians lose their cilium during the maturation pro-
cess [50]. Instead, gated ion channels on stereocilia open
upon deflection of the hair bundle and initiate a cellular
response. Hair cells mediate stimulus detection of head
rotation in the semicircular canals, linear acceleration in the
otolithic organs, and sound in the otolithic organs of fish or
amphibians, and in the cochlea in mammals [52].
In mammals, otolithic kinocilia lack inner dynein arms
[53] and are thus considered immotile. Similarly, kinocilia
in the zebrafish inner ear are considered to be immotile
[51,54–57], despite an initial report stating otherwise [58].
Surprisingly, oscillating kinocilia have been observed in the
otolith organ of eels [59]. Despite the immotility of the kino-
cilium, hair cells express the motile cilia marker foxj1b in
zebrafish [33,54], foxj1.2 in the clawed frog otic vesicle,
[60,61], and Foxj1 in mice in the cochlea prenatally [62], and
in the utricle both pre- and postnatally [62,63]. Interestingly,
motile cilia in auditory organs have been found elsewhere.
For instance, the chordotonal sensory neurons of Drosophila
bear cilia whose motility is shown to amplify environmental
sounds [64], such that mutants lacking ciliary motility are
deaf [65]. By contrast, mammalian hair cells do not rely on
kinocilia to amplify environmental sounds. Instead, this role
is attributed to an active piezo-element in the hair cell mem-
brane [52]. Beating cilia have also been observed in the
zebrafish otic vesicle during early development, specifically
on cells neighbouring hair cells [54–58] (figure 2b). Besides
clear evidence of ciliary motility, there is no consensus
on the timely location [54–58], the ciliary beat frequency
[55–58] or the consequences of ciliary immotility on otolith
formation. Even though ablation of ciliary motility in zebra-
fish affects the otolithic number [54,58] and shape [54,55],
these phenotypes disappear at later developmental stages
[56,57]. It is possible that other mechanisms regulate the
later development of the ear. Bodily movements may be
involved in this process since restraining larval movements
perturbs otolith development [56,66] and even aggravates
the motile-cilia-mediated ear phenotype [57]. Even though
the otolith phenotype disappears over time, the young zebra-
fish larva may depend on motile ciliated flow for its inner
ear function at early age. Since otolith size affects auditory
perception [67] and vestibular processing [68], defects in
CSF-cN
floor plate
ECC/ERG
ciliated OSNs
(d′)
(d′′)
(d′)
(d′′)
radial
glia
B
E1
E2
A
C
Lat
M
A
P
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
A
P
D
V
A
P
D
V
L
R
D
V
(e′)
(e′)
CSF
CSF
CSF
CSF
?
?
CSF
motile ciliated
cells
motile cilium
primary cilium
liquid
motile-cilia-mediated flow
water
MCC
microvilli
OSNs
A
P
D
V
L
R
D
V
E1
B
(e′)
A
D
P
Lat
?
supporting
cell
hair
cell
otolith
(b′)
(b′)
Figure 2. Schematic depiction of various cavities of the nervous system lined with motile cilia. (a) The olfactory organ of a zebrafish larva is composed of multi-
ciliated cells (MCC) located at the outer rim of the nasal cavity. MCC bear multiple motile cilia (magenta), which generate a directional fluid flow of water. Ciliated
OSNs (green), which bear multiple primary cilia (black) and microvilli OSN (grey) are located at the bottom of the nasal cavity. (b,b0) The otic vesicle of a zebrafish
embryo at 18–24 hpf contains hair cells (green), or tether cells, that bear primary cilia capable of tethering the otolith (blue). Next to hair cells, there are motile cilia
on supporting cells that generate a rotational flow near the otolith. (c) The central canal of the spinal cord is composed of cerebrospinal fluid-contacting neurons
(CSF-cNs; green), which bear a microvilli tuft and a motile cilium in zebrafish. ECC (grey), also known as ERG in zebrafish, are located on the floor plate or the dorsal
wall of the central canal and bear a cilium. Note that there are more motile cilia in the ventral part of the central canal than the dorsal plane at early developmental
stage, and that the CSF flow is bidirectional. (d) The brain ventricular system of the zebrafish larva is decorated by motile cilia (magenta) at very specific locations
along the midline. Motile-cilia-mediated flow is complex and compartmentalized to individual ventricles. (d0) Sagittal view of the inset in (d) showing that cells
bear a single cilium oriented anteriorly in the same direction as fluid flow. (d00) Transverse view shows that motile cilia are located in the ventral and dorsal wall of
the diencephalic-tectal ventricle. Elsewhere, radial glia (RG, green) project their primary cilium into the CSF-filled cavity. (e) ECs, which bear motile cilia, are located
along the medial and lateral wall of the mouse lateral ventricle. (e0) Transverse section through the inset in (e) reveals that NSCs of the SVZ are located directly under the
ependyma layer made of multiciliated E1 cells and bi-ciliated E2 cells. NSCs also known as B cells (green) project their primary cilium towards the CSF-filled ventricle in
addition to contacting the blood vessel (blue), while transient amplifying cells (C cells, grey) and migrating neuroblasts (A cells, grey) lose their direct interaction with the
CSF. En face representation shows the pinwheel structure composed of E1 and B cells. Note the translational polarity of the motile cilia of E1 cells. A, anterior; P, posterior;
L, left; R, right; D, dorsal; V, ventral; M, medial; Lat, lateral. Motile cilia are in magenta, primary cilia are in black.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 375: 20190156
3
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

otolith formation may result in an imbalance that compromises
larval zebrafish survival [68]. In fish, otoliths are directly teth-
ered to kinocilia, while in amniotes, multiple hair cells are
covered by an otoconia-covered membrane. Little is known,
however, about the presence or absence of motile cilia in
amniotes. Although otolith formation in fish may not directly
translate to mammals, understanding cilia-mediated control,
as well as the importance of Foxj1 expression, could provide
important mechanistic insights into ear development.
4. Motile cilia in the spinal cord
Motile cilia are observed on several cell types in the spinal
cord, including floor plate cells, ependymal cells (ECs) and
cerebrospinal fluid-contacting neurons (CSF-cNs) (figure 2c).
These cells are adjacent to the central canal, which elongates
from the brain ventricles throughout the entire spinal cord
and is filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) [69,70].
(a) Identity of motile ciliated cells in the spinal cord
The floor plate is present during early development in all ver-
tebrates and consists of cells populating the ventral midline of
the neural tube. Through the secretion of Sonic hedgehog,
floor plate cells play key roles in the patterning of the
neural tube [71]. Work in various animal models including
zebrafish [13], mice and chick [72], revealed that the floor
plate cells harbour cilia and express typical markers of cilia
motility including Foxj1. Moreover, ciliary motility was
observed in zebrafish floor plate cells [73–75], but remains
to be investigated in other species.
Ependymal cells of the central canal (ECCs), which com-
monly refer to the cells directly contacting the central canal
[76], also harbour motile cilia (figure 2c). ECCs primarily
originate from the ventral progenitor domains of the neural
tube during spine development [77–79] and retain the ability
to proliferate at postnatal stages. Most proliferation occurs
either during spinal cord growth [80,81] or upon spinal
cord injury [76,82,83]. ECCs have been observed in all ana-
lysed vertebrate central canals and possess fewer cilia than
ECs of the brain. In fish and amphibians, ECCs have com-
monly been referred to as ependymo-radial glial cells (ERG)
[84]. In fish, birds, amphibians and reptilians, ECCs harbour
one and sometimes two cilia [83,85], while in mice, rat and
guinea pig, ECCs are bi-ciliated [80,85,86], or occasionally
bear up to three to four cilia in multinucleated cells [80,82].
In larger mammals, such as rabbits [85], macaques [81] and
humans [81], two populations of ECCs with either 1–2 or
20–30 cilia coexist and are spatially organized; multiciliated
cells are located laterally, while mono- and bi-ciliated cells
are situated ventrally and dorsally [81]. This suggests that
the number of cilia on ECCs correlates with the size of
the spinal cord and central canal [85]. Interestingly, only
bi-ciliated cells were shown to proliferate [81].
CSF-cNs, also known as Kolmer–Agdhur cells, are the
third motile ciliated cell type in the spinal cord. They primar-
ily constitute GABAergic and PKD2L1-positive neurons
located at the interface between the nervous system and the
CSF [69,87–90]. Two populations of CSF-cNs coexist: the
dorsal CSF-cN0 and the ventral CSF-cN00, which emerge
from different progenitor domains during early spinal cord
development [69,87,91–94]. The morphology of CSF-cNs is
peculiar. They display an apical dendritic extension directed
towards the central canal, protruding a tuft of microvilli
[69,90,95]. CSF-cNs possess a cilium in clawed frog [96,97],
lamprey [88,98,99], zebrafish [100], chick [101] and turtle
[102], and the motility of this cilium was confirmed in lam-
prey and zebrafish [88,99,100] (figure 2c). However, there is
no consensus on whether a cilium exists on CSF-cNs in mam-
mals [69]. Considering their particular morphology and
resemblance to hair cells, CSF-cNs were suggested to be sen-
sory neurons integrating mechanosensory and chemosensory
cues from the CSF [69]. Recent evidence in zebrafish and lam-
prey
confirmed
that
CSF-cNs
are
mechanosensory
[74,99,100]. CSF-cNs respond to both the continuous CSF
flow present in the central canal and bending of the tail
through the specific expression of PKD2L1 [74,100], a channel
previously implicated in flow sensation [103,104]. They also
detect pH changes in the CSF through acid-sensing ion chan-
nels [99] and PKD2L1 [89] in mice and lamprey. CSF-cNs
were shown to maintain spine morphology [74] and modu-
late locomotion [100] in zebrafish. Yet, the importance of
motile cilia in CSF-cNs physiology remains poorly under-
stood. Sternberg et al. [74] observed that the response of
CSF-cNs to muscle contractions was reduced in the absence
of ciliary motility, although PKD2L1 correctly localizes to
the apical extensions of CSF-cNs. These results suggest that
the motile cilium of CSF-cNs may contribute to the sensory
function, but the precise mechanisms remain to be discovered.
(b) Functions of ciliary beating in the development and
maintenance of the spine
In agreement with the observations of ciliary motility in the
spinal cord, movement of CSF occurs along the central
canal. This is well described in zebrafish from 24 h of devel-
opment, when most of the motile cilia are located on the
ventral part of the central canal and generate a bidirectional
flow, moving caudally along the ventral wall and rostrally
along the dorsal wall [74,75,105] (figure 2c).
Work in zebrafish has provided many insights regarding
the function of motile cilia in spine development. Ciliary
motility is essential for the straightening of the body axis at
early developmental stages in zebrafish. N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea
mutagenesis screens were the first to describe zebrafish
mutants with a curly tail phenotype [106], which has since
been ascribed to motile ciliary defects [107]. This phenotype
is only recently being understood. First, ciliary motility and
CSF flow are crucial to form the Reissner’s fibre [75], which
is an extracellular thread primarily composed of the glyco-
protein SCO-spondin secreted by the floor plate and the
subcommissural organ [108]. In turn, the Reissner’s fibre is
needed for the straightening of the body axis, in a process
independent from CSF flow or cilia motility, which is
poorly
understood
[75].
Second,
motile-cilia-mediated
transport of molecules from the brain to the spinal cord
[73,74] controls spine development. Brain-derived adrenaline
induces the release of the urotensin peptides URP1 and URP2
by spinal CSF-cNs, which act on the muscles of the develop-
ing embryos to straighten the body [109]. Surprisingly, no
other animal model but the zebrafish shows such striking
developmental defects upon loss of ciliary motility in the
early neural tube [72].
Later in development, CSF flow and ciliary beating help
maintain a straight body axis in zebrafish. The inhibition of
motile cilia function at post-embryonic stages reveals a high
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 375: 20190156
4
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

incidence of scoliosis [26,110,111]. In addition, a zebrafish
model of scoliosis carrying a mutation in the ptk7 gene
shows defects in cilia and ciliary flow [110,112] even before
the appearance of spinal curvature [113]. The mechanisms
linking scoliosis, ciliary motility and CSF flow are still poorly
understood. Neuroinflammation may be responsible, as proin-
flammatory signals are sufficient to induce scoliosis-like spinal
curvature, and treatment with immunomodulating therapies
reduces the severity of scoliosis [113]. Next, the abovemen-
tioned adrenaline–urotensin signalling may be involved in
this phenotype, since urotensin receptor uts2ra mutant zebra-
fish
develop
scoliosis
[109].
Interestingly,
rescuing
the
expression of the scoliosis-associated gene ptk7 solely in the
motile ciliated cells of the brain ventricles is sufficient to
rescue the scoliosis phenotype [110,113]. This suggests that
brain-released factors travel to the central canal and maintain
the straight body axis, but the precise molecular mechanisms
remain
unknown.
Most
studies
on
the
importance
of
cilia-mediated flow have been performed on zebrafish, and
some studies support a conserved role for CSF flow in spine
development
in
mammals.
For
instance,
developmental
scoliosis is observed in human conditions associated with per-
turbations of CSF flow, including neural tube closure, spinal
canal
cyst
and
Chiari
malformation
[114].
Nonetheless,
stenosis of the human central canal has been observed
in the healthy population after the age of 10 years, yet
it remains a subject of debate and raises questions to the func-
tion
of
the
central
canal
in
adult
human
physiology
[81,115,116].
5. Motile cilia in the brain ventricular system
Motile cilia are also found within the brain ventricular
system, which is the conserved complex of CSF-filled cavities
in the brain. Here, CSF is circulated throughout the brain
ventricular system to nourish the brain, maintain brain
homeostasis
and
support
neurogenesis
[117–121].
One
major contributor to such CSF flow is the motile cilia of the
ECs lining the ventricles [122,123].
(a) Development and cellular composition of the brain
ventricular system
The embryonic brain vesicles, which later develop into the
brain ventricular system, are remarkably conserved across ver-
tebrates. Initially, the hollow neural tube bends to generate
three fluid-filled cavities, one in the telencephalon, one in the
diencephalon and one in the rhombencephalon, akin to the
three ventricular cavities of the larval zebrafish (figure 1)
[124,125]. As the brain further develops to its adult anatomy,
the telencephalic ventricle transforms into two lateral ventricles
in amphibians and mammals, but not in zebrafish, such that
the mature ventricular system constitutes four cavities (figure 1)
[26,124,125]. Furthermore, the telencephalic ventricle in teleost
fish is located dorsally above the brain parenchyma, in contrast
with the deeply embedded ventricles of other vertebrates [126].
This is likely due to the unique telencephalic morphogenesis of
teleosts, wherein the tissue everts and folds outwards [126],
contrasting the telencephalic evagination of other vertebrates.
Already in 1836, the neuroanatomist Purkinje described
ciliary beating on cells along the sheep ventricles [127].
Since then, these cells, referred to as ECs, have been described
in both fish [25,110,128–130], amphibians [131–133] and
mammals [16,123]. Traditionally, the ECs of the brain are
defined as Foxj1-positive, motile ciliated, cuboidal cells gener-
ating near-wall CSF flow [16,25,29,133–135]. In mammals, the
multiciliated ependymal lining appears during late prenatal
and early postnatal stages [136–140], even though ECs are
already
committed
during
embryonic
development
[137,140,141]. ECs derive from embryonic radial glial cells,
which are neural stem cells (NSCs) generating neurons
[142], glia [137,141,143], as well as the NSCs (termed B
cells) of the adult neurogenic subventricular zone (SVZ)
[140,141]. Furthermore, the ECs and adult NSCs share a sub-
population of radial glia as their common progenitors
[140,141]. In contrast with ECs of the spinal cord that can pro-
liferate
postnatally,
ECs
in
the
mammalian
brain
are
considered to be post-mitotic [135,141]. Yet, this is still
debated, as some studies suggest ECs may dedifferentiate
and proliferate [144–146]. Like mammals, both zebrafish
and the clawed frog have a multiciliated ventricular lining
in adult stages, despite the presence of motile monociliated
cells in larvae [25,129,130,133,147] (figure 2d). Interestingly,
although most of the adult ventricular lining of rodents
consists of multiciliated cells, even in the mouse, mono-
and bi-ciliated cells do exist [148,149] (figure 2e). Since
these cells contact the ventricular lumen and extend long
radial processes into the neuropil, they are thought to be
tanycytes relaying chemical and mechanical information
from the CSF to the underlying neurons [149].
In addition to the important role of ECs in circulating
CSF,
studies
also
suggest
that
ECs
secrete
molecules
into the fluid [150], and thus relay signals from the
neural tissue to the CSF. Nevertheless, the main contributors
to the CSF contents in adult vertebrates are the choroid
plexuses [151,152]. These structures, which exist in each ven-
tricle in mammals, consist of specialized epithelial cells,
transporting ions and water from blood capillaries to the ven-
tricular
lumen.
Furthermore,
the
choroid
plexus
cells
themselves produce and secrete many proteins into the CSF
[153]. As such, the choroid plexuses make up a barrier
between the blood and the CSF, tightly controlling the
CSF content. Interestingly, the choroid plexus cells exhibit
cilia, which are motile in zebrafish [154], but mostly
immotile in mice [155]. The function of these cilia is not
fully understood, yet in zebrafish they may contribute to
CSF flow [154], while in mice they are suggested to serve a
chemosensory function [155].
(b) Regulation of the cerebrospinal fluid flow
The flow of CSF within the ventricular system, which is
contributed to by multiple factors in addition to cilia, is com-
plex. Moreover, the properties of CSF flow vary with the
proximity to the ventricular walls, following a principle
known as boundary layers [29]. Therefore, the description
of CSF flow is commonly separated into two major levels:
the macrofluidic, bulk flow amid the ventricular cavities,
and the microfluidic, near-wall flow contributed by the ECs
[29]. In mammals, the bulk CSF flow emerges at the secretion
sites (the choroid plexuses) and moves through the third and
fourth ventricles into the subarachnoid space, wherein it
escapes the brain ventricular system [156–158]. This overall
bulk, unidirectional flow is suggested to arise from several
sources, like the pressure gradient caused by CSF secretion
and
exchange
of
CSF
for
interstitial
fluid
across
the
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 375: 20190156
5
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

ependymal lining [137]. Pressure changes may also be con-
tributed by the cardiac [29,159] and respiratory cycles
[159,160]. Interestingly, bodily movement temporally changes
the direction of CSF flow in humans [161] and in the zebra-
fish brain ventricular system [25]. Since many physiological
parameters impact the bulk flow, and are difficult to measure
with high spatial and temporal resolution, most studies focus
on the cilia-mediated flow along the ventricular walls. The
contribution of motile cilia in CSF flow is clearly demon-
strated in zebrafish [25,110], clawed frog [27,133], rodents
(e.g. [123,136,138,162,163]), pigs [162] and humans [123].
Notably, the cilia-mediated, near-wall flow is complex,
wherein local domains of cilia-generated currents may serve
to
target
certain
molecules
to
specific
areas
[25,162]
(figure 2d). It is well documented that such cilia-mediated
flow is crucial to maintain a properly functioning brain ven-
tricular system, as zebrafish, clawed frog and mouse ciliary
mutants
display
ventricular
defects
eventually
causing
hydrocephalus (e.g. [25–27,110,111,133,136,138,163]). Surpris-
ingly, human patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia rarely
develop hydrocephalus [164]. This observation poses the
question as to whether the relative importance of near-wall
cilia-mediated flow and bulk flow differs across species. The
ventricular sizes may also influence the importance of bulk
compared to near-wall flow, and advocates the continued
use of several animal models to disentangle the CSF flow pat-
terns. Such animal models will also be pivotal to understand
how the CSF flow patterns are regulated. A few studies
revealed that neural states may impact the ciliary beating of
ECs. For instance, the CSF flow patterns change in the third
ventricle of mice during the day versus the night [162]. Fur-
thermore, neuropeptides like melanin-concentrating hormone
may increase the ciliary beating frequency of the ECs [165].
Yet, the influence of such local changes in ciliary beating on
the global CSF flow remains poorly understood.
(c) Functions of the cerebrospinal fluid flow
The differential nature of the bulk flow and the near-wall
flow suggests these different levels of CSF flow may serve
different means of relaying signalling and developmental
cues. It is likely that the bulk mid-ventricular flow supports
brain homeostasis and volume transmission, which is the
long-range, intercellular communication [166,167]. Transfer
of neuropeptides across brain ventricles was shown to not
only promote basic physiological needs like hunger [168],
but also increase neuronal excitability to enhance cortical
alertness in response to acute stress [150].
Considering the apposition of the embryonic and adult
neurogenic zone to the ventricles (figure 2d,e), it is highly
probable that CSF flow supports the neurogenic capacity of
NSCs through the specific delivery of chemical or mechanical
cues. Interestingly, the CSF proteome is regionalized due to
the differential transcriptome of the choroid plexuses in the
various brain regions in mouse embryos [153] and also
changes substantially from early to late embryonic stages
[169] and during ageing [152]. These regional and temporal
changes in the CSF composition have a direct impact on the
cell fate and proliferation rate of the neurogenic tissue appos-
ing the CSF [152,153,169]. Furthermore, these secreted signals
can be rather specific. For instance, WNT5A, secreted by the
hindbrain choroid plexuses, travels to distinct neural progeni-
tors within the developing hindbrain to support cerebellar
development [170]. Altogether, these findings indicate that
CSF flow promotes regionalization of the CSF contents as
proposed in larval zebrafish [25] (figure 2d). Other develop-
mentally important CSF-borne signals, like Igf-2 [117], may
be localized to specific areas by the near-wall flow patterns.
Whether this supports the distinctive differentiation of brain
regions remains to be investigated.
While the neurogenic capacity is largely retained in tele-
osts and amphibians throughout adulthood [84,147,171],
mammalian neurogenesis is confined to two brain regions,
namely the SVZ [172,173], located just beneath the ependyma
of the lateral ventricle, and the subgranular zone of the hip-
pocampal dentate gyrus [174]. In mice, NSCs located in the
SVZ extend a primary, immotile cilium into the ventricles
(figure 2e). This apical extension is surrounded by ECs to
form the so-called pinwheels [148]. Since primary cilia dis-
play a multitude of mechano- and chemosensory receptors
[6,7,175], cilia of the neural progenitors may integrate cues
from the CSF flow and regulate neurogenesis. In the embryo-
nic and early postnatal stages in mice, the primary cilia of
radial glia express the mechanosensors PKD1 and PKD2
[176], which not only regulate the polarity of multiciliated
ECs [176], but also promote the differentiation of radial
glial cells to neurons [121]. The primary cilia of NSCs may
play similar functions in adults. Indeed, ablation of pri-
mary cilia in a subpopulation of SVZ NSCs resulted
in reduced neurogenesis [118]. Furthermore, a study in
mice demonstrated that applying mechanical forces onto
the ventricle-contacting, apical domain of adult NSCs in
the
SVZ
promoted
neuronal
proliferation
through
the
flow-sensing epithelial sodium channel [119] in a cilia-inde-
pendent manner. However, the nature of the incoming signal
to the NSCs remains poorly understood and may also
be chemical. Studies have demonstrated that the binding of
developmental signalling cues to receptors on the NSC pri-
mary cilia may promote proliferation [117] or maintain
cellular quiescence [120]. While these studies suggest that
CSF flow transports molecules to the SVZ in the lateral ventri-
cle, CSF flow may also support a more fine-tuned distribution
of molecules into gradients. For instance, Sawamoto et al. [177]
showed that the distribution of the chemorepellent Slit2 may
drive proper neuroblast migration from the SVZ towards the
olfactory bulb.
6. Conclusion
Motile cilia serve a variety of functions within the nervous
system. There is now clear evidence for the role of these orga-
nelles in circulating fluid, in sensory systems like the nose and
ear, in the spinal cord and in the brain ventricles during organ
development and homeostasis. It remains, however, less under-
stood how motile cilia allow the nervous system to sample its
environment, whether it is achieved through the establishment
of chemical gradients, delivery of molecules to precise targets
or mechanical forces. Moreover, it is remarkable that the ner-
vous system may manipulate ciliary beating, yet the extent
and impact of such regulation on the development and physi-
ology of the brain remain to be studied. Investigations across
systems, species and developmental stages will now be pivotal
to further disentangle this mutual dependence of the nervous
system on proper motile cilia functioning. Ultimately, such
studies will be essential to understand and develop treatments
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 375: 20190156
6
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

for disorders associated with ciliary defects, like scoliosis
and hydrocephalus.
Data accessibility. This article has no additional data.
Authors’ contributions. All authors wrote and edited the manuscript.
C.R. and N.J.Y. assembled the figures, and all authors provided
feedback.
Competing interests. We declare we have no competing interests.
Funding.
This work was supported by NTNU, Helse Midt-Norge
(N.J.-Y.) and Boehringer Ingelheim Fonds (C.R.).
Acknowledgements. We thank V. Kurcuoglu (interfacegroup.ch, Univer-
sity of Zurich), E. Deniz (Yale University) and R Gray (University
of Texas, Austin), for sharing brain ventricular data, E. Yaksi and
A. Utz for critical comments on the manuscript.
References
1.
Mitchell DR. 2007 The evolution of eukaryotic cilia
and flagella as motile and sensory organelles. Adv.
Exp. Med. Biol. 607, 130–140. (doi:10.1007/978-0-
387-74021-8_11)
2.
Preston RR, Usherwood PNR. 1988 L-Glutamate-
induced membrane hyperpolarization and
behavioural responses in Paramecium tetraurelia. J.
Comp. Physiol. A 164, 75–82. (doi:10.1007/
BF00612720)
3.
Christensen ST, Guerra CF, Awan A, Wheatley DN,
Satir P. 2003 Insulin receptor-like proteins in
Tetrahymena thermophila ciliary membranes. Curr.
Biol. 13, R50–R52. (doi:10.1016/S0960-
9822(02)01425-2)
4.
Valentine MS, Rajendran A, Yano J, Weeraratne SD,
Beisson J, Cohen J, Koll F, Van Houten J. 2012
Paramecium BBS genes are key to presence of
channels in cilia. Cilia 1, 16. (doi:10.1186/2046-
2530-1-16)
5.
Satir P, Heuser T, Sale WS. 2014 A structural basis
for how motile cilia beat. Bioscience 64,
1073–1083. (doi:10.1093/biosci/biu180)
6.
Fliegauf M, Benzing T, Omran H. 2007
When cilia go bad: cilia defects and ciliopathies.
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8, 880–893. (doi:10.1038/
nrm2278)
7.
Nachury MV, Mick DU. 2019 Establishing and
regulating the composition of cilia for signal
transduction. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 389–405.
(doi:10.1038/s41580-019-0116-4)
8.
Brailov I, Bancila M, Brisorgueil M-J, Miquel M-C,
Hamon M, Vergé D. 2000 Localization of 5-HT6
receptors at the plasma membrane of neuronal cilia
in the rat brain. Brain Res. 872, 271–275. (doi:10.
1016/S0006-8993(00)02519-1)
9.
Corbit KC, Aanstad P, Singla V, Norman AR, Stainier
DY, Reiter JF. 2005 Vertebrate smoothened functions
at the primary cilium. Nature 437, 1018–1021.
(doi:10.1038/nature04117)
10. Williams CL, McIntyre JC, Norris SR, Jenkins PM,
Zhang L, Pei Q, Verhey K, Martens JR. 2014 Direct
evidence for BBSome-associated intraflagellar
transport reveals distinct properties of native
mammalian cilia. Nat. Commun. 5, 5813. (doi:10.
1038/ncomms6813)
11. Shah AS, Ben-Shahar Y, Moninger TO, Kline JN,
Welsh MJ. 2009 Motile cilia of human airway
epithelia are chemosensory. Science 325,
1131–1134. (doi:10.1126/science.1173869)
12. Bylander A, Lind K, Goksor M, Billig H, Larsson DG.
2013 The classical progesterone receptor mediates
the rapid reduction of fallopian tube ciliary beat
frequency by progesterone. Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol.
11, 33. (doi:10.1186/1477-7827-11-33)
13. Yu X, Ng CP, Habacher H, Roy S. 2008 Foxj1
transcription factors are master regulators of the
motile ciliogenic program. Nat. Genet. 40,
1445–1453. (doi:10.1038/ng.263)
14. Stubbs JL, Oishi I, Izpisua Belmonte JC, Kintner C.
2008 The forkhead protein Foxj1 specifies node-like
cilia in Xenopus and zebrafish embryos. Nat. Genet.
40, 1454–1460. (doi:10.1038/ng.267)
15. Choksi SP, Babu D, Lau D, Yu X, Roy S. 2014
Systematic discovery of novel ciliary genes through
functional genomics in the zebrafish. Development
141, 3410–3419. (doi:10.1242/dev.108209)
16. Spassky N, Meunier A. 2017 The development and
functions of multiciliated epithelia. Nat. Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol. 18, 423–436. (doi:10.1038/nrm.2017.21)
17. Ache BW, Young JM. 2005 Olfaction: diverse species,
conserved principles. Neuron 48, 417–430. (doi:10.
1016/j.neuron.2005.10.022)
18. Jenkins PM, McEwen DP, Martens JR. 2009 Olfactory
cilia: linking sensory cilia function and human
disease. Chem. Senses 34, 451–464. (doi:10.1093/
chemse/bjp020)
19. Kulaga HM et al. 2004 Loss of BBS proteins causes
anosmia in humans and defects in olfactory cilia
structure and function in the mouse. Nat. Genet. 36,
994. (doi:10.1038/ng1418)
20. Bergboer JGM, Wyatt C, Austin-Tse C, Yaksi E,
Drummond IA. 2018 Assaying sensory ciliopathies
using calcium biosensor expression in zebrafish
ciliated olfactory neurons. Cilia 7, 2. (doi:10.1186/
s13630-018-0056-1)
21. Hansen A, Reiss JO, Gentry CL, Burd GD. 1998
Ultrastructure of the olfactory organ in the clawed
frog, Xenopus laevis, during larval development and
metamorphosis. J. Comp. Neurol. 398, 273–288.
(doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-9861(19980824)398:2<
273::AID-CNE8>3.0.CO;2-Y)
22. Hansen A, Zeiske E. 1998 The peripheral olfactory
organ of the zebrafish, Danio rerio: an
ultrastructural study. Chem. Senses 23, 39–48.
(doi:10.1093/chemse/23.1.39)
23. Jafek BW. 1983 Ultrastructure of human nasal
mucosa. Laryngoscope 93, 1576–1599. (doi:10.
1288/00005537-198312000-00011)
24. Frisch D. 1967 Ultrastructure of mouse olfactory
mucosa. Am. J. Anat. 121, 87–119. (doi:10.1002/
aja.1001210107)
25. Olstad EW, Ringers C, Hansen JN, Wens A, Brandt C,
Wachten D, Yaksi E, Jurisch-Yaksi N. 2019 Ciliary
beating compartmentalizes cerebrospinal fluid flow
in the brain and regulates ventricular development.
Curr. Biol. 29, 229–241. (doi:10.1016/j.cub.2018.11.
059)
26. Konjikusic MJ et al. 2018 Mutations in Kinesin
family member 6 reveal specific role in ependymal
cell ciliogenesis and human neurological
development. PLoS Genet. 14, e1007817. (doi:10.
1371/journal.pgen.1007817)
27. Date P, Ackermann P, Furey C, Fink IB, Jonas S,
Khokha MK, Kahle KT, Deniz E. 2019 Visualizing
flow in an intact CSF network using optical
coherence tomography: implications for human
congenital hydrocephalus. Sci. Rep. 9, 6196. (doi:10.
1038/s41598-019-42549-4)
28. Allen Mouse Common Coordinate Framework. 2017
(Allen Institute for Brain Science), 7 April 2019. See
http://download.alleninstitute.org/informatics-
archive/current-release/mouse_ccf/annotation/ccf_
2017/structure_meshes/73.obj.
29. Siyahhan B, Knobloch V, de Zélicourt D, Asgari M,
Schmid Daners M, Poulikakos D, Kurtcuoglu V. 2014
Flow induced by ependymal cilia dominates near-
wall cerebrospinal fluid dynamics in the lateral
ventricles. J. R. Soc. Interface 11, 20131189. (doi:10.
1098/rsif.2013.1189)
30. Menco BPM. 1984 Ciliated and microvillous
structures of rat olfactory and nasal respiratory
epithelia. Cell Tissue Res. 235, 225–241.
31. Sammeta N, Yu TT, Bose SC, McClintock TS. 2007
Mouse olfactory sensory neurons express 10 000
genes. J. Comp. Neurol. 502, 1138–1156. (doi:10.
1002/cne.21365)
32. Larson ED, Pathak S, Ramakrishnan VR, Finger TE.
2019 A subset of olfactory sensory neurons express
Forkhead Box J1-driven eGFP. Chem. Senses 44,
663–671. (doi:10.1093/chemse/bjz060)
33. Tian T, Zhao L, Zhao X, Zhang M, Meng A. 2009
A zebrafish gene trap line expresses GFP recapturing
expression pattern of foxj1b. J. Genet. Genom. 36,
581–589. (doi:10.1016/S1673-8527(08)60150-2)
34. Aamar E, Dawid IB. 2008 Isolation and expression
analysis of foxj1 and foxj1.2 in zebrafish embryos.
Int. J. Dev. Biol. 52, 985–991. (doi:10.1387/ijdb.
072477ea)
35. Reese T. 1965 Olfactory cilia in the frog. J. Cell Biol.
25, 209–230. (doi:10.1083/jcb.25.2.209)
36. Rhein LD, Cagan RH, Orkand PM, Dolack MK. 1981
Surface specializations of the olfactory epithelium of
rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri. Tissue Cell 13,
577–587. (doi:10.1016/0040-8166(81)90028-8)
37. Shang Y, Inthavong K, Tu J. 2019 Development of a
computational fluid dynamics model for mucociliary
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 375: 20190156
7
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

clearance in the nasal cavity. J. Biomech. 85, 74–83.
(doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2019.01.015)
38. Bustamante-Marin XM, Ostrowski LE. 2017 Cilia and
mucociliary clearance. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect.
Biol. 9, a028241. (doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a028241)
39. Doty RL. 2008 The olfactory vector hypothesis of
neurodegenerative disease: is it viable? Ann. Neurol.
63, 7–15. (doi:10.1002/ana.21327)
40. Milho R, Frederico B, Efstathiou S, Stevenson PG.
2012 A heparan-dependent herpesvirus targets the
olfactory neuroepithelium for host entry. PLoS
Pathog. 8, e1002986. (doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.
1002986)
41. Heydel JM et al. 2013 Odorant-binding proteins and
xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes: implications in
olfactory perireceptor events. Anat. Rec. 296,
1333–1345. (doi:10.1002/ar.22735)
42. Baraniuk JN, Kim D. 2007 Nasonasal reflexes, the
nasal cycle, and sneeze. Curr. Allergy Asthma Rep. 7,
105–111. (doi:10.1007/s11882-007-0007-1)
43. Cox JPL. 2008 Hydrodynamic aspects of fish
olfaction. J. R. Soc. Interface 5, 575–593. (doi:10.
1098/rsif.2007.1281)
44. Reiten I et al. 2017 Motile-cilia-mediated flow
improves sensitivity and temporal resolution of
olfactory computations. Curr. Biol. 27, 166–174.
(doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.11.036)
45. Wakisaka N, Miyasaka N, Koide T, Masuda M, Hiraki-
Kajiyama T, Yoshihara Y. 2017 An adenosine
receptor for olfaction in fish. Curr. Biol. 27,
1437–1447. (doi:10.1016/j.cub.2017.04.014)
46. Spors H, Wachowiak M, Cohen LB, Friedrich RW.
2006 Temporal dynamics and latency patterns of
receptor neuron input to the olfactory bulb.
J. Neurosci. 26, 1247–1259. (doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.3100-05.2006)
47. Shusterman R, Smear MC, Koulakov AA, Rinberg D.
2011 Precise olfactory responses tile the sniff cycle.
Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1039. (doi:10.1038/nn.2877)
48. Grosmaitre X, Santarelli LC, Tan J, Luo M, Ma M.
2007 Dual functions of mammalian olfactory
sensory neurons as odor detectors and mechanical
sensors. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 348–354. (doi:10.1038/
nn1856)
49. Briand L, Eloit C, Nespoulous C, Bézirard V, Huet J-C,
Henry C, Blon F, Trotier D, Pernollet J-C. 2002
Evidence of an odorant-binding protein in the
human olfactory mucus: location, structural
characterization, and odorant-binding properties.
Biochemistry 41, 7241–7252. (doi:10.1021/
bi015916c)
50. Hudspeth AJ. 1989 How the ear’s works work.
Nature 341, 397–404. (doi:10.1038/341397a0)
51. Whitfield TT. 2019 Cilia in the developing zebrafish
ear. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 375, 20190163. (doi:10.
1098/rstb.2019.0163)
52. Hudspeth AJ. 2014 Integrating the active process of
hair cells with cochlear function. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
15, 600–614. (doi:10.1038/nrn3786)
53. Kikuchi T, Takasaka T, Tonosaki A, Watanabe H.
1989 Fine structure of guinea pig vestibular
kinocilium. Acta Otolaryngol. 108, 26–30. (doi:10.
3109/00016488909107388)
54. Yu X, Lau D, Ng CP, Roy S. 2011 Cilia-driven fluid
flow as an epigenetic cue for otolith
biomineralization on sensory hair cells of the inner
ear. Development 138, 487–494. (doi:10.1242/dev.
057752)
55. Wu D, Freund JB, Fraser SE, Vermot J. 2011
Mechanistic basis of otolith formation during teleost
inner ear development. Dev. Cell 20, 271–278.
(doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2010.12.006)
56. Stooke-Vaughan GA, Huang P, Hammond KL, Schier
AF, Whitfield TT. 2012 The role of hair cells, cilia
and ciliary motility in otolith formation in the
zebrafish otic vesicle. Development 139, 1777–1787.
(doi:10.1242/dev.079947)
57. Han X, Xie H, Wang Y, Zhao C. 2018 Radial spoke
proteins regulate otolith formation during early
zebrafish development. FASEB J. 32, 3984–3992.
(doi:10.1096/fj.201701359R)
58. Colantonio JR, Vermot J, Wu D, Langenbacher AD,
Fraser S, Chen J-N, Hill KL. 2009 The dynein
regulatory complex is required for ciliary motility
and otolith biogenesis in the inner ear. Nature 457,
205–209. (doi:10.1038/nature07520)
59. Rüsch A, Thurm U. 1990 Spontaneous and
electrically induced movements of ampullary
kinocilia and stereovilli. Hear. Res. 48, 247–263.
(doi:10.1016/0378-5955(90)90065-W)
60. Choi VM, Harland RM, Khokha MK. 2006
Developmental expression of FoxJ1.2, FoxJ2, and
FoxQ1 in Xenopus tropicalis. Gene Expr. Patterns 6,
443–447. (doi:10.1016/j.modgep.2005.11.007)
61. Chung HA, Medina-Ruiz S, Harland RM. 2014 Sp8
regulates inner ear development. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 111, 6329–6334. (doi:10.1073/pnas.
1319301111)
62. Elkon R et al. 2015 RFX transcription factors are
essential for hearing in mice. Nat. Commun. 6,
8549. (doi:10.1038/ncomms9549)
63. Scheffer DI, Shen J, Corey DP, Chen Z-Y. 2015 Gene
expression by mouse inner ear hair cells during
development. J. Neurosci. 35, 6366–6380. (doi:10.
1523/JNEUROSCI.5126-14.2015)
64. Göpfert M, Humphris A, Albert J, Robert D, Hendrich
O. 2005 Power gain exhibited by motile
mechanosensory neurons in Drosophila ears. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 325–330. (doi:10.1073/
pnas.0405741102)
65. Moore DJ et al. 2013 Mutations in ZMYND10, a
gene essential for proper axonemal assembly of
inner and outer dynein arms in humans and
flies, cause primary ciliary dyskinesia. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 93, 346–356. (doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.
2013.07.009)
66. Riley BB, Zhu C, Janetopoulos C, Aufderheide KJ.
1997 A critical period of ear development controlled
by distinct populations of ciliated cells in the
zebrafish. Dev. Biol. 191, 191–201. (doi:10.1006/
dbio.1997.8736)
67. Inoue M, Tanimoto M, Oda Y. 2013 The role of ear
stone size in hair cell acoustic sensory transduction.
Sci. Rep. 3, 2114. (doi:10.1038/srep02114)
68. Riley BB, Moorman SJ. 2000 Development of
utricular otoliths, but not saccular otoliths, is
necessary for vestibular function and survival in
zebrafish. J. Neurobiol. 43, 329–337. (doi:10.1002/
1097-4695(20000615)43:4<329::AID-NEU2>3.0.
CO;2-H)
69. Djenoune L, Wyart C. 2017 Light on a sensory
interface linking the cerebrospinal fluid to motor
circuits in vertebrates. J. Neurogenet. 31, 113–127.
(doi:10.1080/01677063.2017.1359833)
70. Orts-Del’Immagine A, Wyart C. 2017 Cerebrospinal-
fluid-contacting neurons. Curr. Biol. 27,
R1198–R1200. (doi:10.1016/j.cub.2017.09.017)
71. Placzek M, Briscoe J. 2005 The floor plate: multiple
cells, multiple signals. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6,
230–240. (doi:10.1038/nrn1628)
72. Cruz C et al. 2010 Foxj1 regulates floor plate cilia
architecture and modifies the response of cells to
sonic hedgehog signalling. Development 137,
4271–4282. (doi:10.1242/dev.051714)
73. Kramer-Zucker AG, Olale F, Haycraft CJ, Yoder BK,
Schier AF, Drummond IA. 2005 Cilia-driven fluid
flow in the zebrafish pronephros, brain and
Kupffer’s vesicle is required for normal
organogenesis. Development 132, 1907–1921.
(doi:10.1242/dev.01772)
74. Sternberg JR et al. 2018 Pkd2l1 is required for
mechanoception in cerebrospinal fluid-contacting
neurons and maintenance of spine curvature. Nat.
Commun. 9, 3804. (doi:10.1038/s41467-018-06225-x)
75. Cantaut-Belarif Y, Sternberg JR, Thouvenin O, Wyart
C, Bardet PL. 2018 The Reissner fiber in the
cerebrospinal fluid controls morphogenesis of the
body axis. Curr. Biol. 28, 2479–2486. (doi:10.1016/
j.cub.2018.05.079)
76. Becker CG, Becker T, Hugnot JP. 2018 The spinal
ependymal zone as a source of endogenous repair
cells across vertebrates. Prog. Neurobiol. 170,
67–80. (doi:10.1016/j.pneurobio.2018.04.002)
77. Briscoe J, Ericson J. 2001 Specification of neuronal
fates in the ventral neural tube. Curr. Opin.
Neurobiol. 11, 43–49. (doi:10.1016/S0959-
4388(00)00172-0)
78. Masahira N et al. 2006 Olig2-positive progenitors in
the embryonic spinal cord give rise not only to
motoneurons and oligodendrocytes, but also to a
subset of astrocytes and ependymal cells. Dev. Biol.
293, 358–369. (doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.02.029)
79. Fu H, Qi Y, Tan M, Cai J, Hu X, Liu Z, Jensen J, Qiu
M. 2003 Molecular mapping of the origin of
postnatal spinal cord ependymal cells: evidence that
adult ependymal cells are derived from Nkx6.1+
ventral neural progenitor cells. J. Comp. Neurol. 456,
237–244. (doi:10.1002/cne.10481)
80. Alfaro-Cervello C, Soriano-Navarro M, Mirzadeh Z,
Alvarez-Buylla A, Garcia-Verdugo JM. 2012 Biciliated
ependymal cell proliferation contributes to spinal
cord growth. J. Comp. Neurol. 520, 3528–3552.
(doi:10.1002/cne.23104)
81. Alfaro-Cervello C et al. 2014 The adult macaque
spinal cord central canal zone contains proliferative
cells and closely resembles the human. J. Comp.
Neurol. 522, 1800–1817. (doi:10.1002/cne.23501)
82. Meletis K, Barnabe-Heider F, Carlen M, Evergren E,
Tomilin N, Shupliakov O, Frisen J. 2008 Spinal cord
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 375: 20190156
8
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

injury reveals multilineage differentiation of
ependymal cells. PLoS Biol. 6, e182. (doi:10.1371/
journal.pbio.0060182)
83. Ribeiro A, Monteiro JF, Certal AC, Cristovao AM,
Saude L. 2017 Foxj1a is expressed in ependymal
precursors, controls central canal position and is
activated in new ependymal cells during
regeneration in zebrafish. Open Biol. 7, 170139.
(doi:10.1098/rsob.170139)
84. Becker CG, Becker T. 2015 Neuronal regeneration
from ependymo-radial glial cells: cook, little pot,
cook! Dev. Cell 32, 516–527. (doi:10.1016/j.devcel.
2015.01.001)
85. Nakayama Y, Kohno K. 1974 Number and polarity of
the ependymal cilia in the central canal of some
vertebrates. J. Neurocytol. 3, 449–458. (doi:10.1007/
BF01098732)
86. Kohno K. 1969 Electron microscopic studies on
Reissner’s fiber and the ependymal cells in the
spinal cord of the rat. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat.
94, 565–573. (doi:10.1007/BF00936062)
87. Djenoune L et al. 2014 Investigation of spinal
cerebrospinal fluid-contacting neurons expressing
PKD2L1: evidence for a conserved system from fish
to primates. Front. Neuroanat. 8, 26. (doi:10.3389/
fnana.2014.00026)
88. Jalalvand E, Robertson B, Wallen P, Hill RH, Grillner
S. 2014 Laterally projecting cerebrospinal fluid-
contacting cells in the lamprey spinal cord are of
two distinct types. J. Comp. Neurol. 522,
1753–1768. (doi:10.1002/cne.23542)
89. Orts-Del’Immagine A, Seddik R, Tell F, Airault C, Er-
Raoui G, Najimi M, Trouslard J, Wanaverbecq N.
2016 A single polycystic kidney disease 2-like 1
channel opening acts as a spike generator in
cerebrospinal fluid-contacting neurons of adult
mouse brainstem. Neuropharmacology 101,
549–565. (doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.07.030)
90. Vigh B, Vigh-Teichmann I. 1998 Actual problems of
the cerebrospinal fluid-contacting neurons. Microsc.
Res. Tech. 41, 57–83. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-
0029(19980401)41:1<57::AID-JEMT6>3.0.CO;2-R)
91. Djenoune L et al. 2017 The dual developmental
origin of spinal cerebrospinal fluid-contacting
neurons gives rise to distinct functional subtypes.
Sci. Rep. 7, 719. (doi:10.1038/s41598-017-00350-1)
92. Petracca YL, Sartoretti MM, Di Bella DJ, Marin-
Burgin A, Carcagno AL, Schinder AF, Lanuza GM.
2016 The late and dual origin of cerebrospinal fluid-
contacting neurons in the mouse spinal cord.
Development 143, 880–891. (doi:10.1242/dev.
129254)
93. Park HC, Shin J, Appel B. 2004 Spatial and temporal
regulation of ventral spinal cord precursor
specification by Hedgehog signaling. Development
131, 5959–5969. (doi:10.1242/dev.01456)
94. Yeo SY, Chitnis AB. 2007 Jagged-mediated Notch
signaling maintains proliferating neural progenitors
and regulates cell diversity in the ventral spinal
cord. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 5913–5918.
(doi:10.1073/pnas.0607062104)
95. Desban L, Prendergast A, Roussel J, Rosello M, Geny
D, Wyart C, Bardet P-L. 2019 Regulation of the
apical extension morphogenesis tunes the
mechanosensory response of microvilliated neurons.
PLoS Biol. 17, e3000235. (doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.
3000235)
96. Dale N, Roberts A, Ottersen OP, Storm-Mathisen J.
1987 The morphology and distribution of ‘Kolmer-
Agduhr cells’, a class of cerebrospinal-fluid-
contacting neurons revealed in the frog embryo
spinal cord by GABA immunocytochemistry.
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 232, 193–203. (doi:10.1098/
rspb.1987.0068)
97. Alibardi L. 1990 Cerebrospinal-fluid contacting
neurons inside the regenerating caudal spinal-cord
of Xenopus tadpoles. Boll. Zool. 57, 309–315.
(doi:10.1080/11250009009355713)
98. Schotland JL, Shupliakov O, Grillner S, Brodin L.
1996 Synaptic and nonsynaptic monoaminergic
neuron systems in the lamprey spinal cord. J. Comp.
Neurol. 372, 229–244. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-
9861(19960819)372:2<229::AID-CNE6>3.0.CO;2-5)
99. Jalalvand E, Robertson B, Wallen P, Grillner S. 2016
Ciliated neurons lining the central canal sense
both fluid movement and pH through ASIC3.
Nat. Commun. 7, 10002. (doi:10.1038/ncomms
10002)
100. Bohm UL et al. 2016 CSF-contacting neurons
regulate locomotion by relaying mechanical stimuli
to spinal circuits. Nat. Commun. 7, 10866. (doi:10.
1038/ncomms10866)
101. Schueren AM, DeSantis M. 1985 Cellular
heterogeneity in the ependymal layer of the
chicken’s lumbosacral spinal cord. Exp. Neurol. 87,
387–391. (doi:10.1016/0014-4886(85)90230-4)
102. Vigh B, Vigh-Teichmann I, Aros B. 1977 Special
dendritic and axonal endings formed by the
cerebrospinal fluid contacting neurons of the spinal
cord. Cell Tissue Res. 183, 541–552. (doi:10.1007/
BF00225666)
103. Bezares-Calderon LA, Berger J, Jasek S, Veraszto C,
Mendes S, Guhmann M, Almeda R, Shahidi R,
Jekely G. 2018 Neural circuitry of a polycystin-
mediated hydrodynamic startle response for
predator avoidance. eLife 7, e36262. (doi:10.7554/
eLife.36262)
104. Delmas P. 2004 Polycystins: from mechanosensation
to gene regulation. Cell 118, 145–148. (doi:10.
1016/j.cell.2004.07.007)
105. Thouvenin O et al. 2019 Origin of the
bidirectionality of cerebrospinal fluid flow and
impact on long-range transport between brain and
spinal cord. bioRxiv, 627166. (doi:10.1101/627166)
106. Brand M et al. 1996 Mutations affecting
development of the midline and general body
shape during zebrafish embryogenesis. Development
123, 129–142.
107. Grimes DT. 2019 Developmental biology: go with
the flow to keep the body straight. Curr. Biol. 29,
R101–R103. (doi:10.1016/j.cub.2018.12.011)
108. Munoz RI, Kahne T, Herrera H, Rodriguez S, Guerra
MM, Vio K, Hennig R, Rapp E, Rodriguez E. 2019
The subcommissural organ and the Reissner fiber:
old friends revisited. Cell Tissue Res. 375, 507–529.
(doi:10.1007/s00441-018-2917-8)
109. Zhang X et al. 2018 Cilia-driven cerebrospinal fluid
flow directs expression of urotensin neuropeptides
to straighten the vertebrate body axis. Nat. Genet.
50, 1666–1673. (doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0260-3)
110. Grimes DT, Boswell CW, Morante NF, Henkelman
RM, Burdine RD, Ciruna B. 2016 Zebrafish models of
idiopathic scoliosis link cerebrospinal fluid flow
defects to spine curvature. Science 352, 1341–1344.
(doi:10.1126/science.aaf6419)
111. Buchan JG, Gray RS, Gansner JM, Alvarado DM,
Burgert L, Gitlin JD, Gurnett CA, Goldsmith MI. 2014
Kinesin family member 6 (kif6) is necessary for
spine development in zebrafish. Dev. Dyn. 243,
1646–1657. (doi:10.1002/dvdy.24208)
112. Hayes M, Gao X, Yu LX, Paria N, Henkelman RM,
Wise CA, Ciruna B. 2014 ptk7 mutant zebrafish
models of congenital and idiopathic scoliosis
implicate dysregulated Wnt signalling in disease.
Nat. Commun. 5, 4777. (doi:10.1038/ncomms5777)
113. Van Gennip JLM, Boswell CW, Ciruna B. 2018
Neuroinflammatory signals drive spinal curve
formation in zebrafish models of idiopathic scoliosis.
Sci. Adv. 4, eaav1781. (doi:10.1126/sciadv.aav1781)
114. Boswell CW, Ciruna B. 2017 Understanding
idiopathic scoliosis: a new zebrafish school of
thought. Trends Genet. 33, 183–196. (doi:10.1016/j.
tig.2017.01.001)
115. Yasui K, Hashizume Y, Yoshida M, Kameyama T,
Sobue G. 1999 Age-related morphologic changes of
the central canal of the human spinal cord. Acta
Neuropathol. 97, 253–259. (doi:10.1007/
s004010050982)
116. Milhorat TH, Kotzen RM, Anzil AP. 1994 Stenosis of
central canal of spinal cord in man: incidence and
pathological findings in 232 autopsy cases.
J. Neurosurg. 80, 716–722. (doi:10.3171/jns.1994.
80.4.0716)
117. Lehtinen MK et al. 2011 The cerebrospinal fluid
provides a proliferative niche for neural progenitor
cells. Neuron 69, 893–905. (doi:10.1016/j.neuron.
2011.01.023)
118. Tong CK, Han YG, Shah JK, Obernier K, Guinto CD,
Alvarez-Buylla A. 2014 Primary cilia are required in
a unique subpopulation of neural progenitors. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 12 438–12 443. (doi:10.
1073/pnas.1321425111)
119. Petrik D, Myoga MH, Grade S, Gerkau NJ, Pusch M,
Rose CR, Grothe B, Götz M. 2018 Epithelial sodium
channel regulates adult neural stem cell
proliferation in a flow-dependent manner. Cell Stem
Cell 22, 865–878. (doi:10.1016/j.stem.2018.04.016)
120. Delgado AC, Ferron SR, Vicente D, Porlan E, Perez-
Villalba A, Trujillo CM, D’Ocon P, Farinas I. 2014
Endothelial NT-3 delivered by vasculature and CSF
promotes quiescence of subependymal neural stem
cells through nitric oxide induction. Neuron 83,
572–585. (doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2014.06.015)
121. Winokurow N, Schumacher S. 2019 A role for
polycystin-1 and polycystin-2 in neural progenitor
cell differentiation. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 76,
2851–2869. (doi:10.1007/s00018-019-03072-x)
122. Worthington WC, Cathcart RS. 1963 Ependymal
cilia: distribution and activity in the adult human
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 375: 20190156
9
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

brain. Science 139, 221–222. (doi:10.1126/science.
139.3551.221)
123. Worthington Jr WC, Cathcart III RS. 1966 Ciliary
currents on ependymal surfaces. Ann. NY Acad. Sci.
130, 944–950. (doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1966.
tb12638.x)
124. Lowery LA, Sive H. 2009 Totally tubular: the
mystery behind function and origin of the brain
ventricular system. Bioessays 31, 446–458. (doi:10.
1002/bies.200800207)
125. Korzh V. 2018 Development of brain ventricular
system. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 75, 375–383. (doi:10.
1007/s00018-017-2605-y)
126. Butler AB. 2000 Topography and topology of the
teleost telencephalon: a paradox resolved. Neurosci.
Lett. 293, 95–98. (doi:10.1016/S0304-
3940(00)01497-X)
127. Brightman MW, Palay SL. 1963 The fine structure of
ependyma in the brain of the rat. J. Cell Biol. 19,
415–439. (doi:10.1083/jcb.19.2.415)
128. Fame RM, Chang JT, Hong A, Aponte-Santiago NA,
Sive H. 2016 Directional cerebrospinal fluid
movement between brain ventricles in larval
zebrafish. Fluids Barriers CNS 13, 11. (doi:10.1186/
s12987-016-0036-z)
129. Ogino T, Sawada M, Takase H, Nakai C, Herranz-
Perez V, Cebrian-Silla A, Kaneko N, Garcia-Verdugo
JM, Sawamoto K. 2016 Characterization of
multiciliated ependymal cells that emerge in the
neurogenic niche of the aged zebrafish brain.
J. Comp. Neurol. 524, 2982–2992. (doi:10.1002/cne.
24001)
130. Lindsey BW, Darabie A, Tropepe V. 2012 The cellular
composition of neurogenic periventricular zones in
the adult zebrafish forebrain. J. Comp. Neurol. 520,
2275–2316. (doi:10.1002/cne.23065)
131. Jones HC. 1979 Fenestration of the epithelium lining
the roof of the fourth cerebral ventricle in amphibia.
Cell Tissue Res. 198, 129–136. (doi:10.1007/
BF00234840)
132. Jones HC, Jopling CA. 1983 The development of
interependymal pores in the rhombencephalic
posterior tela in late embryonic, larval and
metamorphosing stages of Rana pipiens. Brain
Res. 283, 121–130. (doi:10.1016/0165-3806(83)
90168-2)
133. Hagenlocher C, Walentek P, Müller C, Thumberger T,
Feistel K. 2013 Ciliogenesis and cerebrospinal fluid
flow in the developing Xenopus brain are regulated
by foxj1. Cilia 2, 12. (doi:10.1186/2046-2530-2-12)
134. Del Bigio MR. 2010 Ependymal cells: biology and
pathology. Acta Neuropathol. 119, 55–73. (doi:10.
1007/s00401-009-0624-y)
135. Jacquet BV et al. 2009 FoxJ1-dependent gene
expression is required for differentiation of radial
glia into ependymal cells and a subset of astrocytes
in the postnatal brain. Development 136,
4021–4031. (doi:10.1242/dev.041129)
136. Banizs B, Pike MM, Millican CL, Ferguson WB,
Komlosi P, Sheetz J, Bell PD, Schwiebert EM, Yoder
BK. 2005 Dysfunctional cilia lead to altered
ependyma and choroid plexus function, and
result in the formation of hydrocephalus.
Development 132, 5329–5339. (doi:10.1242/dev.
02153)
137. Spassky N, Merkle FT, Flames N, Tramontin AD,
García-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A. 2005 Adult
ependymal cells are postmitotic and are derived
from radial glial cells during embryogenesis.
J. Neurosci. 25, 10–18. (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
1108-04.2005)
138. Abdelhamed Z et al. 2018 A mutation in
Ccdc39 causes neonatal hydrocephalus with
abnormal motile cilia development in mice.
Development 145, dev154500. (doi:10.1242/
dev.154500)
139. Coletti AM et al. 2018 Characterization of the
ventricular–subventricular stem cell niche during
human brain development. Development 145,
dev170100. (doi:10.1242/dev.170100)
140. Redmond SA, Figueres-Onate M, Obernier K,
Nascimento MA, Parraguez JI, Lopez-Mascaraque L,
Fuentealba LC, Alvarez-Buylla A. 2019 Development
of ependymal and postnatal neural stem cells and
their origin from a common embryonic progenitor.
Cell Rep. 27, 429–441. (doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2019.
01.088)
141. Ortiz-Alvarez G et al. 2019 Adult neural stem cells
and multiciliated ependymal cells share a common
lineage regulated by the geminin family members.
Neuron 102, 159–172. (doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2019.
01.051)
142. Noctor SC, Flint AC, Weissman TA, Dammerman RS,
Kriegstein AR. 2001 Neurons derived from radial
glial cells establish radial units in neocortex. Nature
409, 714–720. (doi:10.1038/35055553)
143. Alvarez-Buylla A, García-Verdugo JM, Tramontin AD.
2001 A unified hypothesis on the lineage of neural
stem cells. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 287. (doi:10.1038/
35067582)
144. Johansson CB, Momma S, Clarke DL, Risling M,
Lendahl U, Frisen J. 1999 Identification of a neural
stem cell in the adult mammalian central nervous
system. Cell 96, 25–34. (doi:10.1016/S0092-
8674(00)80956-3)
145. Carlen M et al. 2009 Forebrain ependymal cells are
Notch-dependent and generate neuroblasts and
astrocytes after stroke. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 259–267.
(doi:10.1038/nn.2268)
146. Shah PT, Stratton JA, Stykel MG, Abbasi S, Sharma
S, Mayr KA, Koblinger K, Whelan PJ, Biernaskie J.
2018 Single-cell transcriptomics and fate mapping
of ependymal cells reveals an absence of neural
stem cell function. Cell 173, 1045–1057. (doi:10.
1016/j.cell.2018.03.063)
147. Kroehne V, Freudenreich D, Hans S, Kaslin J, Brand
M. 2011 Regeneration of the adult zebrafish brain
from neurogenic radial glia-type progenitors.
Development 138, 4831–4841. (doi:10.1242/dev.
072587)
148. Mirzadeh Z, Merkle FT, Soriano-Navarro M, Garcia-
Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A. 2008 Neural stem
cells confer unique pinwheel architecture to the
ventricular surface in neurogenic regions of the
adult brain. Cell Stem Cell 3, 265–278. (doi:10.1016/
j.stem.2008.07.004)
149. Mirzadeh Z et al. 2017 Bi- and uniciliated
ependymal cells define continuous floor-plate-
derived tanycytic territories. Nat. Commun. 8,
13759. (doi:10.1038/ncomms13759)
150. Alpar A et al. 2018 Hypothalamic CNTF volume
transmission shapes cortical noradrenergic
excitability upon acute stress. EMBO J. 37, e100087.
(doi:10.15252/embj.2018100087)
151. Lun MP, Monuki ES, Lehtinen MK. 2015
Development and functions of the choroid plexus–
cerebrospinal fluid system. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 16,
445. (doi:10.1038/nrn3921)
152. Silva-Vargas V, Maldonado-Soto AR, Mizrak D,
Codega P, Doetsch F. 2016 Age-dependent niche
signals from the choroid plexus regulate adult
neural stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 19, 643–652.
(doi:10.1016/j.stem.2016.06.013)
153. Lun MP et al. 2015 Spatially heterogeneous choroid
plexus transcriptomes encode positional identity
and contribute to regional CSF production.
J. Neurosci. 35, 4903–4916. (doi:10.1523/jneurosci.
3081-14.2015)
154. van Leeuwen LM, Evans RJ, Jim KK, Verboom T,
Fang X, Bojarczuk A, Malicki J, Johnston SA, van der
Sar AM. 2018 A transgenic zebrafish model for the
in vivo study of the blood and choroid plexus brain
barriers using claudin 5. Biol. Open 7, bio030494.
(doi:10.1242/bio.030494)
155. Narita K, Kawate T, Kakinuma N, Takeda S. 2010
Multiple primary cilia modulate the fluid
transcytosis in choroid plexus epithelium. Traffic 11,
287–301. (doi:10.1111/j.1600-0854.2009.01016.x)
156. Cushing H. 1925 The third circulation and its
channels. Lancet 2, 851–857.
157. Laterra JJ, Goldstein GW. 2013 The blood-brain
barrier, choroid plexus, and cerebrospinal fluid. In
Principles of neural science (eds ER Kandel, JH
Schwartz, TM Jessell, SA Siegelbaum, AJ Hudspeth),
pp. 1565–1580, 5th edn. New York, NY: The
McGraw-Hill Companies.
158. Mogi K, Adachi T, Izumi S, Toyoizumi R. 2012
Visualisation of cerebrospinal fluid flow patterns in
albino Xenopus larvae in vivo. Fluids Barriers CNS 9,
9. (doi:10.1186/2045-8118-9-9)
159. Simon MJ, Iliff JJ. 2016 Regulation of cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) flow in neurodegenerative, neurovascular
and neuroinflammatory disease. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta Mol. Basis Dis. 1862, 442–451. (doi:10.1016/j.
bbadis.2015.10.014)
160. Dreha-Kulaczewski S, Joseph AA, Merboldt K-D,
Ludwig H-C, Gärtner J, Frahm J. 2015 Inspiration is
the major regulator of human CSF flow. J. Neurosci.
35, 2485–2491. (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3246-14.
2015)
161. Xu Q, Yu S-B, Zheng N, Yuan X-Y, Chi Y-Y, Liu C,
Wang X-M, Lin X-T, Sui H-J. 2016 Head movement,
an important contributor to human cerebrospinal
fluid circulation. Sci. Rep. 6, 31787. (doi:10.1038/
srep31787)
162. Faubel R, Westendorf C, Bodenschatz E, Eichele G.
2016 Cilia-based flow network in the brain
ventricles. Science 353, 176–178. (doi:10.1126/
science.aae0450)
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 375: 20190156
10
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021 

163. Ibañez-Tallon I, Pagenstecher A, Fliegauf M, Olbrich
H, Kispert A, Ketelsen U-P, North A, Heintz N,
Omran H. 2004 Dysfunction of axonemal dynein
heavy chain Mdnah5 inhibits ependymal flow and
reveals a novel mechanism for hydrocephalus
formation. Hum. Mol. Genet. 13, 2133–2141.
(doi:10.1093/hmg/ddh219)
164. Lee L. 2013 Riding the wave of ependymal cilia:
genetic susceptibility to hydrocephalus in primary
ciliary dyskinesia. J. Neurosci. Res. 91, 1117–1132.
(doi:10.1002/jnr.23238)
165. Conductier G et al. 2013 Melanin-concentrating
hormone regulates beat frequency of ependymal
cilia and ventricular volume. Nat. Neurosci. 16,
845–847. (doi:10.1038/nn.3401)
166. Agnati LF, Fuxe K, Zoli M, Ozini I, Toffano G,
Ferraguti F. 1986 A correlation analysis of the
regional distribution of central enkephalin and beta-
endorphin immunoreactive terminals and of opiate
receptors in adult and old male rats. Evidence for
the existence of two main types of communication
in the central nervous system: the volume
transmission and the wiring transmission. Acta
Physiol. Scand. 128, 201–207. (doi:10.1111/j.1748-
1716.1986.tb07967.x)
167. Bjorefeldt A, Illes S, Zetterberg H, Hanse E. 2018
Neuromodulation via the cerebrospinal fluid:
insights from recent in vitro studies. Front. Neural
Circuits 12, 5. (doi:10.3389/fncir.2018.00005)
168. Noble EE et al. 2018 Control of feeding behavior by
cerebral ventricular volume transmission of
melanin-concentrating hormone. Cell Metab. 28,
55–68. (doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2018.05.001)
169. Chau KF et al. 2015 Progressive differentiation and
instructive capacities of amniotic fluid and
cerebrospinal fluid proteomes following neural tube
closure. Dev. Cell 35, 789–802. (doi:10.1016/j.
devcel.2015.11.015)
170. Kaiser K et al. 2019 WNT5A is transported via
lipoprotein particles in the cerebrospinal fluid to
regulate hindbrain morphogenesis. Nat. Commun.
10, 1498. (doi:10.1038/s41467-019-09298-4)
171. Kizil C, Kaslin J, Kroehne V, Brand M. 2012 Adult
neurogenesis and brain regeneration in zebrafish.
Dev. Neurobiol. 72, 429–461. (doi:10.1002/dneu.
20918)
172. Doetsch F, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A.
1997 Cellular composition and three-dimensional
organization of the subventricular germinal zone in
the adult mammalian brain. J. Neurosci. 17,
5046–5061. (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17-13-05046.
1997)
173. Doetsch F, Caillé I, Lim DA, García-Verdugo JM,
Alvarez-Buylla A. 1999 Subventricular zone
astrocytes are neural stem cells in the adult
mammalian brain. Cell 97, 703–716. (doi:10.1016/
S0092-8674(00)80783-7)
174. Alvarez-Buylla A, Lim DA. 2004 For the long run:
maintaining germinal niches in the adult brain.
Neuron 41, 683–686. (doi:10.1016/S0896-
6273(04)00111-4)
175. Ferreira RR, Fukui H, Chow R, Vilfan A, Vermot J.
2019 The cilium as a force sensor—myth versus
reality. J. Cell Sci. 132, jcs213496. (doi:10.1242/jcs.
213496)
176. Ohata S, Herranz-Perez V, Nakatani J, Boletta A,
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A. 2015
Mechanosensory genes Pkd1 and Pkd2 contribute to
the planar polarization of brain ventricular
epithelium. J. Neurosci. 35, 11 153–11 168. (doi:10.
1523/JNEUROSCI.0686-15.2015)
177. Sawamoto K et al. 2006 New neurons follow the
flow of cerebrospinal fluid in the adult brain.
Science 311, 629–632. (doi:10.1126/science.
1119133)
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rstb
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 375: 20190156
11
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 12 August 2021

===== RodriguezJimenez2019_FrontCellDevBiol_SpinalCordNeurospheres =====
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 20 December 2019
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2019.00334
Edited by:
Darius Widera,
University of Reading,
United Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Patompon Wongtrakoongate,
Mahidol University, Thailand
Johannes Boltze,
University of Warwick,
United Kingdom
Stavros Malas,
University of Nicosia, Cyprus
*Correspondence:
Slaven Erceg
serceg@cipf.es
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Stem Cell Research,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental
Biology
Received: 28 June 2019
Accepted: 27 November 2019
Published: 20 December 2019
Citation:
Rodriguez-Jimenez FJ,
Clemente E, Moreno-Manzano V and
Erceg S (2019) Organized
Neurogenic-Niche-Like Pinwheel
Structures Discovered in Spinal Cord
Tissue-Derived Neurospheres.
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 7:334.
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2019.00334
Organized Neurogenic-Niche-Like
Pinwheel Structures Discovered in
Spinal Cord Tissue-Derived
Neurospheres
Francisco Javier Rodriguez-Jimenez1, Eleonora Clemente1, Victoria Moreno-Manzano2
and Slaven Erceg1,3,4*
1 Stem Cell Therapies in Neurodegenerative Diseases Laboratory, Principe Felipe Research Center (CIPF), Valencia, Spain,
2 Neuronal Regeneration Laboratory, Principe Felipe Research Center (CIPF), Valencia, Spain, 3 National Stem Cell
Bank-Valencian Node, Platform for Proteomics, Genotyping and Cell Lines PRB3, Principe Felipe Research Center (CIPF),
Valencia, Spain, 4 Department of Tissue Cultures and Stem Cells, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Czech Academy of
Sciences, Prague, Czechia
The neurogenic niche of the subventricular zone (SVZ) in adult brain tissue takes
the form of a pinwheel-like cytoarchitectural structure, with mono-ciliated astrocytes
displaying neural stem cell (NSC) characteristics present in the core surrounded by
ciliated ependymal cells. For the ﬁrst time, we have demonstrated the formation of
similar pinwheel structures in spinal cord and SVZ tissue-derived neurospheres cultured
in vitro. To investigate whether the organization and integrity of these pinwheel structures
depends on the appropriate organization of ciliated astrocytes and ependymal cells, we
modiﬁed neurosphere cell arrangements via the application of the methyltransferase
inhibitor 5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dc) or the antiviral drug ganciclovir (GCV) in
transgenic mice expressing herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase from the GFAP
promoter (GFAP-TK). Treatment of neurospheres with 5-aza-dc increased FoxJ1
expression, a crucial factor for ciliogenesis, by reducing methylation of the FoxJ1 CpG
island. 5-aza-dc also increased the expression of the astrocyte marker GFAP and
caused aberrant accumulation of ciliated astrocytes. However, the ablation of dividing
astrocytes within neurospheres by GCV treatment led to an increase in the accumulation
of ciliated ependymal cells, as evidenced by the increased expression of the ependymal
cell markers Vimentin or CD24. While 5-aza-dc and GCV treatment differentially affected
cell arrangement, both compounds signiﬁcantly diminished the number of pinwheel
structures present in neurospheres. Thus, we suggest that the ratio of ciliated astrocytes
to ependymal cells plays a crucial role in the correct formation of the pinwheel structures
in spinal cord tissue-derived neurospheres in vitro.
Keywords: pinwheels, astrocytes, ependymal cells, neurospheres, cilia
INTRODUCTION
Exploration of the subventricular zone (SVZ) of adult brain tissue has revealed the
presence of a pinwheel structure speciﬁc to the adult neurogenic niche (Mirzadeh et al.,
2008). The pinwheel core consists of mono-ciliated glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-
positive astrocyte-like cells that possess properties of neural stem cells (NSCs) surrounded at
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
1
December 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 334

Rodriguez-Jimenez et al.
Pinwheels in Spinal Cord-Derived Neurospheres
the periphery by bi- or multi-ciliated ependymal cells. Previous
studies identiﬁed GFAP-positive ciliated astrocytes located at the
pinwheel core as dividing PH3/Ki67 double-positive cells with
neurogenic potential (Mirzadeh et al., 2008; Cui et al., 2011).
One of the primary functions of the motile cilia in cells of the
central nervous system (CNS) is the circulation of cerebrospinal
ﬂuid (CSF). The cilia of astrocytes within the SVZ make contact
with the ventricular ﬂuid, and these mono-ciliated cells confer
the pinwheel architecture to the ventricular surface in neurogenic
regions of the adult brain and may regulate NSC behavior
(Mirzadeh et al., 2008).
In spinal cord tissue, the ciliated ependymal stem-like cells
that line the central canal possess limited self-renewal in the
intact spinal cord (Alfaro-Cervello et al., 2012) and are bordered
by a sub-ependymal layer (less elaborate than in the SVZ)
containing small numbers of ciliated astrocytes, oligodendrocyte
progenitors, and neurons (Hamilton et al., 2009; Alfaro-Cervello
et al., 2012). Radial glial cells serve as primary progenitor cells in
the CNS and can diﬀerentiate into ependymal stem-like cells and
astrocytes during early postnatal periods (Jacquet et al., 2009).
Interestingly, radial glial cells contain deuterosomes, which are
associated with the early development of cilia, suggesting that
cilia formation occurs during diﬀerentiation (Spassky et al.,
2005). In addition to ependymal cells, cell subpopulations
within the epithelium of the spinal cord central canal, such
as dividing GFAP+ astrocytes (Alfaro-Cervello et al., 2012)
also possess cilia.
In
mammals,
the
FoxJ1
transcription
factor
regulates
ciliogenesis and marks cells with motile cilia, including
ependymal cells in the post-natal brain (Jacquet et al., 2009).
Of the three FoxJ members identiﬁed (FoxJ1, 2, and 3), FoxJ2
and FoxJ3 are expressed during embryonic development,
including in the brain (Landgren and Carlsson, 2004). FoxJ1-
positive cells exhibit neurogenic potential in vivo and in vitro,
with a subset of these cells considered as postnatal adult
NSCs
(Jacquet
et
al.,
2009).
Furthermore,
the
postnatal
diﬀerentiation of ependymal stem cells and FoxJ1-positive
astrocytes in the SVZ requires FoxJ1, while the absence of
FoxJ1 associates with proliferation and diﬀerentiation defects
resulting
in
severely
abnormal
olfactory
bulb
formation
(Jacquet et al., 2009).
The in vitro culture of NSCs obtained from the SVZ and
spinal cord leads to the formation of neurospheres (Reynolds
and Rietze, 2005); however, we know little regarding the cellular
organization and molecular mechanisms that determine the
cell type proportion and distribution within neurospheres. In
this study, we report for the ﬁrst time that in vitro cultured
spinal cord and SVZ neurospheres form pinwheel structures
reminiscent of those present in the SVZ in vivo. We explored
whether the proportion of ciliated astrocytes and ependymal cells
inﬂuenced pinwheel formation and investigated the molecular
mechanisms that control the ﬁnal proportions of ciliated cells.
We discovered that methylation of a CpG island located at
−104 to +123 relative to the transcription start site of FoxJ1
silences the FoxJ1 gene, and that forced demethylation by
treatment with 5-azacytidine (5-aza-dc) rescues FoxJ1 mRNA
expression. In neurospheres derived from the transgenic mice
expressing herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase from the
GFAP promoter (GFAP-TK) treated with 5-aza-dc, we observed
up-regulation of GFAP expression, indicative of a heightened
number of astrocyte-like cells and the disruption of pinwheel
structure. Alternatively, the presence of ganciclovir (GCV)
causes the selective ablation of dividing astrocytes in the
transgenic GFAP-TK mouse (Bush et al., 1998). Treatment
leads to a decrease in GFAP expression and an increment
in the levels of the Vimentin or CD24 ependymal markers
in neurospheres obtained from GFAP-TK mouse in vitro
(Imura et al., 2003) and, again, the disruption of pinwheel
structure. Overall, modiﬁcation of the distribution of ciliated
astrocytes and ependymal cells signiﬁcantly inﬂuences pinwheel
arrangement and neurosphere formation of this organotypic-
like culture in vitro, and this process may be critical to
CNS development.
RESULTS
The Presence of SVZ-Like Pinwheel
Cytoarchitecture in Spinal Cord and
SVZ-Derived Neurospheres
We employed antibodies against acetylated tubulin to recognize
cilia, GFAP as a marker of astrocytes, and CD24 as an
ependymal stem cell marker (Liu et al., 2007) in GFAP-TK
neurospheres (Figure 1A). Immunocytochemical evaluation of
said markers revealed a distribution pattern similar to the
pinwheel neurogenic-niche organization previously described
in the SVZ of the adult brain (Mirzadeh et al., 2008). We
observed the localization of GFAP (blue) and acetylated tubulin
(green) at the pinwheel core (Figure 1A, continuous white
lines in schematic) surrounded by staining for CD24 ependymal
marker (Figure 1A, outlined by dashed lines in schematic). We
also detected astrocyte-like extensions that connected adjacent
core centers in neurospheres (Figure 1A, indicated by white
arrows in the schematic) similar to those described in the SVZ
(Mirzadeh et al., 2008).
We employed a β-catenin antibody to delineate cell borders
and explored the protein distribution of γ-tubulin in GFAP-
TK neurospheres cultured in vitro using an antibody that
recognizes
γ-tubulin
in
microtubule-organizing
centers
(MTOCs), centrosomes (Oakley, 1992), and basal bodies
(Mirzadeh et al., 2008; Figure 1B). By immunocytochemical
evaluation of GFAP-TK spinal cord-derived neurospheres, we
encountered γ-tubulin and β-catenin distribution patterns
similar to the pinwheel neurogenic-niche organization of the
SVZ (Figure 1B, outlined by dashed lines in the schematic).
When studying γ-tubulin patterning, we encountered clusters
of small basal bodies (marked by arrows) or double basal
bodies (marked by ﬁlled arrowheads) in large ependymal cells
(delineated by β-catenin staining) (Figure 1B). We also observed
regions of small cells delineated by β-catenin (Figure 1B,
indicated by continuous white lines in schematic) containing
a single basal body detected by γ-tubulin (Figure 1B, an
example marked by empty arrowhead), similar to structures
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
2
December 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 334

Rodriguez-Jimenez et al.
Pinwheels in Spinal Cord-Derived Neurospheres
FIGURE 1 | Identiﬁcation of pinwheel structures in GFAP-TK mouse spinal cord and SVZ-derived neurospheres cultured in vitro (A) In spinal cord-derived (SC)
neurospheres cultured in vitro, an acetylated tubulin (green) antibody was used to mark cilia, a GFAP (blue) antibody was used to mark astrocytes, a CD24 (red)
antibody was used to mark ependymal cells. Central clusters of acetylated tubulin and GFAP detected are indicated by a continuous line, and the periphery of
CD24-positive ependymal cells and the pinwheel structure is labeled by dashed lines (schematic). Lateral extensions of astrocytes are indicated by white arrows
(schematic). (B) In spinal cord-derived (SC) neurospheres cultured in vitro, a β-catenin (green) antibody delineates the cell membrane, and an antibody against
γ-tubulin (red) was used to detect single basal bodies marked by an empty arrowhead in small cells (as delineated by β-catenin). The γ-tubulin antibody also
detected groups of basal bodies (marked by arrows) or double basal bodies (marked by arrowheads) in large cells (as delineated by β-catenin). Central clusters of
γ-tubulin-positive small cells are indicated by a continuous line, and the periphery of the pinwheel structure is labeled by dashed lines (schematic). Single ependymal
cells that are shared by two adjacent pinwheels are labeled by double-head arrows (i). (C) In SVZ-derived neurospheres cultured in vitro, an acetylated tubulin (green)
antibody was used to mark cilia, a GFAP (blue) antibody was used to mark astrocytes, a CD24 (red) antibody was used to mark ependymal cells and DAPI was used
to mark nuclei (gray). Central clusters of acetylated tubulin and GFAP detected are indicated by a continuous line, and the periphery of CD24-positive ependymal
cells and the pinwheel structure is labeled by dashed lines (schematic). Lateral extensions of astrocytes are indicated by white arrows (schematic). The scale bars
correspond to 20 (A,B) or 10 µm (C).
usually positioned at the pinwheel structure core identiﬁed
as astrocytes in the SVZ (Mirzadeh et al., 2008). We also
note that, as observed in the SVZ (Mirzadeh et al., 2008),
some single ependymal cells helped to form two adjacent
pinwheels
in
GFAP-TK
spinal
cord-derived
neurospheres
(Figure 1B, labeled by double-headed arrows in schematic).
We also show, for the ﬁrst time (Figure 1C), that neurospheres
obtained from adult SVZ present a similar organization to
that observed in the SVZ and GFAP-TK spinal cord-derived
neurospheres (Figure 1A). Nuclei of large ependymal cells
and small astrocytes are labeled by DAPI (gray). Nuclei of
astrocytes (blue) seem to be present in a deeper layer (Figure 1C,
outlined by continuous white lines in schematic), suggesting
a stratiﬁcation of neurospheres in a manner similar to that
described for the SVZ. We also detected astrocyte extensions
that connect adjacent core centers (Figure 1C, indicated by
white arrows in schematic) similar to those described in the
SVZ (Mirzadeh et al., 2008) and GFAP-TK spinal cord-derived
neurospheres (Figure 1A).
We next sought to investigate the role of the ciliated cells that
make up the SVZ-like pinwheel formed by GFAP-TK spinal cord-
derived neurospheres by ﬁrst targeting the expression of FoxJ1 in
ciliated cells via epigenetic modulation.
DNA Methylation of the FoxJ1 CpG
Island Regulates Gene Expression in
Spinal Cord-Derived Neurospheres
We ﬁrst analyzed the promoter region and ﬁrst exon of the
FoxJ1 gene [chromosome 11: Location 116,330,704-116,335,399
(reverse strand)] to discover a possible CpG island using
the MethPrimer software. We detected a CpG island at the
5′upstream region of FoxJ1 (−104 to +123 relative to the
transcription start site) and designed primers (ampliﬁed a
227 bp PCR product that includes 18 CpG sites) for bisulﬁte
analysis. Methylation status analysis of the described region in
at least ten plasmid clones 2 weeks after spinal cord extraction
revealed 34.5% methylated CpG sites in neurospheres treated
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
3
December 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 334

Rodriguez-Jimenez et al.
Pinwheels in Spinal Cord-Derived Neurospheres
with vehicle [DMSO (V), in all cases] for 48 h. Treatment
with the 5-aza-dc methyltransferase inhibitor (10 µM) for 48 h
reversed promoter hypermethylation (4.97%) (Figure 2A) and
signiﬁcantly increased the fold change of FoxJ1 gene expression in
GFAP-TK neurospheres when compared to basal levels (DMSO
1 ± 0.14 vs. 5-aza-dc 4.34 ± 2.54; p < 0.05) (Figure 2B).
5-aza-dc and GCV Treatment Alter
Astrocyte and Ependymal Cell Markers
A previous study revealed that a population of GFAP-positive
cells in the SVZ requires the expression/activity of the
FoxJ1 transcription factor. As 5-aza-dc increases the mRNA
expression of FoxJ1, we evaluated the expression of the astrocyte
cell marker GFAP after treatment with 5-aza-dc for 48 h
showing a signiﬁcantly increases of protein expression (DMSO
0.5375 ± 0.16 vs. 5-aza-dc 1.74 ± 0.074; p < 0.05), but slightly
decreases the expression of the ependymal cell marker Vimentin
(DMSO 1.15 ± 0.14 vs. 5-aza-dc 0.62 ± 0.052; ns). Overall, our
protein analysis suggests an enrichment in ciliated astrocytes at
the expense of ciliated ependymal cells (Figure 3A).
Selective Ablation of Ciliated Astrocytes
Leads to an Enrichment of Ciliated
Ependymal Cells
Ganciclovir treatment selectively eliminates dividing GFAP-
positive cells in the spinal cord as well as in spinal cord-derived
neurospheres (Bush et al., 1998; Imura et al., 2003). Treatment
of GFAP-TK neurospheres with GCV for 24 h signiﬁcantly
decreased the protein expression of GFAP (DMSO 2.27 ± 0.88
vs. GCV 0.67 ± 0.10; p < 0.05) but slightly increased Vimentin
(DMSO 0.81 ± 0.05 vs. GCV 1.77 ± 0.67; ns) suggesting the
enrichment in ciliated ependymal cells to the detriment of ciliated
astrocytes (Figure 3B).
5-aza-dc and GCV Treatment Alter the
Cellular Distribution and Organization of
Ciliated GFAP-Positive and
CD24-Positive Cells in GFAP-TK Spinal
Cord-Derived Neurospheres
In the SVZ, GFAP-positive astrocytic cells are present as small
cells located at the pinwheel core (Mirzadeh et al., 2008).
We analyzed the distribution of GFAP-positive cells in GFAP-
TK spinal cord-derived neurospheres cultured for 2 weeks
in vitro and after treatment with vehicle [DMSO (V)], 5-aza-
dc, or GCV using a rabbit polyclonal anti-GFAP antibody
(Figure 4A). We employed a β-catenin antibody to delineate
cell borders. We identiﬁed the pinwheel structures with GFAP-
positive cells at the core (Figure 4A, delineated by solid white
line in schematic) surrounded by large GFAP-negative cells in
vehicle-treated samples (Figure 4A, delineated by dashed white
line in schematic). However, we observed the accumulation
of clusters of small GFAP-positive cells (Figure 4A, marked
by solid white line in schematic) and the disruption of the
pinwheel cytoarchitecture in 5-aza-dc treated samples. GCV
treatment favored the accumulation of large GFAP-negative
cells identiﬁed as ependymal cells (Figure 4A, marked by
dashed-dotted lines in schematic). Despite the disruption to
the pinwheel cytoarchitecture by 5-aza-dc and GCV treatment,
we still detected the presence of a few remaining pinwheels
(Figure 4A, marked by dashed line in schematic). Overall, we
observed a signiﬁcant increase in the area representing GFAP-
positive cells in GFAP-TK spinal cord-derived neurospheres
treated with 5-aza-dc (DMSO 7.5 ± 3.8 vs. 5- aza-dc 17.3 ± 5.86;
p < 0.05) and a signiﬁcant decrease in those treated with GCV
(DMSO 7.5 ± 3.8 vs. GCV 1.33 ± 0.9; p < 0.05). The graph
shows the overall results obtained from twenty images for each
condition (Figure 4B). We also obtained comparable results
using a chicken polyclonal anti-GFAP antibody (Figure 4C). We
mainly observed FoxJ1 in large nuclei (DAPI stained) of positive
cells surrounding GFAP positive cells, in line with the results
obtained in vivo (Redmond et al., 2019). Lateral extensions of
astrocyte connecting with neighboring astrocytes from adjacent
cores in neurospheres are marked by white arrows (Figure 4C).
We next analyzed the distribution of the ependymal marker
CD24 (red) and acetylated tubulin (green) in GFAP-TK
neurospheres treated with vehicle [DMSO (V)], 5-aza-dc, or
GCV (Figure 5A). In DMSO-treated GFAP-TK spinal cord-
derived neurospheres, we observed CD24 staining indicative of
ependymal cells in those cells surrounding the center of the
pinwheel (Figure 5A, marked by dashed white line in schematic)
and rarely at the core (Figure 5A, marked by solid white line in
schematic), similar to the SVZ (Mirzadeh et al., 2008). We found a
similar CD24 staining pattern in GFAP-TK neurospheres treated
with 5-aza-dc, where even given the disruption of the pinwheel
cytoarchitecture, these structures remained present (Figure 5A).
We observed abnormal accumulations of acetylated tubulin
surrounded by CD24 positive cells in GFAP-TK neurospheres
treated with 5-aza-dc (Figure 5A, indicated by asterisks and
solid lines in schematic). In GFAP-TK neurospheres treated with
GCV, we detected larger areas of CD24 positive cells with little
presence of acetylated tubulin accumulation that corresponds
to pinwheel cores (Figure 5A). Even given the disruption of
the pinwheel cytoarchitecture, we still detected these structures
(Figure 5A; schematic).
Overall, treatment with 5-aza-dc signiﬁcantly decreased the
percentage of CD24 positive area in cells treated compared to
vehicle (DSMO 11.34 ± 1.68 vs. 5-aza-dc 6.623 ± 1.38; p < 0.01),
while GCV caused a signiﬁcant increase in the percentage of
CD24 positive area of cells treated compared to vehicle (DSMO
11.34 ± 1.68 vs. GCV 17.013 ± 2.63; p < 0.05) (Figure 5B).
Finally, we evaluated a combination of antibodies for the
clear identiﬁcation of the pinwheel structures under diﬀerent
conditions: we used an antibody against acetylated tubulin and
GFAP to identify the cores and an antibody against CD24 to
mark the surface of surrounding ependymal cells (Figure 6A).
We treated cells with vehicle [DMSO (V)], 5-aza-dc, or GCV.
After vehicle [DMSO (V)] treatment, we continued to observe a
well-organized distribution of pinwheels formed by cores labeled
by acetylated tubulin and GFAP (Figure 6A, marked by solid lines
in schematic) and surrounded by CD24-positive cells (Figure 6A,
outlined by dotted lines in schematic). As described in SVZ
tissue, we also observed lateral extensions of astrocyte connecting
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
4
December 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 334

Rodriguez-Jimenez et al.
Pinwheels in Spinal Cord-Derived Neurospheres
FIGURE 2 | Identiﬁcation and analysis of FoxJ1 CpG island GFAP-TK mouse spinal cord-derived neurospheres cultured in vitro. (A) GFAP-TK neurospheres cultured
for 2 weeks were treated with vehicle (DMSO [V]) or 5-aza-dc for 48 h. A schematic of the FoxJ1 CpG island is shown at the top for reference with the transcription
start point indicated by an arrow. Each row represents an individually cloned and sequenced allele following sodium bisulﬁte DNA modiﬁcation. Ten clones were
analyzed per condition. The grade of the individual CpG island methylation for each clone and the global methylation per condition is indicated as a percentage of
methylation. Vertical lines beneath the horizontal line indicate the distributions and densities of CpG sites. CpG sites are marked as circles to accurately reﬂect the
CpG density of the region, with empty circles for unmethylated CpG sites and ﬁlled circles for methylated CpG sites. (B) FoxJ1 relative mRNA expression was
determined by real-time PCR, and the values normalized to GAPDH. Values are represented as mean ± SD, n = 6. ∗p < 0.05 determined by Student’s t-test was
considered statistically signiﬁcant.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
5
December 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 334

Rodriguez-Jimenez et al.
Pinwheels in Spinal Cord-Derived Neurospheres
FIGURE 3 | Protein expression analysis of GFAP and Vimentin in GFAP-TK mouse spinal cord-derived neurospheres cultured in vitro. (A) GFAP-TK neurospheres
cultured for 2 weeks were treated with vehicle (DMSO [V]) or 5-aza-dc (48 h). Analysis of protein expression (a) by Western blotting used speciﬁc antibodies against
GFAP and Vimentin. Densitometry analysis of proteins was performed using the ImageJ software. Values were normalized to β-Actin in three independent
experiments and results represented in the graphics. (B) GFAP-TK neurospheres cultured for 2 weeks were treated with vehicle (DMSO [V]) or GCV (24 h). Analysis
of protein expression was quantiﬁed by Western blotting (a), and the corresponding quantiﬁcation by densitometry is shown. ∗p < 0.05, determined by a Mann
Whitney U test were considered statistically signiﬁcant.
with astrocytes from adjacent cores in neurospheres (Figure 6A,
marked by white arrows in schematic). As previously described,
treatment with 5-aza-dc caused abnormal accumulations of
GFAP and acetylated tubulin that indicate the cores (Figure 6A,
indicated by asterisks and solid lines in schematic). In GFAP-
TK neurospheres treated with GCV, we observed larger areas
positive for CD24 and a lack of GFAP and acetylated tubulin
signal (Figure 6A).
Following vehicle [DMSO (V)] treatment of GFAP-TK
spinal cord-derived neurospheres, we also encountered similar
γ-tubulin and β-catenin distribution patterns for the described
pinwheel neurogenic-like niche (Supplementary Figure S1A,
demarcated by dashed white lines in schematic). Interestingly,
we observed that pinwheels became distributed in row-like
formations (Supplementary Figure S1A, marked by numbers
in schematic). However, the treatment of GFAP-TK spinal
cord-derived neurospheres with 5-aza-dc led to the disruption
of the pinwheel-like structure and the accumulation of small
γ-tubulin-positive cells (Supplementary Figure S1A, delimited
by continuous line and marked by asterisks in schematic).
In neurospheres treated with GCV, we observed large cells
that may correspond to ependymal cells residing in close
vicinity, while we noted a general lack of cores of small
cells (Supplementary Figure S1A). GCV treatment also largely
disrupted the pinwheel structure and promoted the accumulation
of γ-tubulin aggregates (Supplementary Figure S1A; marked
by white dots in schematic) within larger cells as delineated
by β-catenin. The accumulation of γ-tubulin due to abnormal
distribution of γ-tubulin protein at the apical surface has been
previously described (Jacquet et al., 2009).
Moreover, we explored the distribution of basal bodies and
cilia, observing a well-organized distribution of cores labeled
by acetylated tubulin and γ-tubulin after vehicle [DMSO (V)]
treatment (Supplementary Figure S1B) with cores distributed
into rows (Supplementary Figure S1B, as indicated by dotted
arrows, schematic). However, after 5-aza-dc treatment, we
frequently observed large accumulations of both markers
(Supplementary Figure S1B; indicated by asterisks and solid
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
6
December 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 334

Rodriguez-Jimenez et al.
Pinwheels in Spinal Cord-Derived Neurospheres
FIGURE 4 | Continued
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
7
December 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 334

Rodriguez-Jimenez et al.
Pinwheels in Spinal Cord-Derived Neurospheres
FIGURE 4 | GFAP astrocyte marker expression in GFAP-TK mouse spinal cord-derived neurospheres cultured in vitro and treated with 5-aza-dc or GCV. (A)
GFAP-TK neurospheres were treated with vehicle (DMSO [V]), 5-aza-dc, or GCV. The GFAP signal was obtained by using a rabbit polyclonal anti-GFAP antibody that
marks astrocytes (green) while the β-catenin signal delineates cell borders (red). Pinwheel structures identiﬁed are marked with dashed lines indicating the periphery
of ependymal cells and a solid white line indicating the core (schematic). In 5-aza-dc treatment, the continuous lines mark the core of pinwheel and aberrant
accumulations of GFAP-positive cells (schematic). In GCV treatment, dashed and dotted lines mark regions of accumulated large cells (schematic). Scale bars,
20 µM. (B) Percentage of GFAP positive areas in twenty regions over multiple experiments (mean ± SD) were calculated for each condition using ImageJ software
and compared to total area. ∗p < 0.05 determined by Student’s t-test was considered statistically signiﬁcant. (C) The GFAP signal obtained by using a chicken
polyclonal anti-GFAP antibody marks astrocytes (green), the FoxJ1 signal (blue) and the nuclear marker DAPI (gray). Lateral extensions of astrocyte connecting with
astrocytes from adjacent cores are indicated by arrows. Scale bars, 20 µM.
FIGURE 5 | CD24 ependymal cell marker expression in GFAP-TK mouse spinal cord-derived neurospheres cultured in vitro and treated with 5-aza-dc or GCV. (A)
GFAP-TK neurospheres were treated with vehicle [DMSO (V)], 5-aza-dc, or GCV. CD24 signal marks ependymal cells (red) while acetylated tubulin signal marks cilia
(green). Pinwheel structures detected are marked with dashed lines indicating the periphery of ependymal cells and a solid white line indicating the core (schematic).
Continue lines containing an asterisk mark the aberrant accumulation of acetylated tubulin. Scale bars, 20 µM. (B) Percentage of CD24 positive areas in 20 regions
over multiple experiments (mean ± SD) were calculated for each condition using ImageJ software and compared to the total area. ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01
determined by Student’s t-test were considered statistically signiﬁcant.
white line in schematic). Treatment with GCV caused not only
a large accumulation of γ-tubulin labeling as reported above
but also acetylated tubulin labeling (Supplementary Figure S1B,
marked by solid lines with white dots in schematic), thereby
conﬁrming alterations to the cilia.
Finally, we determined the number of pinwheel-like structures
per
100
cells
in
at
least
20
pictographs
per
condition
by immunocytochemistry for GFAP-TK spinal cord-derived
neurospheres. We discovered a lower number of pinwheel-
like structures in GFAP-TK neurospheres treated with 5-aza-dc
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
8
December 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 334

Rodriguez-Jimenez et al.
Pinwheels in Spinal Cord-Derived Neurospheres
FIGURE 6 | GFAP astrocyte marker and CD24 ependymal cell expression in GFAP-TK mouse spinal cord-derived neurospheres cultured in vitro and treated with
5-aza-dc or GCV. (A) Cells treated with vehicle (DMSO [V]), 5-aza-dc, or GCV. Acetylated tubulin (green) antibody was used to mark cilia, a CD24 (red) antibody was
used to mark ependymal cells, and a GFAP (blue) antibody was used to mark astrocytes, and all are shown in the merge. Central clusters are marked by a solid
white line, and cores with aberrant accumulations of acetylated tubulin and GFAP detected after 5-aza-dc treatment are marked by asterisks and by a solid white line
(schematic). CD24-positive ependymal cells and the pinwheel periphery are labeled by dashed lines (schematic). Astrocyte extensions that connect adjacent cores
were labeled by white arrows (schematic). (B) Quantiﬁcation of pinwheel structures in GFAP-TK mouse spinal cord-derived neurospheres cultured in vitro. The
graphic displays the number of pinwheels counted per 100 total cells and from twenty pictures per condition after immunocytochemical evaluation. ∗∗p < 0.01
determined by Student’s t-test was considered statistically signiﬁcant.
(DMSO 8 ± 1.58 vs. 5-aza-dc 2.5 ± 0.925; p < 0.01) or GCV
(DMSO 8 ± 1.58 vs. GCV 1.75 ± 0.95; p < 0.01) when compared
to vehicle [DMSO (V)] treated cells (Figure 6B).
DISCUSSION
The neurogenic capacity of the mouse SVZ depends on the
capability of ependymal cells to assemble into pinwheels; unique
structures that constitute real regenerative units (Paez-Gonzalez
et al., 2011; Gonzalez-Cano et al., 2016). In neurogenic regions
of the SVZ in the mouse adult brain, the cytoarchitecture of the
pinwheel unit constitutes a core of ciliated astrocytes surrounded
by ciliated ependymal cells (Mirzadeh et al., 2008). In the spinal
cord, ependymal cells with stem cell properties (Barnabe-Heider
et al., 2010) line the central canal with bordering astrocytes.
Thus, since ependymal cells and astrocytes do not form pinwheel
in the spinal cord, one would not expect these structures in
spinal cord-derived neurospheres in vitro, unless the artiﬁcial
proliferative conditions in vitro mimic a microenvironment
similar to the neurogenic-like niche in vivo. Here we report
that neurospheres from spinal cord cultured in vitro contain
pinwheel-like structures similar to the neurogenic niche in
the adult SVZ. This neurosphere cytoarchitecture could confer
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
9
December 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 334

Rodriguez-Jimenez et al.
Pinwheels in Spinal Cord-Derived Neurospheres
neurogenic niche-like properties that would represent an exciting
source of transplantable neurogenic cells.
FoxJ1 is the master regulator of ciliogenesis and governs a
speciﬁc motile ciliogenic program in cells. FoxJ1 is necessary for
the diﬀerentiation of radial glial cells into a subset of astrocytes
and ependymal cells in the postnatal brain (Jacquet et al., 2009).
Ciliated astrocyte cells attribute unique pinwheel architecture to
the ventricular surface in neurogenic regions of the adult brain
(Mirzadeh et al., 2008). Some studies have shown a link between
FoxJ1 and the astrocytic marker GFAP; in fact, the maintenance
of the population of GFAP-positive cells in SVZ requires FoxJ1
(Jacquet et al., 2009). Moreover, disruption of the FoxJ1/Ank-3
pathway in vivo results in a dramatic reduction of neuroblasts and
ependymal niche organization in the brain (Paez-Gonzalez et al.,
2011). Thus, we explored whether an alteration to the distribution
of comprising cells could inﬂuence the proper formation of the
niche. The regulation of FoxJ1 in ciliated ependymal cells and
astrocytes from the spinal cord, as well as its possible contribution
to neurosphere organization in vitro, remains mostly unexplored.
Here we show that DNA methylation epigenetically regulates
FoxJ1 expression; treatment of neurospheres with the DNA
methylation inhibitor (5-aza-dc) reduced the overall level of CpG
island methylation and induced FoxJ1 expression. The presence
of FoxJ1 is necessary for the appropriate expression of proteins
involved in the generation of motile cilia, such as γ-tubulin
(Jacquet et al., 2009; Didon et al., 2013).
Treatment of GFAP-TK neurospheres from the spinal cord
with 5-aza-dc increases GFAP and decreases Vimentin and
CD24 protein expression, while GCV increases Vimentin and
CD24 and decreases GFAP expression. Treatment with 5-aza-
dc causes the enrichment of the astrocyte marker GFAP in
GFAP-TK neurospheres regardless of FoxJ1 expression, possibly
via the epigenetic regulation of GFAP (Restrepo et al., 2011),
while GCV favors an increase in the ependymal cell population.
Analysis of the distribution of expression of acetylated tubulin
(a cilia-related protein), GFAP (astrocyte marker), and CD24
(ependymal cell marker) in GFAP-TK neurospheres revealed that
treatment with 5-aza-dc causes the accumulation of acetylated
tubulin/GFAP double-positive small cells in comparison to
GFAP-TK neurospheres treated with vehicle [DMSO (V)]. In
contrast, treatment with GCV causes areas of accumulation of
large cells and an increased percentage of CD24-positive cells.
After GCV treatment, we frequently observed that γ-tubulin and
acetylated tubulin were not distributed as before nor docked at
the apical surface of cells and instead formed aberrant aggregates
as shown for FoxJ1-null cells (Jacquet et al., 2009). This result may
indicate that killing dividing astrocytes by GCV may inﬂuence
the correct distribution of γ-tubulin and acetylated tubulin and,
therefore, cilia formation in cells forming neurospheres.
After identiﬁcation and enumeration of pinwheels present
in neurospheres from spinal cord cultured in vitro, we
observed a signiﬁcant decrease in pinwheel number following
treatment with 5-aza-dc or GCV compared to vehicle. Thereby,
modiﬁcation of the internal distribution of astrocytes and
ependymal cells by these drugs aﬀects the proper assembly of the
pinwheel cytoarchitecture in spinal cord neurospheres cultured
in vitro. Our study is the ﬁrst to describe report that pinwheel
structures located in the SVZ of the brain in vivo also occur
in SVZ and spinal cord-derived neurospheres cultured in vitro.
However, we note the requirement for additional studies to
determine the apical surface position of γ-tubulin, cell polarity,
and the orientation of cells in the neurosphere to assess whether
these structures faithfully mimic the in vivo cellular distribution
and tissue structures of SVZ pinwheels. The results obtained
in our study suggest that cells of the neuronal lineage may
possess an intrinsic memory and capability to self-organize in a
similar manner to the adult tissue, behaving like an organotypic-
like culture. Therefore, we believe that the in vitro culture of
these cells will be of signiﬁcant use to high-throughput genomic
and proteomic approaches aiming to assess biological function,
as well as to drug evaluation screens to study neurogenic
tissue formation. This organotypic-like culture resembles the
organization of the neurogenic niche of the SVZ in the adult brain
may oﬀer an opportunity to study mechanisms of neurogenesis
under normal or pathological conditions. In addition, the
described in vitro organized microenvironmental niche could
inﬂuence cell behavior mimicking SVZ development, thereby
presenting obvious interest to the regenerative medicine ﬁeld.
In conclusion, the analysis presented here suggests that ciliated
astrocytes and ependymal cells are necessary for the faithful
assembly of the pinwheel structures in vitro in a process that
may also be pertinent for the in vivo formation neurogenic
niches of the CNS.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Wild Type and Transgenic Animals
Transgenic mice generated as previously described were used for
the selective ablation of dividing astrocytes. The GFAP-TK mouse
is a transgenic model in which thymidine kinase (TK) from
the herpes simplex virus (HSV) is driven by the mouse GFAP
promoter. This permits selective ablation of dividing GFAP-TK-
expressing astrocytes following administration of the antiviral
drug GCV, both in vitro and in vivo. Adult female GFAP-TK
transgenic mice and wild type (WT) mice were obtained by
mating heterozygous females of GFAP-TK line 7.1 with wild
type C57/BL6 males.
GFAP-TK Neurosphere Isolation and Treatment
Neurospheres were obtained from the spinal cord of GFAP-
TK transgenic mice (Bush et al., 1998) at 3 months of age,
as previously described (Moreno-Manzano et al., 2009). Brieﬂy,
once the overlying meninges and blood vessels were removed, the
dissected spinal cord tissue was placed in fresh washing medium
(DMEM/F12 supplemented with 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml
streptomycin, 5 mM HEPES buﬀer, 0.125% NaHCO3, 0.09%
glucose) and cut into 1-mm3 pieces. Under sterile conditions,
the tissue was homogenized; ﬁrst, by incubating in washing
medium for 10 min at 37◦C, then by disaggregating down
to the cellular level in growth medium and passing 20 times
through a thin silicon-glass pipette. GFAP-TK neurospheres were
formed in growth medium in low-attachment plates [DMEM/F12
supplemented with 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin,
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
10
December 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 334

Rodriguez-Jimenez et al.
Pinwheels in Spinal Cord-Derived Neurospheres
2 mM L-glutamine, 5 mM HEPES buﬀer, 0.125% NaHCO3, 0.6%
glucose, 0.025 mg/ml insulin, 80 µg/ml apotransferrin, 16 nM
progesterone, 60 µM putrescine, 24 nM sodium selenite, 4 µg/ml
bovine serum albumin (BSA), 0.7 U/ml heparin, 20 ng/ml
epidermal growth factor (EGF) and 10 ng/ml basic ﬁbroblast
growth factor (FGF)]. GFAP-TK neurospheres were isolated
and cultured for 2 weeks. Next, GFAP-TK neurospheres were
treated with either vehicle (dimethyl sulfoxide, DMSO), the
methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-dc dissolved in DMSO for 48 h
(10 µM; Sigma Chemical, Mo., United States), or GCV in DMSO
for 24 h (3 µM; Sigma Chemical, Mo., United States). Adult
brains were cut into coronal sections using a tissue chopper, and
the sections were collected in 6-cm Petri dishes ﬁlled with 3 ml
of complete growth medium for neurospheres. We dissected the
lateral walls of the lateral ventricles under a dissecting microscope
and keep the dissected tissue in tubes, each containing 5 ml of
growth medium. Tissue was homogenized like spinal cord tissue
and neurospheres grown for 2 weeks before using.
DNA Extraction, Puriﬁcation, Bisulﬁte
Modiﬁcation, and Sequencing
CpG island methylation analysis of the FoxJ1 gene in GFAP-
TK neurospheres was performed by bisulﬁte treatment and
sequencing (BSP). Genomic DNA was extracted using a DNeasy
Blood and tissue kit (QIAGEN). Genomic DNA (400 ng) was
treated with sodium bisulﬁte using the EZ DNA methylation
kit (Zymo Research). Bisulﬁte-treated DNA was ampliﬁed with
primers designed to amplify both methylated and unmethylated
DNA (BSP) to cover the CpG-rich dinucleotide region of
the FoxJ1 gene. Primers were designed using MethPrimer
software.
Particularly,
from
the
location:
116,330,704-
116,335,399
(Chromosome
11).
BSP
FoxJ1
sense
primer
(5′- ATTGTGTAATTGGAGTTTGGGTTAT -3′) and BSP FoxJ1
antisense primer (5′- TTCCTACAACCATTACAAACTAATCAA
-3′) were used. PCR products were then sub-cloned into the
pGEMT vector (Promega), and DNA was isolated from at least
ten clones per condition. Finally, samples were sequenced in
both directions using the BigDye Terminator cycle sequencing
kit (Applied Biosystems) and ABI 310 automated sequencer (the
average methylation levels per individual clones are represented
in Figure 2).
Total RNA Extraction and Real-Time
Polymerase Chain Reaction
Total RNA was obtained using the NucleoSpin RNA/Prot
kit (Macherey Nagel, Germany) and reverse-transcribed using
TaqMan reverse transcription reagents (Applied Biosystems)
following the manufacturer’s instructions. As a template,
40 ng cDNA from target and housekeeping genes were
independently prepared for each TaqMan reaction. Each reaction
was performed in duplicate from three independent experiments.
The MGB assay on demand TaqMan probe (Applied Biosystems)
for FoxJ1 (Mm01267279_m1) was used, and the results
were normalized to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(Gapdh) (Mm99999915_g1) used as a housekeeping gene. The
comparative threshold cycle (CT) method was used to calculate
the relative expression (Livak and Schmittgen, 2001).
Western Blotting Analysis
Cells were collected and proteins extracted using Lysis Buﬀer -
50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.02% NaN3, 0.1 SDS,
1% NP40, 1 mM EDTA, 2 µg/ml leupeptin, 2 µg/ml aprotinin,
1 mM PMSF, 1 x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche Diagnostics,
IN, United States). Equal amounts of protein extracts (50 µg)
were loaded onto a 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and resolved
by standard SDS-PAGE. Proteins were then electrophoretically
transferred onto PVDF membranes. Membranes were blocked
with 5% skimmed milk in PBST for 60 min and tested
overnight with speciﬁc antibodies at dilution 1:1000 against,
mouse monoclonal glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP; M0761;
Dako, Denmark); mouse monoclonal Vimentin (Abcam, ab8978)
and mouse monoclonal ß-actin at dilution 1:5000 (A5441; Sigma
Chemical, MO, United States) which was used as loading control.
Subsequently, membranes were incubated with rabbit anti-
mouse or goat anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase-conjugated
secondary antibody (1:5000) (Sigma Chemical, St. Louis, MO,
United States). Blots were visualized by the ECL detection
system (Amersham, United Kingdom). Results were quantiﬁed
by densitometry using ImageJ Software.
Immunocytochemistry
GFAP-TK neurospheres were grown for 6 h, as previously
described (Rodriguez-Jimenez et al., 2015) to allow them to
adhere to a poly-L-lysine-coated cover slide (Sigma-Aldrich;
P4707). The medium employed here diﬀers from the neurosphere
growth medium described above by the addition of heparin and
the removal of the mitogenic factors EGF and FGF and the
replacement of BSA by 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Cells were
post-ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) at room temperature
for 15 min. After permeabilization of cell membranes with
0.1% Triton X-100, samples were blocked with 10% FBS.
Incubation with primary antibodies was performed overnight
(1:200) at 4◦C; mouse monoclonal FoxJ1 (Invitrogen, 4-9965-82),
mouse monoclonal glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP; M0761;
Dako, Denmark), chicken polyclonal GFAP (Thermoﬁsher, PA1-
10004), rat monoclonal CD24 (BD Biosciences; 557436), mouse
monoclonal acetylated tubulin (Sigma Aldrich; T6793), rabbit
polyclonal γ-tubulin (Sigma Aldrich; T5192), mouse monoclonal
ß-Catenin (Transduction Laboratories; 610153 BD), and rabbit
polyclonal antibody ß-Catenin [Cell Signaling Technology;
9562). After a wash step, secondary antibodies (Oregon green
488 goat anti-mouse IgG; Alexa Fluor 555 goat anti-rat IgG
or Alexa Fluor 647 mouse anti-rabbit (1:400; Life Technology,
United States)], were incubated with the sections for 1 h
at room temperature. Signals were visualized by confocal
microscopy (Leica). Quantiﬁcation of GFAP/CD24 positive areas
was performed using ImageJ software; the area of positive signal
is expressed as a percentage of the total area from twenty pictures.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using the software GraphPad
Prism 5. Two-tailed Student’s t-test was conducted to evaluate
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
11
December 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 334

Rodriguez-Jimenez et al.
Pinwheels in Spinal Cord-Derived Neurospheres
the diﬀerences between control and experimental groups for
RT-PCR. Values represent mean ± SD of at least six independent
experiments. A Mann Whitney U test was conducted to evaluate
the diﬀerences between data from control and experimental
groups for Western blotting experiments. Values represent
mean ± SD of at least three independent experiments. (∗p < 0.05
and ∗∗p < 0.01 for statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences).
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
All datasets generated in this study are included in the
article/Supplementary Material.
ETHICS STATEMENT
This
study
was
carried
out
in
accordance
with
the
recommendations of Spanish guidelines (53/2013) of the Ethics
Committee for Animal Experimentation (EAEC) of Principe
Felipe Research Centre. The protocol was approved by the Ethics
Committee for Animal Experimentation (EAEC) of Principe
Felipe Research Centre.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
FR-J conceived the idea, designed the research studies, conducted
the experiments, acquired the data, analyzed the data, and
wrote the manuscript. EC conducted the experiments and
acquired the data. VM-M provided the conceptual advice. SE
conceived the idea, provided the conceptual advice, designed
the research studies, wrote the manuscript, and contributed
to the materials.
FUNDING
This work was supported by research funds from the “Miguel
Servet” contract of the Institute of Health Carlos III of
Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation CPII16/00037
(SE), PI18/00286 (SE), Fundacion Marato TV3/ref.20172230
(2018) and by AEI “RTI2018-095872-B-C21/ERDF”, Platform
for Proteomics, Genotyping, and Cell Lines, PRB3 of ISCIII
(PT17/0019/0024), FEDER (European Regional Development
Fund) and the project “Centre of Reconstructive Neuroscience,”
registration number CZ.02.1.01/0.0./0.0/15_003/0000419.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge Stuart P. Atkinson for article reviewing and
English language editing, and Ovsanna Kepenekyan for her
excellent technical support.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online
at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcell.2019.00334/
full#supplementary-material
FIGURE S1 | β-catenin/γ-tubulin and acetylated tubulin/γ-tubulin distribution in
GFAP-TK mouse spinal cord-derived neurospheres cultured in vitro. GFAP-TK
neurospheres were treated with Vehicle [DMSO (V)], 5-aza-dc, or GCV. (A) The
β-catenin (green) antibody was used to mark cell borders. The γ-tubulin (red)
antibody was used to detect single or groups of small basal bodies and two basal
bodies. The identiﬁed pinwheel structures in each condition are marked with
dashed lines for the periphery of ependymal cells and with continuous lines for the
core formed by small central cells (schematic). Numbers mark the consecutive
cores of adjacent pinwheels aligned horizontally (d). Asterisks were used to mark
aberrant accumulations of γ-tubulin-positive small cells in the core and dots for
aberrant accumulations of γ-tubulin-positive puncta within larger cells (schematic).
(B) The acetylated tubulin (green) antibody was used to mark cilia. The γ-tubulin
(red) antibody was used to detect single or groups of small basal bodies and two
basal bodies. The identiﬁed pinwheel structures in each condition are marked with
continuous lines for the core (schematic). Dotted arrows indicate the horizontal
and oblique distribution of aligned cores in the vehicle (schematic). Asterisks were
used to mark accumulations of acetylated tubulin/γ-tubulin-positive cells in the
core and dots for aberrant accumulations of unstructured acetylated
tubulin/γ-tubulin-positive puncta within cells (schematic). Scale bars, 20 µM.
REFERENCES
Alfaro-Cervello, C., Soriano-Navarro, M., Mirzadeh, Z., Alvarez-Buylla, A.,
and Garcia-Verdugo, J. M. (2012). Biciliated ependymal cell proliferation
contributes to spinal cord growth. J. Comp. Neurol. 520, 3528–3552. doi: 10.
1002/cne.23104
Barnabe-Heider, F., Goritz, C., Sabelstrom, H., Takebayashi, H., Pfrieger, F. W.,
Meletis, K., et al. (2010). Origin of new glial cells in intact and injured adult
spinal cord. Cell Stem Cell 7, 470–482. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2010.07.014
Bush, T. G., Savidge, T. C., Freeman, T. C., Cox, H. J., Campbell, E. A., Mucke, L.,
et al. (1998). Fulminant jejuno-ileitis following ablation of enteric glia in adult
transgenic mice. Cell 93, 189–201. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81571-8
Cui, G., Yu, Z., Li, Z., Wang, W., Lu, T., Qian, C., et al. (2011). Increased expression
of Foxj1 after traumatic brain injury. J. Mol. Neurosci. 45, 145–153. doi: 10.1007/
s12031-011-9504-8
Didon, L., Zwick, R. K., Chao, I. W., Walters, M. S., Wang, R., Hackett, N. R.,
et al. (2013). RFX3 modulation of FOXJ1 regulation of cilia genes in the human
airway epithelium. Respir. Res. 14:70. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-70
Gonzalez-Cano, L., Fuertes-Alvarez, S., Robledinos-Anton, N., Bizy, A., Villena-
Cortes, A., Farinas, I., et al. (2016). p73 is required for ependymal cell
maturation and neurogenic SVZ cytoarchitecture. Dev. Neurobiol. 76, 730–747.
doi: 10.1002/dneu.22356
Hamilton, L. K., Truong, M. K., Bednarczyk, M. R., Aumont, A., and Fernandes,
K. J. (2009). Cellular organization of the central canal ependymal zone, a niche
of latent neural stem cells in the adult mammalian spinal cord. Neuroscience
164, 1044–1056. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.09.006
Imura, T., Kornblum, H. I., and Sofroniew, M. V. (2003). The predominant neural
stem cell isolated from postnatal and adult forebrain but not early embryonic
forebrain expresses GFAP. J. Neurosci. 23, 2824–2832. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.
23-07-02824.2003
Jacquet, B. V., Salinas-Mondragon, R., Liang, H., Therit, B., Buie, J. D.,
Dykstra, M., et al. (2009). FoxJ1-dependent gene expression is required for
diﬀerentiation of radial glia into ependymal cells and a subset of astrocytes
in the postnatal brain. Development 136, 4021–4031. doi: 10.1242/dev.
041129
Landgren, H., and Carlsson, P. (2004). FoxJ3, a novel mammalian forkhead
gene expressed in neuroectoderm, neural crest, and myotome. Dev. Dyn. 231,
396–401. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.20131
Liu, J. Q., Carl, J. W. Jr., Joshi, P. S., RayChaudhury, A., Pu, X. A., Shi, F. D.,
et al. (2007). CD24 on the resident cells of the central nervous system enhances
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
12
December 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 334

Rodriguez-Jimenez et al.
Pinwheels in Spinal Cord-Derived Neurospheres
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J. Immunol. 178, 6227–6235. doi:
10.4049/jimmunol.178.10.6227
Livak, K. J., and Schmittgen, T. D. (2001). Analysis of relative gene expression
data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method.
Methods 25, 402–408. doi: 10.1006/meth.2001.1262
Mirzadeh, Z., Merkle, F. T., Soriano-Navarro, M., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M.,
and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2008). Neural stem cells confer unique pinwheel
architecture to the ventricular surface in neurogenic regions of the adult brain.
Cell Stem Cell 3, 265–278. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.07.004
Moreno-Manzano, V., Rodriguez-Jimenez, F. J., Garcia-Rosello, M., Lainez, S.,
Erceg, S., Calvo, M. T., et al. (2009). Activated spinal cord ependymal stem cells
rescue neurological function. Stem Cells 27, 733–743. doi: 10.1002/stem.24
Oakley, B. R. (1992). Gamma-tubulin: the microtubule organizer? Trends Cell Biol.
2, 1–5. doi: 10.1016/0962-8924(92)90125-7
Paez-Gonzalez, P., Abdi, K., Luciano, D., Liu, Y., Soriano-Navarro, M., Rawlins, E.,
et al. (2011). Ank3-dependent SVZ niche assembly is required for the continued
production of new neurons. Neuron 71, 61–75. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.
029
Redmond, S. A., Figueres-Onate, M., Obernier, K., Nascimento, M. A., Parraguez,
J. I., Lopez-Mascaraque, L., et al. (2019). Development of ependymal and
postnatal neural stem cells and their origin from a common embryonic
progenitor. Cell Rep. 27:429–441.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.01.088
Restrepo, A., Smith, C. A., Agnihotri, S., Shekarforoush, M., Kongkham, P. N.,
Seol, H. J., et al. (2011). Epigenetic regulation of glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein
by DNA methylation in human malignant gliomas. Neuro Oncol. 13, 42–50.
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noq145
Reynolds, B. A., and Rietze, R. L. (2005). Neural stem cells and neurospheres–re-
evaluating the relationship. Nat. Methods 2, 333–336. doi: 10.1038/nmeth758
Rodriguez-Jimenez, F. J., Alastrue-Agudo, A., Stojkovic, M., Erceg, S., and Moreno-
Manzano, V. (2015). Connexin 50 expression in ependymal stem progenitor
cells after spinal cord injury activation. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 16, 26608–26618. doi:
10.3390/ijms161125981
Spassky, N., Merkle, F. T., Flames, N., Tramontin, A. D., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M.,
and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2005). Adult ependymal cells are postmitotic and are
derived from radial glial cells during embryogenesis. J. Neurosci. 25, 10–18.
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.1108-04.2005
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Rodriguez-Jimenez, Clemente, Moreno-Manzano and Erceg. This
is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
13
December 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 334

===== Russ2021_NatComm_MouseSC+scTx+CellTypesCatalog =====
ARTICLE
A harmonized atlas of mouse spinal cord cell types
and their spatial organization
Daniel E. Russ
1,7, Ryan B. Patterson Cross2,7, Li Li2, Stephanie C. Koch
3, Kaya J. E. Matson2,
Archana Yadav4, Mor R. Alkaslasi
5,6, Dylan I. Lee
4, Claire E. Le Pichon
5, Vilas Menon
4 &
Ariel J. Levine
2✉
Single-cell RNA sequencing data can unveil the molecular diversity of cell types. Cell type
atlases of the mouse spinal cord have been published in recent years but have not been
integrated together. Here, we generate an atlas of spinal cell types based on single-cell
transcriptomic data, unifying the available datasets into a common reference framework. We
report a hierarchical structure of postnatal cell type relationships, with location providing the
highest level of organization, then neurotransmitter status, family, and ﬁnally, dozens of
reﬁned populations. We validate a combinatorial marker code for each neuronal cell type and
map their spatial distributions in the adult spinal cord. We also show complex lineage
relationships among postnatal cell types. Additionally, we develop an open-source cell type
classiﬁer, SeqSeek, to facilitate the standardization of cell type identiﬁcation. This work
provides an integrated view of spinal cell types, their gene expression signatures, and their
molecular organization.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
OPEN
1 Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, Data Science Research Group, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Rockville, MD, USA. 2 Spinal Circuits and
Plasticity Unit, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. 3 Department of Neuroscience, Physiology and
Pharmacology, Division of Biosciences, University College London, London, UK. 4 Department of Neurology, Center for Translational and Computational
Neuroimmunology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. 5 Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, NIH,
Bethesda, MD, USA. 6 Department of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA. 7These authors contributed equally: Daniel E. Russ, Ryan B.
Patterson Cross. ✉email: ariel.levine@nih.gov
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;

A
revolution in single-cell sequencing technologies is
transforming many ﬁelds of biology. By sequencing the
RNA/cDNA or open chromatin from many individual
cells and using computational analysis to identify shared patterns
of gene expression or epigenetic structure, we may simultaneously
deﬁne cell types, characterize their molecular signatures, and
track how each cell type in tissue changes in different biological
conditions such as development and disease. Within the central
nervous system, this approach may also reveal the molecular basis
of the impressive levels of neuronal diversity, can provide marker
genes for developing genetic tools to manipulate neuronal func-
tion, and may help to reveal the cellular basis of behavior.
In the postnatal mouse spinal cord, there have been several
papers proﬁling single-cell RNA expression that, combined, cover
a range of biological parameters, including age, tissue region,
developmental lineage, and circuit features1–11. These studies
provide a powerful and multi-faceted perspective on spinal cord
cell types, yet despite this signiﬁcant effort and a rich literature of
spinal cord cell type characterization (see reviews12–19), there is
still no consensus cell type atlas of the spinal cord20. A major
obstacle is the lack of accepted ground truth of cell types in this
tissue that could form the basis of a reference atlas. Unfortu-
nately, this challenge is compounded by the difﬁculty in com-
paring data between studies even when the same tissue types and
techniques are used3,5. This is partly due to biological differences
and technical limitations, but may also reﬂect particular analysis
parameters and technical artifacts that conceal underlying simi-
larities between these studies. Indeed, it is not clear whether the
cell types from the original studies are comparable in their cur-
rent forms, resulting in a fragmented set of incomplete and
conﬂicting atlases for the spinal cord. Rather than being speciﬁc
to the study of the spinal cord, these are among the grand chal-
lenges that scientists face as we re-discover the cells and tissues we
study through the perspective of single-cell proﬁling21.
To begin to overcome these challenges within the mammalian
central nervous system, we sought to establish a harmonized,
validated atlas of postnatal spinal cord cell types that could reveal
the organizing principles of spinal neuronal diversity and serve as
a standard foundation for future work. We began by performing a
merged and integrated analysis of the raw data from the ﬁrst six
publicly available postnatal spinal cord single-cell datasets. We
clustered the cells and nuclei of this meta-dataset to reveal 15
non-neural and 69 neural cell types, thereby providing a cell type
resolution and characterization that surpasses all prior studies,
both in the depth of its detail and the breadth of general trends.
By analyzing gene expression proﬁles across families of cell types,
we created a combinatorial panel of dozens of marker genes and
validated it with high-content in situ hybridization to characterize
the spatial distribution and prevalence of each cell type in adult
tissue. This work revealed striking differences between dorsal and
ventral neuronal cell types, both in their cell-type relationships
and molecular trends. Co-integration with embryonic cell types
allowed us to infer putative lineage relationships for each post-
natal cell type and uncovered complex convergent contributions
from multiple lineages to many cell types. Finally, we tested a
range of automated classiﬁcation algorithms and identiﬁed a two-
tiered model based on label transfer and neural networks as the
best method for classifying spinal cord cell types. We now present
SeqSeek, a web-based resource for querying this data by gene or
cell type and for accessing automated classiﬁcation algorithm of
any spinal cord cell or nucleus from raw sequencing data.
Results
Merged analysis of spinal cord cells and nuclei. We ﬁrst created
a merged dataset with over one hundred thousand cells and
nuclei from the ﬁrst six published studies of the postnatal mouse
spinal cord1–6. These studies cover a range of biological and
experimental parameters (Fig. 1a). To best compare the data from
these studies, we began with the raw sequencing reads from each
study and performed our own data processing with uniform
methods and ﬁlters. All sequencing reads were aligned to a com-
mon genomic sequence that included both exons and introns and
we used common, liberal ﬁltering thresholds for inclusion (> 200
genes per cell/nucleus) and exclusion (<5% percent of genes from
mitochondria). As a result, this merged dataset contains more cells
and nuclei than were analyzed in the original studies and a uniform
set of genes.
Our ﬁrst major goal was to create a harmonized atlas of the
major spinal cord cell types that are shared across these studies
and we considered whether it would be possible to register
different studies to each other and thereby identify a common set
of cell types that would simply require the resolution of
differences in nomenclature. To perform a direct comparison of
the clusters between different studies, we used the merged data
(with common threshold criteria and genes analyzed) and we
focused on dorsal neurons that were commonly studied by
Sathyamurthy et al., Haring et al., and Zeisel et al. For each study,
we calculated the mean expression of each gene in each cluster
and then analyzed the correlation in overall gene expression
between the studies. When either all genes or the top 500 highly
variable genes were analyzed, there were weak overall correlations
and very few alignments between clusters from different studies
(Supplementary Fig. 1a, b, d). We therefore concluded that the
previously published atlases cannot simply be registered to each
other to achieve a valid reference atlas. This is similar to previous
reports which used correlation in gene expression between
clusters to attempt to link cell types across studies and this
approach yielded weak and/or incomplete correlations, even
between studies in which the same sample age and tissue
dissociation method were used3,5.
Next, we hypothesized that co-clustering cells and nuclei across
all of the studies would provide an improved ability to relate cell
types in one study to those in another. We performed
dimensionality reduction using principal component analysis
and visualized the cells and nuclei using Unifrom Manifold
Approximation and Projection (UMAP) plots. Unfortunately, the
cells or nuclei from each study were segregated from each other
almost completely, indicating that the study of origin is a major
source of variability in the dataset (Fig. 1b). This technical
limitation obscured all cell type distinctions.
Finally, we used a recently developed integration method,
implemented in the Seurat software package, to align the cells and
nuclei across studies to reduce experimental sources of variability
and reveal the core set of spinal cord cell types22,23. With this
approach, the cells and nuclei from all six studies were spatially
interposed in a UMAP visualization of principal component
space (Fig. 1c) and separated into groupings that each expressed a
panel of well-established cell type markers such as Snap25
(neurons), Mbp (oligodendrocytes), Aqp4 (astrocytes), and Ctss
(microglia) (Fig. 1d, e). Moreover, the integration-adjusted gene
expression values markedly improved the ability to identify
relationships between the clusters of the original studies and also
improved the top correlation score for each original cluster
(Supplementary Fig. 1c, d).
With the integrated merged data, we performed preliminary
clustering and removed low-quality clusters and doublets (see
Methods) to obtain a ﬁnal dataset of over ﬁfty thousand cells and
nuclei (Supplementary Fig. 2a, e). The majority of these cells/
nuclei from this analysis are from the three studies that used high
throughput collection and barcoding techniques (the Sathya-
murthy, Rosenberg, and Zeisel datasets). A comparison across
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

studies revealed that these high throughput studies detected fewer
genes per cell/nucleus than studies that used single well technical
approaches (the Hayashi, Haring, and Baek datasets), and studies
that used cells (the Hayashi, Haring, Zeisel, and Baek datasets)
detected more genes per cell/nucleus but had higher levels of
immediate early gene and stress gene expression than did studies
that used nuclei (the Sathyamurthy and Rosenberg datasets)
(Supplementary Fig. 2). These trends across technical approaches
were expected based on other reports (reviewed22). Thus,
integration has the potential to facilitate merged analysis and
comparison amongst independent datasets by reducing (but not
eliminating) the effects of technical differences between the
studies.
To test whether the particular integration method may bias
downstream results and alter cell type assessments, we also
performed integration using three independent methodologies24:
Harmony25, Conos26, and LIGER27 (Supplementary Fig. 3). In
each case, highly reliable cell type results were observed, based on
visual inspection of UMAP distributions and low Local Inverse
Simpson Index (LISI) values for cell type coherence when
compared
to
Seurat
integration.
Together,
these
analyses
demonstrated that integration of publicly available datasets can
be used to harmonize spinal cord sequencing data, preserve
important biological differences between studies, and uncover a
robust set of shared cell types.
A harmonized atlas of major cell types. Next, we performed
coarse clustering to deﬁne the major cell types of the mouse
spinal cord (Fig. 1d, e and Supplementary Fig. 2). Sixteen major
types were identiﬁed that represent all known classes of spinal
cord cell types. These cell types are: (1) oligodendrocyte precursor
cells; (2–3) two maturational stages of oligodendrocyte progeni-
tors; (4–5) two types of oligodendrocytes that likely correspond to
myelinating and mature cell types and that blend into each other;
(6) Schwann cells; (7) peripheral glia; (8–9) two types of meninges
that likely correspond to vascular leptomeningeal cells and ara-
chnoid barrier cells; (10) ependymal cells that surround the
central canal; (11–12) two types of astrocytes that likely corre-
spond to a major population of regular astrocytes and a minor
population
of
Gfap-expressing
proliferating/activated/white
matter astrocytes; (13–14) two types of vascular cells that likely
correspond to endothelial cells and pericytes; (15) microglia; and
(16) neurons, which are discussed in detail below.
As expected, the cell types that were derived from each study
corresponded to the techniques used to isolate the cells or nuclei
(Supplementary Fig. 2e). The three studies that FACS sorted
neurons from the spinal cord (Hayashi, Haring, and Baek
datasets) predominantly gave rise to cells in the neuronal sub-
clusters, as well as non-neural cells that most likely represented
doublets. Moreover, among the three studies that examined all
cell
types,
the
early
postnatal
Rosenberg
study
showed
a
e
d
c
b
Astro-2
Pericytes
OPC
Neurons
Microglia
Schwann
Mening-1
Epend
Astro-1
Endoth
Mening-2
PG
Sathyamurthy
Zeisel
Rosenberg
Baek
Haring
Hayashi
Adult
Juvenile 
Postnatal
Nuclei
Cells
Oligo-1
OProg-1
OProg-2
Oligo-2
Sathyamurthy
Hayashi
Haring
Rosenberg
Zeisel
Baek
Without Integration
With Integration by Study
Blum
Alkaslasi
Embryonic
Delile
Merged & Integrated Multi-Study Analysis
Fig. 1 Integration of six independent studies on single cell spinal cord data reveals the major cell types of the spinal cord. a Summary of the datasets
used in this study, including the studies that used single-cell/nucleus RNA sequencing to analyze postnatal mouse spinal cord cell types (colored names
above the gray bar) and additional studies that were used for focused aspects of the analysis below the gray bar. The age and technique (cell or nuclei
isolation) is represented for each study. b UMAP presentation of the 52,623 cells/nuclei in the ﬁnal dataset, without integration and colored by the study of
origin (colors in the legend). c UMAP presentation of the same 52,623 cells/nuclei in the ﬁnal dataset, integrated by study and colored by the study of
origin (same colors as in (b)). d UMAP presentation of the cells/nuclei in the merged dataset, integrated by study and colored by cell type. e Dot plot of
the expression of marker genes for the major coarse cell types. Average expression for each cluster is shown by color intensity and the percent of cells/
nuclei in each cluster that expressed each gene is shown by dot diameter.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3

enrichment of immature cells of oligodendrocyte lineage relative
to the adult Sathyamurthy study, while the adolescent Zeisel study
showed an intermediate distribution. The only study to dissect
the spinal cord including the dorsal and ventral spinal roots (the
Sathyamurthy dataset) was the only source of Schwann and
peripheral glia cells that would be located in these roots.
Overview of harmonized neuronal cell types. We next focused
our analysis on neuronal populations to further probe their
impressive diversity and to deﬁne a reference set of cell types for
understanding the spinal cord cellular basis of behavior. Based on
the coarse cell type assignments above, we selected and clustered
all neuronal cells/nuclei (Supplementary Fig. 4). Preliminary
analysis revealed that putative dorsal horn clusters separated well
in principal component space while putative mid and ventral
horn clusters did not, which prompted us to perform a targeted
sub-clustering of all mid and ventral cells/nuclei (see Methods).
In total, 69 neuronal clusters were identiﬁed (Fig. 2, Supple-
mentary Figs. 4 and 5, Supplementary Table 2, and Supplemen-
tary Movie 1) and the neurotransmitter status and putative
regional location (dorsal horn, mid-region, ventral horn) were
determined by marker gene expression and comparison to the
original six studies. Subsequent validation studies conﬁrmed these
determinations (see below). We observed 20 dorsal excitatory
clusters, 14 dorsal inhibitory clusters, 10 deep dorsal/mid exci-
tatory clusters, 7 deep dorsal/mid inhibitory clusters, 8 ventral
excitatory clusters, 6 ventral inhibitory clusters, 3 cholinergic
motoneuron clusters, and 1 cluster of the cerebrospinal ﬂuid
contacting neurons (CSF-cN).
To determine the robustness of these clusters, we used a
bootstrapped co-clustering test of the consistency with which cells
and nuclei in each cluster remain together upon repeated clustering
(Fig. 2c and Supplementary Fig. 5). Dorsal clusters showed very
high robustness with this measure, whereas mid and ventral clusters
showed low to moderate robustness. This general feature was
consistent with previous observations and likely reﬂects similar
patterns of gene expression amongst mid and ventral clusters1,4.
To assess how these neuronal clusters relate to previously
characterized transcriptomic spinal cord cell types, we ﬁrst
focused on the original clusters from the Sathyamurthy and
Haring datasets because these two studies included a common set
of cell types (dorsal horn neurons) and provided the most
analysis, annotation, and marker validation for their respective
cell types. Some ventral neurons from the Sathyamurthy dataset
appeared in low-quality clusters that were discarded from the
harmonized analysis due to low counts of genes per cell/nucleus
and a lack of marker genes, whereas some neurons from the
Haring dataset were classiﬁed as non-neural cell types or
Dataset
Neurotransmitter
Lamina
Family
Harmonized Neuron Clusters
Robustness Score
UMAP_2
UMAP_1
a
e
d
c
b
f
Fig. 2 Harmonized atlas of 69 populations of spinal cord neurons. a UMAP presentation of 19,353 neuronal cells/nuclei of the postnatal mouse spinal
cord, colored and annotated by cell type cluster. b–f The same cells/nuclei, colored by the study of origin (b), by robustness (silhouette) score (c), a
neurotransmitter (d), lamina (e), and family (f). I inhibitory, I/Ch inhibitory cholinergic, Ch cholinergic, E/Ch excitatory cholinergic, E excitatory, MN
motoneurons, ME mid excitatory, CC Clarke’s Column (*see main text for note on this designation), MI mid inhibitory, VE ventral excitatory, VI ventral
inhibitory. Laminae were assigned based on in situ hybridization validation experiments and are colored by the approximate depth from the dorsal surface
of the cord (hot pink to violet). See main text for description of neuronal families.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

appeared in doublet clusters that were also discarded from the
harmonized analysis. Nevertheless, we found that cells/nuclei
from the original studies were distributed into the harmonized
clusters in coherent patterns that facilitated the registration of the
original clusters based on their distance in the neuron principal
component space (Supplementary Fig. 6). We next compared the
harmonized clusters to the clusters reported in a recent study by
Blum et al. which focused on spinal motoneurons but also
included
many
interneurons
and
glia.
We
found
general
agreement between the clusters that they reported and our
harmonized analysis with the following differences (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 7). First, they described many more sub-types of
motoneurons, similar to the work of Alkaslasi et al., and we
incorporated both of these studies and performed an expanded
analysis of motoneuron sub-types (see below). Second, most
excitatory or inhibitory clusters that Blum et al. described
corresponded to multiple reﬁned harmonized clusters. Third,
Blum et al. cluster “0” was described as inhibitory neurons but
likely included both inhibitory and excitatory ventral neurons.
And fourth, there were a few putative mis-annotation errors in
the Blum et al. dataset: cluster “22” was not annotated but likely
corresponded to ependymal cells; cluster “24” was annotated as
inhibitory interneurons but likely corresponded to oligodendro-
cyte
precursor
cells;
and
cluster
“35”
was
annotated
as
oligodendrocytes but likely corresponded to a mix (or doublets)
of oligodendrocyte precursors/progenitors and other glial cell
types such as astrocytes. Finally, we compared all marker genes
that we highlight in this paper (those in Table 1 and all ﬁgures) to
their patterns in a recent spatial transcriptomics analysis of the
spinal cord28 and to the Allen29 and Gensat30 expression
databases
and
found
general
concordance
between
these
resources (Supplementary Table 4). Together, this analysis reveals
the overall reproducibility of single-cell sequencing atlases of the
spinal cord but also highlights the power of integrating many
sources of information to obtain the most reﬁned and robust cell
types and the importance of having an annotated reference atlas
to facilitate cell type analysis in future work.
General trends in molecular identity relationships amongst
neuronal populations. We next sought to examine the major
features that govern the broad molecular identity relationships
amongst spinal cord neurons. We used a dendrogram analysis of
the distance between the clusters within the 50-dimensional
principal component space. This revealed that the primary dis-
tinctions within spinal interneurons/projection neurons (non-
motoneurons) were based on spatial location in the dorsal horn
or mid/ventral regions of the spinal cord. Interestingly, this
bifurcation occurred even before cell types split by neuro-
transmitter status (for example into dorsal excitatory or dorsal
inhibitory types), a core feature of neuronal identity. This analysis
also revealed that putative dorsal clusters were well separated
from each other by long dendrogram branches, while putative
mid and ventral clusters were much closer to each other in this
reduced gene expression space (Fig. 3a). Intriguingly, neurons
that are located at the spatial mid-point between the dorsal and
ventral sides of the cord (preganglionic cells and two excitatory
populations near the central canal) were organized as a single
branch (Fig. 3a; center), further underscoring the importance of
spatial distribution as an organizing principle in the spinal cord.
We next performed differential expression between dorsal and
mid/ventral neuron types and compared the signature gene
expression proﬁles by gene ontology analysis to uncover the
broad molecular
differences
that
distinguish
these
classes.
Remarkably, we found that genes related to plasticity were
signiﬁcantly enriched in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. This
included (1) genes that were widely expressed in the dorsal horn
but not in the ventral horn, such as Camk2a which has well-
established roles in long-term potentiation (LTP)31; (2) genes that
were present at higher levels in the dorsal horn than the mid/
ventral horn, such as Grm5 which encodes the mGluR5 receptor
which has been linked to meta-plasticity32, Plcb1 (PLCβ), and
Gria3 (GluR3); and (3) genes with restricted expression in
particular dorsal horn neuron types such as Prkcg (PKCγ),
Kcnip3 (DREAM), Nrgn, and Nos1 (nNOS) (Fig. 3b, c, d, g). In
contrast, genes related to structural adhesion and stability were
enriched in the ventral horn of the spinal cord, including (1)
genes related to cell-cell adhesion such as Lrrtm3, Cntn5, Cdh18,
and Sdk1; (2) genes related to perineuronal net components such
as Bcan (Brevican) and Tnr (Tenascin R), and genes related to
limiting the signal transduction pathways associated with LTP
such as Ptpn5 (STEP)33 (Fig. 3b, e, f, g). We validated the
differentially expressed patterns of several of these genes using
in situ hybridization and also at the protein level for CAMK2α
and WFA-lectin to reveal perineuronal nets, thereby conﬁrming
predicted gene expression signatures that would differentially
regulate plasticity in the dorsal and ventral horns of the spinal
cord (Fig. 3c–f). Thus, we discovered general differences in the
relationships between clusters in the dorsal versus the ventral
horn and molecular trends that could confer differential plasticity
control in these two regions.
We also performed a similar analysis to compare gene
expression between excitatory and inhibitory classes of spinal
neurons. As expected, genes involved in neurotransmitter status
were detected (such as Pax2 and Gad2) but we also observed
consistent differential expression between excitatory and inhibi-
tory neurons for a pair of calcium channels (Cacna2d3 and
Cacna2d1) and a pair of synaptic adhesion molecules that
promote repulsion to limit homophilic interactions (Dscam and
Dscaml1) (Supplementary Fig. 8).
Detailed cluster analysis and marker validation for harmonized
neuronal cell types. Next, we sought to characterize the indivi-
dual clusters at a molecular level and to deﬁne their marker genes.
There are multiple approaches for identifying cell type markers
based on single-cell data. Commonly used methods such as the
Wilcox Rank Sum test and Area Under the Curve Receiver
Operating Characteristic (AUROC) analysis use differential
expression to identify genes that are enriched within one identi-
ﬁed cell cluster as compared to all other clusters and we used this
approach to generate candidate markers for each cluster (Sup-
plementary Table 1). However, these approaches do not prioritize
markers that are shared between related clusters or those markers
that are well-established for a given tissue, nor do they produce
an efﬁcient ﬁnal set of markers that can be used to deﬁne neu-
ronal cell types for use in other types of experiments. To over-
come these obstacles, we therefore used a combination of Wilcox
and ROC individual cluster markers, Wilcox and ROC markers
for dendrogram branches, and established markers from the lit-
erature to generate a panel of combinatorial markers for spinal
cord neurons that follows a family name and given name analogy.
For example, Excit-14 through Excit-19 comprise the Sox5 family.
They are distinguished by expression of Col5a2 (Excit-14),
Col5a2 and Enpp1 (Excit-15), Col5a2, Enpp1, and Tac1 (Excit-
16), Dcx expression and being present almost exclusively at early
post-natal stages (Excit-17), Nmu (Excit-18), and Tac2 (Excit-19)
(Fig. 4A, B).
To determine whether this panel of markers corresponded to
in situ gene expression patterns and to deﬁne the anatomical
distribution of each cluster, we performed high-content in situ
hybridization with combinatorial sets of marker gene probes
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5

including both known and not previously described marker genes
(Supplementary Table 3). While the harmonized analysis above
included a range of tissue ages, all validation work was done in
the adult lumbar spinal cord to test whether predicted gene
expression patterns are accurate and whether they can be used in
the adult context to study cells involved in the mature function.
We tested 95 unique genes and analyzed gene expression in ten
overlapping sets of 12 genes each. For each set, hundreds of cells
were counted from three spinal cords and their locations mapped
by lamina with examples shown in Fig. 4 and Supplementary
Fig. 9. (Details for the counting procedure including are described
in the “Methods”.)
Using this approach, 79 genes (out of 95) showed reliable
expression in the adult spinal cord (Supplementary Table 3) and
71% of neurons in the adult lumbar spinal cord could be
identiﬁed as belonging to one of the 69 neuronal clusters (2057/
2894 total). An additional 9% of neurons could be identiﬁed as
belonging to pairs of closely related clusters (266/2894 total). Of
note, the ability to use deﬁned markers to identify cell types in
tissue varied by combinatorial gene set such that dorsal sets could
be more readily assigned based on in situ gene expression than
ventral sets (Fig. 4F). This suggests that the distinction between
dorsal and ventral neurons that we described above is not limited
to the sequencing data but exists in the adult spinal cord tissue.
This detailed in situ hybridization analysis also revealed the in-
tissue prevalence and laminar location of each of the lumbar adult
neuronal cell types (Table 1) and can serve to translate single-cell
sequencing data back into tissue-based analysis.
The cell type markers, typical laminar distribution, prevalence,
and putative embryonic lineage (described below) of each cluster
are shown in Table 1, Fig. 4, and Supplementary Fig. 9.
The motoneuron (MN) family includes alpha motoneurons
(MNa) which had relatively higher levels of Poln and Spp134,
gamma motoneurons (MNg) which had relatively higher levels of
Esrrg and Htr1f35, and the related preganglionic cells (PGC)
which expressed Gfra3, Nos1, and Fbn236,37. This family was only
comprised of nuclei from the Sathyamurthy and Rosenberg
datasets but we could not detected reﬁned sub-populations of
motoneurons. However, this included only 565 MNs. Recently,
data from Blum et al.10 and Alkaslasi et al.11, focusing only on
cholinergic neurons, became available. Therefore, we incorpo-
rated this data and performed a targeted analysis of a merged set
of 23,032 spinal motoneurons. This larger dataset, combined with
the barcoding of the Alkaslasi study enabled the identiﬁcation of
distinctly localized MN subtypes that were not previously
resolved. PGCs were clustered into 23 subtypes that varied by
spinal cord level and MNa were clustered into 14 subtypes that
also varied by spinal level. For example, we found that digit-
Excit-7
Excit-4
Excit-3
Excit-5
Excit-6
Excit-2
Excit-1
Excit-13
Excit-25
Excit-12
Excit-14
Excit-15
Excit-17
Excit-16
Excit-18
Excit-19
Excit-11
Excit-10
Excit-8
Excit-9
Inhib-10
Inhib-11
Inhib-9
Inhib-13
Inhib-12
Inhib-2
Inhib-1
Inhib-6
Inhib-7
Inhib-8
Inhib-3
Inhib-5
Inhib-4
PGC
Excit-28
Excit-30
Excit-37
Excit-34
Excit-29
Inhib-24
Excit-38
Excit-35
Excit-36
Excit-22
Excit-21
Excit-20
Excit-33
Excit-26
Excit-27
Excit-23
Excit-24
Inhib-15
Inhib-21
Inhib-14
Inhib-18
Inhib-16
Inhib-19
Inhib-17
Inhib-27
Inhib-20
Inhib-25
Inhib-26
Inhib-22
Excit-21
Inhib-23
CSF-cN
MN-Gamma
MN-Alpha
MN
IN
CSFcN
All Other 
INs
Mid/Ventral
Dorsal
DI
Center
MI
ME/VE
ME
VE/VI
VE
VI
VE/VI
DE
MI
b
Gene Category
p-Value
Cell adhesion
0.000000006
Axon guidance
0.00000017
Neuron system dev.
0.0000029
Homophilic cell adhesion
0.0000033
Positive regulation of synapse assembly
0.0000042
Axon guidance
0.000008
cAMP signaling pathway
0.000025
Actomyosin structure organization
0.00011
Chemical synaptic transmission
0.00023
Gene Category
p-Value
Regulation of synaptic transmission 
0.0000041
Glutamatergic synapse
0.0000056
Long-term potentiation
0.000049
Circadian entrainment
0.00016
Neuron migration
0.00057
Calcium signaling pathway
0.00095
Behavioral fear response
0.0014
Chemical synaptic transmission
0.0015
Long-term depression
0.0021
a
Dorsal Neuron Types
Mid/Ventral Neuron Types
CAMK2    protein
Perineuronal Net (WFA)
Camk2a Plcb1 Grm5
c
d
f
e
Sdk1 Tnr
g
Mid/Ventral
Dorsal
Excit-1 
Excit-2 
Excit-3 
Excit-4 
Excit-5 
Excit-6 
Excit-7 
Excit-8 
Excit-9 
Excit-10 
Excit-11 
Excit-12 
Excit-13 
Excit-14 
Excit-15 
Excit-16 
Excit-17 
Excit-18 
Excit-19 
Excit-20 
Inhib-1 
Inhib-2 
Inhib-3 
Inhib-4 
Inhib-5 
Inhib-6 
Inhib-7 
Inhib-8 
Inhib-9 
Inhib-10 
Inhib-11 
Inhib-12 
Inhib-13 
Inhib-14 
Excit-21 
Excit-22 
Excit-23 
Excit-24 
Excit-25 
Excit-26 
Excit-27 
Excit-28 
Excit-29 
Excit-30 
Inhib-15 
Inhib-16 
Inhib-17 
Inhib-18 
Inhib-19 
Inhib-20 
Inhib-21 
Excit-31 
Excit-32 
Excit-33 
Excit-34 
Excit-35 
Excit-36 
Excit-37 
Excit-38 
Inhib-22 
Inhib-23 
Inhib-24 
Inhib-25 
Inhib-26 
Inhib-27 
Prkcg 
Nrgn 
Camk2a 
Plcb1 
Grm5 
Gria2 
Gria3 
Lrrtm3 
Ptpn5 
Sdk1 
Tnr 
Bcan
% Exp
Ave Exp
Fig. 3 Trends in dorsal-ventral organization of spinal cord neuron types. a Dendrogram showing the relationships between the 69 neuronal cell types
based on their distance from each other in the 50-dimensional principal component (PC) space. MN motoneuron, IN interneurons (and projection
neurons), CSF-cN cerebrospinal ﬂuid contacting neurons, DE dorsal excitatory, DI dorsal inhibitory ME mid excitatory, MI mid inhibitory, VE ventral
excitatory, VI ventral inhibitory, center represents a group of 3 cell types located near lamina X–the center of the spinal cord. b Differential gene expression
tests (ROC) were used to compare overall gene expression between the dorsal cell types and mid/ventral cell types and signiﬁcant gene lists were
analyzed by gene ontology (GO) term searches with GO DAVID using molecular function and biological process terms, as well as KEGG pathway lists
(which are underlined) and the top terms for each cell class are shown. c–f Validation of differentially expressed genes using RNA in situ hybridization (c,
e), antibody staining (d), or WFA-lectin staining (f). 20x tiled images, with brightness and contrast adjusted. All images are representative of the pattern
observed in at least 3 sections each from N = 3 animals. Scale bars are 200 μm. g Dot plots showing expression of plasticity-related genes in each
harmonized cluster, in which dot color intensity corresponds to average expression level (Ave Exp) and dot size corresponds to the percent of each cluster
that expressed the gene (% Exp).
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

innervating motoneurons, expressing Cpne4 and Fign38, sepa-
rated into two subtypes, one found in limb-innervating regions
(both cervical and lumbar) and one that was speciﬁcally localized
to the lumbar spinal cord39,40 (Supplementary Fig. 9A and
Supplementary Fig. 10).
Cerebrospinal fluid contacting neurons (CSF-cN) were dis-
tinguished by Pkd2l1 and Pkd1l2. This population has been
suggested to be involved in postural control in zebraﬁsh41–45.
This cluster was very distinct from other neuronal populations,
inhibitory, and also expressed the early neuron marker Sox2 and
the V2b lineage markers Gata2 and Gata3, suggesting an
immature phenotype. (Supplementary Fig. 9A).
The dorsal excitatory cell types were comprised of the
following families:
 
 
 
18
Sox5
5
3
3
3
3
4
4
2.5
2.5
Col5a2
Tac1
Tac2
Nmu
a
c
Enpp1
Dcx
Nmu/Tac2
Sox5
Col5a2
Tac1
Tac2
Nmu
Enpp1
Dcx
b
Ave Expression
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
% Expressed
0
25
50
75
MNa
MNg
PGC
CSF-cN
Excit-1
Excit-2
Excit-3
Excit-4
Excit-5
Excit-6
Excit-7
Excit-8
Excit-9
Excit-10
Excit-11
Excit-12
Excit-13
Excit-14
Excit-15
Excit-16
Excit-17
Excit-18
Excit-19
Excit-20
Inhib-1
Inhib-2
Inhib-3
Inhib-4
Inhib-5
Inhib-6
Inhib-7
Inhib-8
Inhib-9
Inhib-10
Inhib-11
Inhib-12
Inhib-13
Inhib-14
Excit-21
Excit-22
Excit-23
Excit-24
Excit-25
Excit-26
Excit-27
Excit-28
Excit-29
Excit-30
Inhib-15
Inhib-16
Inhib-17
Inhib-18
Inhib-19
Inhib-20
Inhib-21
Excit-31
Excit-32
Excit-33
Excit-34
Excit-35
Excit-36
Excit-37
Excit-38
Inhib-22
Inhib-23
Inhib-24
Inhib-25
Inhib-26
Inhib-27
f
n=124
n=492
n=234
n=505
n=599
n=394
n=226
n=178
n=102
n=142
Set 1
100
 In Situ
0
Set 2
Set 3
Set 5
Set 6
Set 7
Set 8
Set 9
Set 10
MNa, MNg, PGC, CSF-cN, E28
E8, E9, E10, E11, E12, E13, E30
I9, I10, I11, I12, I13, I14
I22, I23, I24, I25, I26, I27
E1, E1, E3, E4, E5, E6
I1, I2, I3, I4, I5, I6, I7, I8
E21, E22, E23, E24, E25, E26, E27
I15, I16, I17, I18, I19, I20, I21
E14, E15, E16, E17, E18, E19, E20, E29
E31, E32, E33, E34, E35, E36, E37, E38
Dorsal
Mid/Ventral
Set 4
Sox5 Col5a2 Tac1 Nmu Tac2
16
18
15
d
e
19
19
19
19
18
18
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
15**
14*
15
14
Dorsal Horn
19
15**
14*
Enpp1
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7

The Cpne4 dorsal, excitatory family was comprised of Excit-
1 and Excit-2. Excit-1 was a rare subset, both in the
harmonized clusters and in the in situ counts, that also
expressed Dach2. Excit-2 was more prevalent and co-expressed
Prkcg
as
well
as
Cbln2.
This
family
had
markers
of
interneurons suggested to be involved in mechanical itch46,47.
(Supplementary Fig. 9B).
The Prkcg dorsal, excitatory family was comprised of Excit-3
and Excit-4 and likely corresponded to neurons involved in light
static touch and allodynic pain in pathological situations46,48–56.
Prkcg is a classic marker gene in the spinal cord and deﬁned this
family together with the neuropeptides Cck and Trh (Excit-3) and
Nts (Excit-4). Both subsets also expressed Calb1, although it was
not speciﬁc to these clusters. This family was also close to Excit-7,
an immature cluster grouped with the Maf family. Of note, there
were two discrepancies in this family between the sequencing data
and the in situ hybridization data: Cck was present at high levels
in the Excit-3 in the sequencing data but we did not detect Cck in
most Prkcg-expressing cells of the adult spinal cord and Prkcg
was not enriched in Excit-4 in the sequencing data but was readily
detected with Nts and Calb1 in this cluster in adult tissue.
(Supplementary Fig. 9B).
The Maf dorsal, the excitatory family was comprised of Excit-5,
Excit-6, and Excit-7 which expressed markers of neurons
involved in light touch46,48,50,56,57. All three clusters expressed
enriched levels of Maf and Rora (which was broadly expressed in
many other clusters at lower levels). Excit-5 also expressed Pvalb
and Cck, Excit-6 expressed Rorb and Cpne4, and Excit-7 was
distinguished by having only nuclei from the Rosenberg dataset
and expressed the immature neuron marker Dcx, suggesting an
immature phenotype. The similarity of Excit-7 with Excit-3,
Excit-4, Excit-5, and Excit-6 suggests a shared lineage relationship
between these families. This family also expressed low levels of
Slc17a8 (vGlut3). (Supplementary Fig. 9B).
The Reln dorsal, excitatory family was comprised of Excit-8,
Excit-9, Excit-10, and Excit-11 and expressed markers indicative
of a role in chemical itch sensation58–62. These clusters expressed
enriched levels of Car12 (in particular in Excit-9 and Excit-10),
the neuropeptide receptors Trhr (Excit-8), Npr1 (Excit-9 and
Excit-10), and Nmur2 (Excit-10), and the neuropeptide Grp
(Excit-9). (Supplementary Fig. 9C).
The Rreb1 dorsal, excitatory family was comprised of Excit-12
and Excit-13. These clusters also expressed Satb1 and either Zim1
(Excit-12) or Nmur2 and Crh (Excit-13). (Supplementary Fig. 9C).
The Sox5 dorsal, the excitatory family was comprised of Excit-
14, Excit-15, Excit-16, Excit-17, Excit-18, and Excit-19, and
expressed markers suggestive of a role in coping pain and
mechanical nociception46,52,56,63–67. Within this family, Excit-14
and Excit-15 were slightly separated and also similar to the Rreb1
family clusters and expressed Col5a2 (Excit-14) or Col5a2 and
Enpp1 (Excit-15). Excit-16, Excit-18, and Excit-19 expressed the
neuropeptides Tac1 (Excit-16), Nmu-hi/Tac2-lo (Excit-18), and
Tac2hi/Nmu-lo (Excit-19). Excit-17 included almost exclusively
nuclei
from
the
Rosenberg
dataset
and
showed
enriched
expression of the immature neuron marker Dcx. (Fig. 4).
The Megf11 cluster (Excit-20) displayed features of dorsal
excitatory neurons and mid excitatory neurons, being located in
lamina 4/5 and being grouped with mid neurons in principal
component space in the UMAP and dendrogram analysis. It
expressed Megf11 and Mdga1.
The dorsal inhibitory cell types were comprised of the
following families:
The Rorb and Adamts5 dorsal, the inhibitory family was
comprised of Inhib-1, Inhib-2, Inhib-3, Inhib-4, and Inhib-5, with
markers of neurons involved in the dampening of dynamic
touch48,68,69. Each of these clusters, except Inhib-2, expressed
Rorb. Inhib-2 is grouped with this family based on its proximity
in principal component space, as reﬂected in the UMAP and
dendrogram analysis. In addition to Rorb, Inhib-1 expressed
Sorcs3, Inhib-3 expressed Nppc as well as Nrgn, Inhib-4
expressed Rxfp2, and Inhib-5 did not express these other genes.
Inhib-2 expressed Sorcs3 and Adamts5. (Supplementary Fig. 9D).
The Cdh3 dorsal, inhibitory family was comprised of Inhib-6,
Inhib-7, and Inhib-8 and are likely to be involved in the
dampening of dynamic touch and therefore in mechanical
allodynia70–72. Inhib-6 and Inhib-7 expressed Cdh3 and were
distinguished by co-expression of Kcnip2 and Pvalb in Inhib-7.
While Inhib-8 contained only low levels of Cdh3 in this analysis,
Cdh3 expression was conﬁrmed by in situ hybridization and this
cluster was included in this family based on proximity in
principal component space as reﬂected in the UMAP and
dendrogram analysis. Inhib-8 also expressed Klhl14. (Supple-
mentary Fig. 9D).
The Pdyn dorsal, inhibitory family was comprised of Inhib-9,
Inhib-10, and Inhib-11 and expressed markers suggestive of a role
in chemical itch52,61,73–77. Each of these clusters expressed Pdyn,
while Inhib-10 also expressed Gal and Mlxipl and Inhib-11 also
expressed Gal only. Of note, the clusters in this family also
expressed Rorb and Nrgn. (Supplementary Fig. 9E).
The Npy dorsal, the inhibitory family was comprised of Inhib-
12 and Inhib-13. Studies suggest this family’s markers identify
neurons involved in mechanical itch and pain73,78,79. These
clusters expressed Npy and were distinguished by low levels of
Vgf (Inhib-12) or by expression of Qrfpr (Inhib-13). (Supple-
mentary Fig. 9E).
The Chat dorsal inhibitor cluster Inhib-14 was a deep dorsal
(lamina 4), inhibitory and cholinergic population and also
expressed Nos180–82.
Fig. 4 Family structure and in situ validation for adult spinal cord tissue. a UMAP for neuronal cell types Excit-14 through Excit-19. b Dot plot of the
distribution of selected marker genes across the 69 neuronal clusters in which dot color intensity corresponds to average expression level (Ave Expression)
and dot size corresponds to the percent of each cluster that expressed the gene (% Expressed). c Feature plots of each gene expression pattern in Excit-14
through Excit-19. Expression levels are indicated by color intensity, with the maximum level indicated below each plot. The co-expression of Nmu (red) and
Tac2 (green) are shown in the right-most plot, with expression levels cut-off at a maximum of 2.5 to highlight co-expressing cells in yellow. d, e RNA in situ
hybridization of selected marker genes Sox5, Col5a2, Tac1, Nmu, Tac2 on an adult mouse lumbar spinal cord section. Cells were assigned to individual
excitatory clusters with cluster number identity shown based on marker gene expression. Inset show representative cells of Excit-14 (14*) and Excit-15
(15**) with in situ hybridization for Sox5 (green), Col5a2 (red), Enpp1 (blue). 20x tiled images, with brightness and contrast adjusted. All images are
representative of the pattern observed in at least 3 sections each from N = 3 animals. Scale bar is 100 μm in (d) and 25 μm in (e). f Quantiﬁcation of the
cells in adult spinal cord tissue that could be deﬁned using sets of marker genes in situ. The cell types analyzed by each set of genes are shown on the left,
the number of cells counted for each set are shown at the base of the bars, and the percent of counted cells are shown for each animal (N = 3, replicates
and mean ± standard error) that could be conﬁdently assigned to a single cluster (white bars), or that could be assigned to a single cluster or to pair of
closely related clusters (gray). For each set, the coarse criteria for counting total cells are speciﬁed in the Methods. Set 4, which includes the Sox5 family
clusters, is highlighted in green as an example.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Table 1 Cell-type census of 69 populations of spinal cord neurons.
Cluster
Lamina
%
NT
Family
Individual Markers
Putative Lineage
MN-alpha
9
1.1
Chat
MN
Spp1
Poln
Tns1
MN
MN-gamma
9
0.5
Chat
MN
Esrrg
Htr1f
Tns1
MN
PGC
7-IML
Chat
MN
Gfra3
Nos1
Fbn2
MN
CSF-cN
10
0.3
Slc6a1
CSF-cN
Pkd2l1
V2b.2/V2b.4
Excit-1
1/2o
0.6
Slc17a6
Cpne4
Dach2
(Cck)
dI3.3/dI5
Excit-2
1/2o/2i
3.7
Slc17a6
Cpne4
Prkcg
(Rorb)
dI5.4
Excit-3
1/2o/2i
3.8
Slc17a6
Prkcg
(Cck)
Calb1
dI5.4
Excit-4
2i/3
2.8
Slc17a6
(Prkcg)
Nts
Calb1-hi
dI5.4
Excit-5
2i/3/4
3.2
Slc17a6
Maf
Cck
dI5.4
Excit-6
3/4
2.4
Slc17a6
Maf
Rorb
Cpne4
dI5.4/dI5.5
Excit-7
N/A
N/A
Slc17a6
Maf
Dcx
(vGlut3)
dI5.4/dI5.5
Excit-8
1/2
1.4
Slc17a6
Reln
Trhr
(Car12)
(Grp)
dI3.3/dI5.4
Excit-9
1/2/3
1.7
Slc17a6
(Reln)
Grp
Calb2
dI5.4/dI5.5
Excit-10
1/2
2
Slc17a6
Reln
Car12
Nmur2
dI5.4
Excit-11
N/A
0
Slc17a6
Reln
Car12
Gabra2
dI5.4
Excit-12
1/2
0.2
Slc17a6
Rreb1
Satb1
Zim1
dI5.5
Excit-13
2i/3
0.7
Slc17a6
Rreb1
Nmur2
(Satb1)
dI5.5
Excit-14
1/2o
1.7
Slc17a6
Sox5
Col5a2
(dI5)
Excit-15
1/2/3
0.2
Slc17a6
Sox5
Col5a2
Enpp1
(dI5)
Excit-16
1/2o (2i-4)
6.5
Slc17a6
Sox5
Col5a2
Enpp1
Tac1
(dI5)
Excit-17
N/A
N/A
Slc17a6
Sox5
Dcx
(dI5)
Excit-18
1/2o (2i-4)
2.7
Slc17a6
Sox5
Nmu
(Tac2)
(dI5)
Excit-19
2i (3/4)
1.9
Slc17a6
Sox5
Tac2
(Nmu)
dI5.4/dI5.5
Excit-20
4/5
2
Slc17a6
Megf11
Mdga1
dI2.1/dI5.5
Inhib-1
3 (1-4)
7.4
Slc6a1
Rorb
Sorcs3
(Nppc)
(Runx2)
dI4.3
Inhib-2
3 (1-4)
10.3
Slc6a1
(Rorb)
Adamts5
Klhl14
Sorcs3
dI4.3
Inhib-3
1-4
3
Slc6a1
Rorb
Nppc
Nrgn
dI4.3
Inhib-4
1/2o/2i
0.4
Slc6a1
Rorb
Rxfp2
dI4.3
Inhib-5
1/2o (3)
1
Slc6a1
Rorb
dI4.3
Inhib-6
3/4 (1/2o)
1.3
Slc6a1
Cdh3
dI4.4
Inhib-7
2i/3 (1-4)
3.6
Slc6a1
Cdh3
Kcnip2
Pvalb
dI4.4
Inhib-8
3/4
0.5
Slc6a1
(Cdh3)
Klhl14-hi
dI4.4
Inhib-9
1/2o (2i/3)
1.6
Slc6a1
Pdyn
(Rorb)
(Rspo3)
dI4.1/dI4.4
Inhib-10
3 (1-5)
9.7
Slc6a1
Pdyn
Gal
Mlxipl
Rspo3
dI4.1/dI4.4
Inhib-11
1/2o/2i/3
0.9
Slc6a1
Pdyn
Gal
(Rorb)
Nrgn
dI4.1/dI4.4
Inhib-12
1/2o/4
1.8
Slc6a1
Npy
(Vgf)
dI4.6
Inhib-13
1/2o/2i
2.1
Slc6a1
Npy
Qrfpr
dI4.6
Inhib-14
4
0.1
Slc6a1
Chat
Slc6a5
Nos1
dI4.1/dI4.6
Excit-21
4/lat 5
0.5
Slc17a6
ME/Lmx1b
Zfhx3
Nms
dI5.5
Excit-22
4/5/6
0.1
Slc17a6
ME/Lmx1b
Zfhx3
dI3.3/dI5.5
Excit-23
4/med 5
1.2
Slc17a6
ME/Lmx1b
Nﬁb
Cep112
(dI5)
Excit-24
4/5/6
0.7
Slc17a6
ME/Lmx1b
(Nﬁb)
(Cep112)
(dI5)
Excit-25
4/5/6
0
Slc17a6
ME/Lmx1b
Nﬁb
Prox1
(dI5)
Excit-26
4
0.1
Slc17a6
ME
Nﬁb
(Prox1)
(Satb1)
(dI1/dI2)
Excit-27
4/5
1.3
Slc17a6
ME
Adamts2
Cep112)
(dI2)
Excit-28
10
0.1
Chat
ME
Pitx2
Pou6f2
Onecut2
V0*
Excit-29
5/6
0.3
Slc17a6
ME
Onecut2
Pmfbp1
(V0)
Excit-30
5
0.8
Slc17a6
CC#
Gbx2
Neurod2+
Pou6f2
V2a.1
Inhib-15
med 5
1.1
Slc6a5
MI
Prox1
Gabra1
Nﬁb
V1.7
Inhib-16
med 5
0.6
Slc6a5
MI
Gpc3
(Rorb)
Sema5b
dI4.6
Inhib-17
N/A
N/A
Slc6a5
MI
Satb2
dI4.4/dI4.6/(dI6)
Inhib-18
5/6
0.5
Slc6a5
MI
Sema5b
dI4
Inhib-19
med 5
0.5
Slc6a5
MI
Ccbe1
Pou6f2
dI4.4
Inhib-20
5/6
1
Slc6a5
MI
Tfap2b
dI4.6/V1.1/(dI6)
Inhib-21
4/med 5
0.8
Gad2
MI
Nﬁb
Pax6
dI4.6/V1.6/(dI6)
Excit-31
6/7/8
0.3
Slc17a6
VE
Lhx9
Gm26673
Syt2
(dI1/dI2)
Excit-32
6/7/8
0.4
Slc17a6
VE
Lhx9
Prlr
Mdga1
dI1/dI2/dI3
Excit-33
N/A
N/A
Slc17a6
VE
Lhx9
dI2.1
Excit-34
6/7/8
0.4
Slc17a6
VE
Bnc2
Pou6f2
Lhx2
dI1/dI2
Excit-35
6/7
0.5
Slc17a6
VE
Vsx2
Pou6f2
Vamp1
V2a*
Excit-36
6/7
0.3
Slc17a6
VE
Vsx2
Esrrg
(Gm26673)
dI1/dI2/V2a
Excit-37
7
0.8
Slc17a6
VE
Vsx2
Shox2*
V2a*
Excit-38
N/A
N/A
Slc17a6
VE
Sim1
Rnf220
V3*
Inhib-22
7
0.1
Slc6a5
VI
Foxp2
(Esrrb)
(dI6)/V1.3
Inhib-23
7/8
0.6
Slc6a5
VI
Foxp2
Esrrbb+
Gm26673
(dI6)/V1.3
Inhib-24
7
0.6
Slc6a5
VI
Pou6f2
Nr5a2
V1
Inhib-25
7/8
1.1
Slc6a5
VI
Esrrb
(Pvalb)
(dI6)/V1
Inhib-26
ventral 7
0.5
Slc6a5
VI
Chrna7
Calb1
(Pvalb)
V1.1/V1.2
Inhib-27
7
0.3
Slc6a5
VI
Foxp2
(Gata3)
Pax2-hi
(dI6)/V1/V2b
The lamina, prevalence, neurotransmitter marker gene, family, individual marker genes, and putative embryonic lineage for each neuronal cluster are shown. The clusters are color-coded to correspond
approximately to their color in Fig. 2a. The prevalence of each cluster was determined by counting the conﬁdently assigned cells of each type based on RNA in situ hybridization on sections from three
animals and are presented as the percent of the total number of conﬁdently assigned neurons. Genes in parenthesis are expressed at lower levels. Genes in gray were not validated (due to probe failure,
being present only in postnatal animals, or were not included in the analysis). + denotes relatively higher expression. # denotes a possible identity of Clarke’s column (CC). * denotes a marker that was
validated using RNAScope V2 but did not work in the RNAScope Hiplex assay.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9

The cell types of the mid-region of the spinal cord, the deep
dorsal horn, were comprised of the following families and the
clusters were generally less robust than dorsal clusters (Fig. 2b
and Supplementary Fig. 5).
The mid excitatory (ME)/Lmx1b family was comprised of
Excit-21, Excit-22, Excit-23, Excit-24, and Excit-25 and corre-
sponds to cells suggested to be involved in pain3,83. These clusters
expressed Lmx1b, suggesting a dI5/dILB embryonic origin. All of
the clusters except Excit-25 expressed Tacr1 and Excit-21 also
expressed Lypd1, suggesting that these are candidate ascending
populations3. These clusters could also be distinguished by
expression of Zfhx3 (Excit-21 and Excit-22) or Nﬁb (Excit-23,
Excit-24, and Excit-25), which corresponded to lateral Zfhx3 and
medial Nﬁb sub-types. Other markers sub-divided the clusters in
a combinatorial manner, including Nms (Excit-21), Bcl11a
(Excit-22 through Excit-25), Satb1 and Cdh23 (Excit-23, Excit-
24, and Excit-25), Cep112 (Excit-23 and Excit-24), and Prox1
(Excit-25). Of note, nearly all of the cells and nuclei in this family
were from the Rosenberg and Sathyamurthy datasets. (Supple-
mentary Fig. 9F).
The remaining ME family was comprised of mid, excitatory
clusters were comprised of Excit-26, Excit-27, Excit-28, and Excit-
29. These clusters do not express Lmx1b, in contrast to the other
mid excitatory family and are likely derived from dI1-3 or ventral
embryonic lineages. Excit-26 expressed Nﬁb, Excit-27 expressed
Adamts2, Excit-28 expressed Chat and Pitx2 and thus likely
corresponds to V0c neurons, and Excit-29 expressed Pmfbp1.
Excit-28
and
Excit-29
also
express
Onecut2
and
Pou6f2,
potentially revealing a link with ventral cell types. Of note, nearly
all of the cells and nuclei in this family were from the Rosenberg
and Sathyamurthy datasets and Excit-26 in particular was
predominantly from the Rosenberg dataset. (Supplementary
Fig. 9A and F).
The Excit-30 cluster was marked by Gbx2, Neurod2, and Sp8
and there was partial evidence that it corresponded to Clarke’s
column (CC). This cluster expressed multiple genes associated
with Clarke’s column including Chmp2b, Syt4, Ebf3, Rgs4, and
Enc16. The Clarke’s column marker gene, Gdnf, was expressed at
very low levels in the merged dataset, but was present in several
Excit-30 cells. However, this cluster only contained two deﬁned
spinocerebellar cells from the Baek et al. dataset while the
majority of this cluster was from the Hayashi dataset, arguing
against Clarke’s column identity and also suggesting a V2
embryonic lineage. As the in situ hybridization experiments were
performed on mid/lower lumbar spinal cord sections, we did not
validate markers for this cluster.
The mid inhibitory cell types were grouped as one family
comprised of Inhib-15, Inhib-16, Inhib-17, Inhib-18, Inhib-19,
Inhib-20, and Inhib-21, which expressed the glycinergic marker
Slc6a5 (with the exception of Inhib-21) and also the gaba-ergic
marker
Gad2,
implicating
these
neurons
in
sensorimotor
processing84–86. Inhib-15 expressed Prox1, Gabra1, and Nﬁb,
Inhib-16 expressed Gpc3 and Sema5b, Inhib-17 expressed Satb2,
Inhib-18 expressed Sema5b, Inhib-19 expressed Ccbe1 and
Pou6f2, Inhib-20 expressed higher levels of Tfap2b as well as
Zfhx3, and Inhib-21 expressed Nﬁb and was distinguished by
having only Gad2 and not Slc6a5 and was mainly derived from
the Rosenberg dataset. (Supplementary Fig. 9G).
In general, we found that the ventral clusters had less distinct
gene expression patterns and were less robust than dorsal and
mid clusters; therefore, the ﬁnal identities of these clusters should
be considered with caution. We identiﬁed several genes that
contribute to overlapping gene expression patterns across clusters
by being present in a spatial region of the cord and in diverse
mid/ventral cell types. For example, Pou6f2 was expressed in the
deep dorsal horn and in the dorsal part of the ventral horn and
was enriched in mid-excitatory (Excit-21, Excit-28, and Excit 30),
ventral excitatory (Excit-34 and Excit-35), and ventral inhibitory
(Inhib-24) clusters that are located within this domain. Similarly,
Nﬁb was expressed in the medial deep dorsal horn (mid) spinal
cord and was enriched in both excitatory (Excit-23, Excit-25, and
Excit-30) and inhibitory (Inhib-15 and Inhib-21) clusters. Of
note, several cluster markers of ventral cell types, such as Sim1,
were not observed in adult spinal cord tissue by in situ
hybridization and while they are detected in the harmonized
sequencing data, they likely represent lingering RNA from
developmental samples.
The ventral, excitatory clusters were grouped as one family
comprised of Excit-31, Excit-32, Excit-33, Excit-34, Excit-35,
Excit-36, Excit-37, and Excit-38. Of these, Excit-31, Excit-32,
Excit-33, and Excit-34 expressed low levels of Lhx2, Lhx9, and
Isl1, potentially suggesting dorsal dI1/dI2/dI3 embryonic lineages
for these clusters. These clusters could be distinguished by
Gm26673, Syt2, and Prlr (Excit-31), Mdga1 and Prlr (Excit-32),
and Bnc2 and Pou6f2 (Excit-34). Excit-33 was comprised almost
entirely of nuclei from the Rosenberg dataset and may represent
an immature cell type. Excit-35, Excit-36, and Excit-37 are likely
derived from the V2a lineage, as they expressed Vsx2 (Chx10)
and included many cells from the Hayashi dataset that sorted cells
based on Chx10 genetic expression and thus may play a role in
skilled reaching87. Excit-35 also expressed Vamp1, Pou3f1, Shox2,
and Pou6f2 and Excit-36 expressed Esrrg. Intriguingly, many cells
from the Baek dataset, which sorted cells based on spinocerebellar
status were found in Excit-35, suggesting that this population
includes ascending projection neurons that target the cerebellum.
Excit-37 expressed low levels of the V3 marker gene Sim1 as well
as Rnf220. (Supplementary Fig. 9H).
The ventral, inhibitory clusters were also grouped as one family
that was comprised of Inhib-22, Inhib-23, Inhib-24, Inhib-25,
Inhib-26, and Inhib-27. Each of these clusters expressed the
glycinergic marker Slc76a5. Inhib-22 and Inhib-27 also expressed
the gaba-ergic marker Gad2 as well as Pax2 and Pou6f2. They
were distinguished by low levels of Gata3 expression in Inhib-27,
which may represent V2b lineage. Inhib-23 and Inhib-25
expressed Foxp2 and Esrrb, suggesting they correspond to the
Foxp2 clade of V1 lineage neurons described by Bikoff and
colleagues88. They were identiﬁed by expression of Gm26673 and
Pvalb in Inhib-23, which may suggest that this cluster included
Ia-inhibitory neurons89. Inhib-24 expressed both Pou6f2 and
Nr5a2, suggesting that this cluster corresponded to the Pou6f2/
Nr5a2 clade of V1 lineage neurons88. Inhib-26 was the most
robust ventral cluster and expressed the Renshaw marker genes
Chrna2,
Chrna7,
and
Calb1,
suggesting
that
this
cluster
corresponded to Renshaw cells89,90. (Supplementary Fig. 9I).
Developmental lineages of postnatal spinal neuron popula-
tions. Having established this harmonized atlas of postnatal
through adult spinal cord neurons, we next asked if these cell
types could be aligned with the cardinal classes of embryonic
spinal progenitors. Developmental lineage has been a powerful
and inﬂuential framework for categorizing spinal neurons, par-
ticularly within the ventral horn, and relies on the combinatorial
expression code of transcription factors that specify distinct
progenitor domains along the dorsal-ventral axis of the spinal
cord. While recent work has revealed an impressive diversity of
gene expression patterns within each cardinal class2,88,89,91–97,
the contribution of these populations to adult neuronal classes
and function is still not clear.
We co-integrated the merged dataset of six postnatal studies
with the neurons from a single cell sequencing atlas of e9.5 to
e13.5 mouse spinal cord7 and analyzed these seven studies
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

together (Fig. 5a). Dimensionality reduction with principal
components (PC) was performed and the distances in PC-space
between the centroid of each embryonic or postnatal cluster and
every other cluster centroid was used to determine transcription-
ally similar nearest neighbors between embryonic and postnatal
cell types. In addition, the identity of the individual embryonic
cells that were closest in PC-space to each cluster were also
determined (Supplementary Table 6).
We found that long trajectories of embryonic cells led towards
particular cluster families, which allowed us to infer develop-
mental relationships (Fig. 5b). The molecular identities of the
cardinal classes were conﬁrmed by classic marker analysis
(Fig. 5c) and these marker genes often extended into the
postnatal cell type domains as well. A combination of centroid
distance, nearest cells, and marker gene expression was used to
assign an embryonic lineage for each harmonized neuron
population (Table 1 and Fig. 5d).
The
most
striking
ﬁnding
from
this
analysis
was
the
unexpectedly high degree of convergence of multiple lineages
into postnatal cell types. Notable examples of this trend include:
(1) Multiple dorsal excitatory cell types seemed to be derived
from a mixed set of dI5 lineage cells (as expected) and an Isl1-
negative, Tlx3-positive dI3.3/dI3.4 embryonic population (which
was unexpected). Although Tlx3 is known to be a dorsal marker
and a marker of dI3 neurons, the dI3 population is generally
considered to give rise to an Isl1-positive population in the deep
dorsal horn/intermediate zone98–102. (2) A subset of cells from
the dorsal dI4.6/dI6 lineages contributed to most ventral
inhibitory populations, which was unexpected though there have
been reports of scattered dI4 Ptf1a-derived cells in the embryonic
and perinatal ventral horn103,104, and the very small dI6
population is known to be ventrally located105–107. (3) Dual
contributions of dI5.5 and dI2.1 to Excit-20 and of V1 and V2b to
Inhib-27 were also observed. This analysis also supported a
division of deep dorsal horn excitatory neurons into two overall
groups (with the ME/Lmx1b family being more closely related to
dI5, while the other ME clusters are more closely related to dI1-
dI3) and a division of ventral excitatory neurons into two groups
(with Excit-31 through Excit-34 being closer to dI1-3 and Excit-
35 through Excit-37 being closer to V0, V2a, and V3 popula-
tions). Together, the joint analysis of spinal cord neurons from
embryonic through adult stages began to align these two
perspectives on cell types while also highlighting the complex
relationships that exist between genetically deﬁned cellular origins
and mature transcriptional signatures.
Using machine learning to classify spinal cord cell types. We
next sought a means to standardize and automate spinal cord cell
type classiﬁcation. First, we tested three strategies that have been
used successfully to classify single-cell data from other tissues on
their ability to classify spinal cord cells into coarse cell types.
These were label transfer23, a support vector machine, and a fully
connected neural network (with two hidden layers of 512 nodes
and L2 regularization for each). It is important to note that each
of these models were trained using cell type labels from the
Fig. 5 Co-integration of embryonic and postnatal through adult spinal cord neuronal types. a To reveal the temporal relationship between embryonic and
postnatal through adult cell types, the Delile, and harmonized datasets were co-integrated and are shown in a UMAP, colored by dataset (right). b A
UMAP of the co-integrated datasets, colored by clusters from the Delile et al. study (bold labels) or the harmonized analysis (regular font labels). Cluster
annotations are repeated in cases in which a group of cells from a given cluster are located at a distance from the cluster centroid (ex. for dI4.6). c Feature
plots of selected marker genes for the cardinal classes of spinal cord lineages. d Sankey plot of the relationships between embryonic lineages (left) and
harmonized cell types (right) showing multiple examples of divergence and convergence.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11

harmonized analysis because there is no existing gold standard
for spinal cord cell identities. In this context, the ﬁrst phase of the
analysis that follows should be considered a feasibility study for
machine learning classiﬁers on spinal cord single cell count data.
The full merged dataset of 101,070 cells and nuclei was tested,
including low-quality cells and nuclei and doublets, in order to
represent the full range of input raw data. All three strategies
performed well, with label transfer showing the best performance
(overall accuracy of 89%), followed by the neural network (83%),
and then the SVM (80%) (Fig. 6a and Supplementary Table 6).
Next, we tested label transfer and neural networks on a more
reﬁned and challenging task: the classiﬁcation of 69 neuronal sub-
types. For label transfer, two phases of analysis were performed
(dorsal sub-types and then mid/ventral sub-types) because we
found that this approach was important for clustering spinal cord
neurons. For the neural networks, a non-exhaustive hand sweep
Neuronal Types
SVM
Neural Net
a
b
Coarse Types
Label Transfer
Label Transfer
Neural Net
OPC
Progen.1
Progen.2
Oligo.1
Oligo.2
Schwann
Periph.
Mening.1
Mening.2
Epend.
Astro.1
Astro.2
Endoth.
Pericy.
Microglia
MN
Neurons
doublets
low qual.
OPC
Progen.1
Progen.2
Oligo.1
Oligo.2
Schwann
Periph.
Mening.1
Mening.2
Epend.
Astro.1
Astro.2
Endoth.
Pericy.
Microglia
MN
Neurons
doublets
low qual.
OPC
Progen.1
Progen.2
Oligo.1
Oligo.2
Schwann
Periph.
Mening.1
Mening.2
Epend.
Astro.1
Astro.2
Endoth.
Pericy.
Microglia
MN
Neurons
doublets
low qual.
MNa
PGC
Excit-1
Excit-3
Excit-5
Excit-7
Excit-9
Excit-11
Excit-13
Excit-15
Excit-17
Excit-19
Inhib-1
Inhib-27
Inhib-25
Inhib-23
Excit-38
Excit-36
Excit-34
Excit-32
Inhib-21
Inhib-19
Inhib-17
Inhib-15
Excit-29
Excit-27
Excit-25
Excit-23
Excit-21
Inhib-13
Inhib-11
Inhib-9
Inhib-7
Inhib-5
Inhib-3
MNa
PGC
Excit-1
Excit-3
Excit-5
Excit-7
Excit-9
Excit-11
Excit-13
Excit-15
Excit-17
Excit-19
Inhib-1
Inhib-27
Inhib-25
Inhib-23
Excit-38
Excit-36
Excit-34
Excit-32
Inhib-21
Inhib-19
Inhib-17
Inhib-15
Excit-29
Excit-27
Excit-25
Excit-23
Excit-21
Inhib-13
Inhib-11
Inhib-9
Inhib-7
Inhib-5
Inhib-3
Tier 1: Coarse 
Label Transfer
Two-Tier Model
6
5
3
8
9
2
7
1
4
Doub.
Neuron
OPC
Micro.
c
Prog.1
Tier 2: Neurons 
Neural Network
Doublets
Excit-1
Inhib-27
Cell Type Prediction
Schwann
Excit-1
d
e
f
Two-Tier Classification
Independent 
Dataset
Lumbar 
spinal 
cord
Nuclei 
isolation
10x 
Chromium
~30,000 
nuclei
Clustering 
(Seurat v3)
Two-Tier 
Classification
Final Comparison
10
n
1
2
3 Excit-24
4
5
Inhib-27
junk
???
6
pericyte
Accuracy on 
Independent Dataset
0
50
100
% Nuclei
100%
Known + 
Accurate
Unknown + 
Identified
Unknown + 
Not Identified
Known + 
Inaccurate
Fig. 6 Computational classiﬁcation of spinal cord cell types. a Confusion matrices of the F1 scores for the classiﬁcation of coarse cell types using label
transfer, a support vector machine (SVM), and a fully connected neural network (neural net), (blue = 0; maroon = 1). The actual cell types are in rows and
the predicted cell types are in columns in the same order. b Confusion matrices of the F1 scores for the classiﬁcation of ﬁne neuronal sub-types using label
transfer and a fully connected neural network. The actual cell types are in rows and the predicted cell types are in columns, both in the order presented in
Table 1. Alternating cell types are labeled. c Model of the two-tiered classiﬁcation approach in which all cells/nuclei are classiﬁed into coarse cell types
using label transfer (also including low-quality junk and doublets). Subsequently, all cells/nuclei that were classiﬁed as neurons, motoneurons, or doublets
by label transfer are further classiﬁed into 69 neuronal cell types (also including doublets). d Experimental design for generating an independent set of
single nucleus RNA sequencing data. e Distribution plot showing how nuclei from each cluster (rows) were distributed into each of the harmonized cell
types (columns), normalized by rows with dark blue = 0.0 fraction; maroon = 1.0 fraction). f Bar plot of the total counts of nuclei that were from known
clusters and were correctly classiﬁed (81% of total), that were from known clusters and were incorrectly classiﬁed (9% of total), that were from unknown
clusters but could be identiﬁed by their classiﬁcation (3% of total), or that were from unknown clusters and could not be identiﬁed (7% of total). OPC
oligodendrocyte precursor cell, progen.1 oligodendrocyte progenitor 1, progen.2 oligodendrocyte progenitor 2, Olig.1 oligodendrocyte 1, Olig.2
oligodendrocyte 2, Periph. peripheral glia, Mening.1 meninges 1, Mening.2 meninges 2, Epend. Ependymal cells, Astro.1 astrocytes 1, Astro.2 astrocytes 2,
Endoth endothelial cells, Pericy pericytes, MN = motoneurons; low qual. low quality, MNa motoneurons alpha, PGC preganglionic cell.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

of several hyperparameters was conducted, including network
depth, optimizer, number of hidden nodes, and the number of
training epochs, and seven different models were tested (see
Methods and Supplementary Table 6). We found that a linear
model (with no regularization and with an SGD optimizer)
showed the best performance, with an overall test accuracy of
85% (Fig. 6b and Supplementary Table 6). The model showed
very high conﬁdence scores for correct predictions; however,
performance varied with cell type prevalence suggesting a target
for improving the model in the future (Supplementary Fig. 11).
How should the performance of this model be assessed and
should we expect automated classiﬁcation to achieve 100%
accuracy?
Perfect
performance
would
require
perfect
and
invariable
biological data: discrete cell
types
that
express
completely distinct patterns of gene expression and experimental
data without natural heterogeneity, doublets, low-quality cells, or
other sources of indeterminate data. Knowing that this is not
possible, we still sought to determine a benchmark performance
guide for the classiﬁcation of adult mouse spinal cord neurons
using neural network models and considered four metrics of
cluster deﬁnition and separation. We examined the relationship
between the model performance for each cluster (F1 score) and
(1) the co-clustering frequency of each cell type across 100
clustering iterations, (2) how distant each cluster was from its
nearest neighbor in principal component space, and (3) the
conﬁdence with which clusters could be distinguished based on
in situ marker expression (measured by in situ analysis sets of
clusters) (Supplementary Fig. 12). We found that the model
performance varied with the co-clustering frequency of each
cluster and with the ability to identify cell types in situ and we
propose that these measures can be used to set a reasonable
expectation for neural network performance. Overall, neuronal
cells/nuclei of a given type co-clustered together 65% of the time
(average from Supplementary Fig. 5E) and a total of 70% of cells
could be classiﬁed in situ (Fig. 4). In comparison, the model’s
accuracy of 85% reveals the outstanding performance of this
approach.
To develop a standardized pipeline for the classiﬁcation of
independent datasets unrelated to the original studies analyzed
above, we considered a two-tiered approach that would take
advantage of the strengths of both the label transfer for coarse
classiﬁcation (Tier 1) and a neural network model for classiﬁca-
tion of neuronal sub-types (Tier 2) (Fig. 6c). By combining these
two methods, we improved overall performance by maximizing
performance at both steps. We ﬁrst selected all cells/nuclei that
were assigned as doublets or neurons during the harmonized
analysis above to represent the output of the ﬁrst tier and input to
the second tier. In this context, we trained another set of ﬁve
neural network models (see Methods and Supplementary Table 6).
A neural network model with one hidden layer (256 nodes) and
an SGD optimizer showed the best performance (overall accuracy
of 80%) and was selected for further work. Using the raw
(normalized) data from each of the six original studies as an
independent input to the two-tiered model, we found that it
showed strong performance in identifying the neuronal sub-types
in ﬁve of the six studies (Sathyamurthy, Hayashi, Haring,
Rosenberg, and Zeisel) (Supplementary Fig. 11). The model
may have shown poor performance for the sixth dataset (Baek)
due to its very small size and minor contribution to the overall
training data and to the neuron training data, as we observed a
relationship between the fraction of correct predictions and the
contribution to the training data in the context of all cell types
(Supplementary Fig. 11). These results must be interpreted with
caution because each of these datasets were included in the overall
training data which could lead to artiﬁcially high performance.
As a ﬁnal performance test of the two-tiered model, we applied
it to spinal cord nuclei from a completely independent dataset
that was not included in the integration or model training. As the
model was trained on different data, overﬁtting is not a concern
on this dataset, so these results are indicative of real-world
performance on independent data. Nuclei were isolated from the
lumbar spinal cords of four adult mice, sequenced using 10x
Chromium, clustered using Seurat, and marker genes were
identiﬁed for each cluster (Fig. 6d and Supplementary Fig. 13).
90% of nuclei (out of 28,584 total) were in clusters that could be
assigned a cell-type label based on marker gene expression
(known clusters). In cases for which labels could not be
conﬁdently assigned (10% of nuclei, unknown clusters), a
placeholder name was given (Supplementary Fig. 13). We
performed classiﬁcation of all nuclei from the independent
dataset that passed quality-control thresholds (Fig. 6c) in an
analysis that took less than thirty minutes of computational time
(~20 min for Tier 1 and less than one minute for Tier 2). We
found that 90% of nuclei from known clusters were accurately
classiﬁed by the two-tiered model (Fig. 6f known + accurate). We
next considered how this model performed upon the classiﬁcation
of nuclei from the challenging unknown clusters that could not be
identiﬁed based on marker genes. Surprisingly, we found that
28% of unknown nuclei could be identiﬁed with the two-tier
classiﬁcation model (Fig. 6f unknown + identiﬁed). Thus, the
two-tiered model surpassed the ability of experienced users to
identify spinal cord cell types.
Of note, several cell types were not expected to be present in
the independent dataset, including Schwann cells, peripheral glia,
and meninges 2 (based on the surgical dissection method used
that did not include spinal roots or outer layers of meninges) and
including PGC, Excitatory-7, and Excitatory-17 (based on the
lumbar region and adult age that was used). As expected, these
cell types were not predicted by the two-tiered model. There were
also several cell types that were not classiﬁed as expected. In
particular, several mid/ventral cell types were not detected in the
independent dataset while two ventral clusters (Excitatory-31 and
Inhibitory-27) were over-represented (Fig. 6 and Supplementary
Fig. 13). This may reﬂect a training dataset that is not large
enough to train a model that distinguishes closely related cell
types, that small clusters are not modeled as well, and that some
mid/ventral clusters are deﬁned partly by early postnatal gene
expression contained within the harmonized analysis but absent
from the independent adult dataset.
These results establish a two-tiered model based on label
transfer and a neural network as an effective approach for the
computational classiﬁcation of single-cell sequencing data, even
in the context of the ﬁnely separated populations of spinal cord
neurons. The neural network model was at least as accurate as
other methods such as Seurat-based clustering and high-content
in situ hybridization and was orders of magnitude faster. In
addition, it can standardize spinal cord cell type classiﬁcation so
that a uniﬁed and harmonized set of cell types can be identiﬁed
and studied consistently between datasets, biological conditions,
and laboratories throughout the ﬁeld.
SeqSeek: a community resource for analyzing and classifying
spinal cord cell types. Finally, we have developed an online
resource for spinal cord single-cell data, SeqSeek (available at
seqseek.ninds.nih.gov). This resource includes user-friendly tools
to search gene expression across spinal cord cell types using single
genes or gene lists (SeqSeek Genes), to compare gene expression
between clusters or groups of clusters (SeqSeek Cells), and to
access the SeqSeek algorithm for cell-type classiﬁcation (SeqSeek
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13

Classify, also available on our Github repository https://github.
com/ArielLevineLabNINDS).
Discussion
For the ﬁeld of spinal cord biology to build upon the incredible
promise of single-cell technologies, it is critical to establish a
standard set of cell types. Here, we leveraged and expanded upon
the previously published single-cell sequencing studies of the
postnatal mouse spinal cord to deﬁne 84 types of spinal cord cells.
We present a harmonized atlas of these cell types; a validated
combinatorial panel of markers to facilitate their study either
in vivo, in tissue sections, and in vitro cell culture; putative
embryonic lineages for each cell type; computational resources for
classifying spinal cord cells based on transcriptomics; and a web-
based resource, SeqSeek, to allow the community to interact easily
with and explore single cell spinal cord data. This work estab-
lishes a common framework that will serve as a powerful resource
for the ﬁeld and facilitates the discovery of biological features of
spinal cord cell types. As an example, we identiﬁed major dif-
ferences between dorsal and ventral neuron types in their cluster
relationships and in plasticity gene signatures, highlighting the
primary role of spatial location in the organization of the mam-
malian spinal cord.
The ﬁrst key consideration is whether the cell types of the atlas
are correct biologically or whether they are confounded by
technical issues contributed by the original studies or analysis
choices that we made here. For example, it is possible that inte-
grating these studies would obscure important biological differ-
ences between them or that merging early postnatal and adult
datasets would blur proper cell type descriptions. In the absence
of a commonly accepted standard set of spinal cord cell types, it is
impossible to answer this question completely. However, several
pieces of evidence support the accurate description of spinal cord
cell types. First, highly reliable clusters were identiﬁed based on
four independent integration methodologies – Seurat V3, Har-
mony, Conos, and LIGER – suggesting that these clusters
represent the underlying biological reality of cell types. Second,
these clusters correspond well with prior gene expression analysis
of the postnatal spinal cord including many classic and well-
established marker gene studies as well as three independent
single nucleus sequencing datasets that were not included in the
harmonized clustering: an independent dataset that we clustered
separately and used to test the SeqSeek Classify algorithm, and
two recent studies that used different analysis strategies but found
similar markers to the harmonized set8,9. Third, and most
importantly, this atlas does not rest only on select studies or on
computational approaches that would be subject to the biases of
particular tools and parameter choices. We performed high
content in situ hybridization to test the validity of predicted
expression proﬁles in the full transverse view of adult lumbar
spinal cord tissue. In a few instances, this data differed from the
harmonized sequencing data (for example in Excit-3 and Excit-4)
which may reﬂect differences in developmental patterns. How-
ever, we validated the vast majority of predicted expression pat-
terns from the harmonized atlas and the resulting data provided
the most extensive characterization of cell types, their prevalence,
and their spatial distribution in the postnatal spinal cord.
In addition to serving as a powerful reference resource, what
new biological information can this study reveal? One of the most
striking ﬁndings was the difference in cell type organization
between the dorsal and mid/ventral regions of the spinal cord,
both in cluster relationships and in general molecular trends.
Dorsal clusters are distinct from each other with clearly separated
individual cell types that can be grouped loosely into families.
These cell types are located at greater distances from each other in
principal component/UMAP space, have higher measures of
robustness (such as co-clustering frequency and silhouette score),
and can be reliably distinguished by machine learning algorithms
or in tissue with combinatorial marker genes. In contrast, ventral
clusters are much more similar to each other, with close or
overlapping distributions in principal component space and
overlapping gene expression patterns. Ventral neuron cell types
may be organized at a second, nested level of spatial trends that
overlay embryonic lineage-deﬁned cell types: a Pou6f2-Esrrg
trend along the dorsal-ventral axis and a Nﬁb-Zfhx3/4 and
birthdate trends along the medial-lateral axis, consistent with a
recent report108. It is not yet known what these differences
between the dorsal and mid/ventral spinal cord may signify, but
an exciting possibility is that discreet versus overlapping sets of
cell types would give rise to different network computational
properties109.
Related to these overall differences in cell type relationships,
the dorsal and ventral regions of the spinal cord displayed broad
molecular differences from each other that drove the primary
bifurcation
amongst
spinal
interneurons/projection
neurons
(non-motoneurons or CSF-cN neurons) in our cluster dendo-
gram analysis, even before excitatory and inhibitory neuron types
separated from each other. Differential gene expression and gene
ontology analysis revealed that learning-related genes are enri-
ched in the dorsal horn while structural stability-related genes are
enriched in the ventral horn. Within the dorsal horn, this
included
both
broadly
expressed
genes
such
as
Camk2a
(CAMK2α) as well as cell type-speciﬁc genes such as Prkcg
(PKCγ)31. Within the ventral horn, this included components of
perineuronal nets (which are thought to restrict plasticity and had
been previously detected in the ventral spinal cord110,111) such as
Tnr (Tenascin-R), as well as adhesion molecules such as Sdk1 and
intracellular signaling components such as Ptpn5 (STEP) which
de-phosphorylates
CAMK2α,
NMDA
receptors,
and
ERK
kinases33. This raises the intriguing possibility that meta-plasticity
trends govern spinal cord circuits to facilitate learning in dorsal
regions, where central sensitization112, wind-up113, and long-
term potentiation and depression114–116 have been observed and
may underly chronic pain states117,118. In contrast, the ventral
horn may be stabilized to restrict certain plasticity mechanisms
from altering core locomotor circuits. We had previously noted
differences in the robustness of dorsal and ventral cell type
clusters1 and a similar trend of overlapping ventral cell types was
observed in the neonatal spinal cord4. Building on these pre-
liminary ﬁndings, the scope of the harmonized analysis here
afforded a much deeper characterization of cell type relationships
and robustness, the validation of these molecular distinctions in
tissue, and through machine learning. This work also led to the
surprising discovery of gene expression signatures for plasticity in
the dorsal horn and for structural stability in the ventral horn.
This work also provides a broad view of the relationships
between embryonic lineage domains and their mature neuronal
progeny. For the past thirty years, the cardinal classes of spinal
cord progenitors have been used as a framework to classify spinal
cord cell types, particularly within the ventral horn of the spinal
cord13,15,16,119,120. However, it has been challenging to relate
these domains to cell types deﬁned in the adult by function,
connectivity, or electrophysiology and it has therefore been
unclear how these perspectives on cell type intersect and which
perspective is the most useful for linking spinal cord neurons to
behavior. Here, we co-integrated an embryonic (e9.5–e13.5)
spinal cord sequencing dataset7 with our harmonized analysis
and identiﬁed putative lineages of many postnatal cell types.
These relationships must be tested experimentally in future stu-
dies but, if true, they reveal two intriguing trends in spinal cord
cell type organization. The ﬁrst trend is that cell types within the
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
14
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

family structure that we described generally shared common
embryonic lineages, suggesting a developmental basis for the
group resemblances. For example, the deep dorsal horn excitatory
neurons can be divided into two families, with Excit-21 through
Excit-25 in one family that is likely derived from dI5 precursors
and Excit-26 through Excit-29 in a looser family that includes
dI1/2 and V0 precursors. The second trend is that many cell types
were derived from multiple lineage domains. For example, dI3.3
and dI3.4 were found together with dI5.3 and dI5.4 in a long
trajectory toward the majority of dorsal excitatory neurons. It is
already known that the adult cell types of Ia inhibitory neurons
and CSF-contacting neurons each have dual origins43,45,121,
suggesting that this could be a common occurrence. Perhaps
there isn’t a simple but rigid logic by which cardinal classes
mature and differentiate into distinct and reﬁned populations.
Rather, a complex process may operate in which there is both
divergence and convergence in the relationships of developmental
and mature cell types, with inﬂuences such as birthdate, cell body
location, connectivity, or activity-dependent maturation playing
important modulatory roles. By providing a broad perspective on
developmental and mature cell type similarities, this work sug-
gests that there are multiple schemes that guide the differentiation
of spinal cord neural precursors into the highly reﬁned and
diverse array of neurons that mediate adult behavior.
On the analytical side, this work is among the ﬁrst practical
applications of automated classiﬁcation for large and complex
single-cell datasets from neural tissue. A wide range of cell
annotation approaches have been described recently but it is not
yet clear which methods will work best for each type of
data23,122–125. A comparative analysis of automated classiﬁcation
approaches across diverse datasets found that SVM and neural
network models showed the best performance on the Allen Brain
Atlas dataset of 92 neuronal cell types–a dataset similar in scale
and complexity to the harmonized analysis here125. This analysis
also found that performance depends partly on the number of cell
types and the complexity (the relatedness between clusters) of a
dataset, similar to what we observed. Here, we found that a two-
tiered model that incorporates label transfer and a neural network
displayed excellent performance in the computationally challen-
ging task of classifying cells and nuclei into the 69 ﬁne resolution
neuronal cell types of the spinal cord. In the future, larger spinal
cord single-cell datasets will be available and the neural network
model that we presented here can be reﬁned and improved.
Speciﬁcally, larger training datasets may facilitate classiﬁcation of
closely related mid/ventral neuronal populations; region or
sample age-speciﬁc training datasets may reduce the number of
cell types that cannot be detected; and generative models may be
used to enhance training on rare cell populations. As this work
proceeds, we expect that increasingly powerful neural network
models will be developed that allow rapid, accurate, and stan-
dardized classiﬁcation of all spinal cord cell types directly from
raw sequencing data. This could be done by individual users with
downloadable models or through the development of a spinal
cord single-cell data commons that could continuously reﬁne the
models and provide classiﬁcation analysis through a cloud-based
platform, similar to what has been proposed for the Human Cell
Atlas126. A forthcoming study aims to partially address these
challenges. Theis and colleagues propose a method called single-
cell architectural surgery that uses transfer learning to map query
datasets onto a reference, simultaneously contextualizing the
query while updating the reference. This allows for decentralized
reference building without the sharing of raw data, which could
further increase
the effectiveness
of
neural network-based
classiﬁers127.
There are several notable limitations to this study. Most spe-
ciﬁcally, this analysis is limited in scope to RNA expression in the
postnatal mouse spinal cord and reﬂects a merged study of
multiple time points. As more data become available from studies
that include more speciﬁc regions of the spinal cord, more bio-
logical conditions, more developmental stages, more species,
more speciﬁc cellular features, and more -omics modalities, we
anticipate that this work will reveal exciting insights from single-
cell data. Future work could incorporate genetic lineage tracing to
test developmental origins for postnatal cell types2, could track
cell-type-speciﬁc changes in different biological conditions8,9,128,
or could focus deeply on speciﬁc spinal cord regions and cell
types10,11,39,40,77,129. Relatedly, the in situ hybridization experi-
ments here are also limited in scope, being speciﬁc to the adult
lumbar spinal cord. The failure to detect several genes from the
harmonized analysis could reﬂect that these genes are no longer
expressed at the adult stage or lumbar region that we analyzed,
that the cell types themselves are not present (being transiently
found in early postnatal stages or only in other spinal cord
regions), or technical issues. We caution users of the SeqSeek
resource to keep this in mind when examining individual data
points.
A second notable caveat that is common to most single-cell
sequencing experiments is that this analysis is population-based.
Data is captured from thousands of individual cells, but the rate
of false-negative data in each cell and the requirement for sta-
tistical power necessitates analyzing many cells of each type and
considering population-level shared patterns. It is likely that by
emphasizing common patterns, this analysis underrepresents true
biological variability, including noisy gene expression and con-
tinua of cell types. For example, three very different methods –
single-cell data clustering, multiplexed in situ hybridization, and
an artiﬁcial intelligence neural network – all showed a relatively
weak ability to classify ventral cell types into discrete types and a
relatively strong but still imperfect ability to classify dorsal cell
types. We propose that this reﬂects some technical limitations but
also a fundamental complexity and diversity in how gene
expression is controlled within individual cells and in cell-type
populations.
Third, as future datasets and technologies become available, we
anticipate an explosion of single-cell data and the opportunity to
periodically supplement, revise, and reﬁne the work presented
here. In this context, the harmonized atlas is both a work in
progress that will continue to evolve over time and the gold
standard that we have now as the most comprehensive and
validated resource available for the mammalian spinal cord.
Finally, it is crucial to note that single-cell/nucleus proﬁling,
particularly single-cell/nucleus RNA sequencing, produces one
perspective on cell types and it is not yet clear how this will relate
to other core cellular features such as circuit connectivity, elec-
trophysiology, and behavioral function. Re-considering the very
deﬁnition of a cell type and identifying the most useful system for
classifying cells is now a fundamental task in understanding
nervous system function. We expect that in each tissue, indeed in
each region of each tissue, there may be different organizing
principles of cell types. In that context, the work here provides a
comprehensive atlas of spinal cord transcriptomic cell types that
can be used as a framework to compare with other cellular
features.
This work brings together the ﬁrst single-cell studies of the
post-natal mouse spinal cord to create a standard reference set of
spinal cord cell types. It will (1) serve as a unifying resource and
nomenclature for the ﬁeld, (2) provide a validated and combi-
natorial set of markers that can be used to translate this rich
sequencing data back into tissue-based studies, (3) be a template
for the computational analysis of single-cell data from complex
neural tissue, and (4) facilitate the community-wide use of single-
cell data through a web-based resource. We hope that this work
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
15

will facilitate the design and interpretation of cell-based studies of
behavior and will open up opportunities for many discoveries.
Methods
Mice. Animal experiments were performed in accordance with institutional
guidelines and approved (protocol #1384) by the National Institute of Neurological
Disorder and Stroke’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. An even
balance of male and female mice that were 9 weeks old and of mixed C57BL/6 J and
BALB/cJ background were used for single nucleus sequencing (four mice) and
validation studies (two groups of three mice).
Published data acquisition. Published data were downloaded from the NCBI
Sequence Read Archive (SRA). Raw datasets were used instead of investigator-
provided count matrices so that we could align all sequences to the same genome
and apply uniform data ﬁltering. All raw datasets were pre-processed using
technique-speciﬁc pipelines. For data from Sathyamurthy et al. (DropSeq, GEO:
GSE103892, SRA: SRP117727), data were downloaded in fastq format from SRA. A
count matrix was created following the steps in the McCarroll lab DropSeq
cookbook130. For data from Hayashi et al. (GEO: 108788, SRA: SRP128071), Zeisel
et al. (SRA: SRP135960), and Baek et al. (GEO: GSE130312), 10X sequence data
were download from SRA in BAM format then converted to cell ranger-compatible
fastq ﬁles using the 10X-provided bamtofastq tool. Count matrices were created
using the 10X cell ranger count tool. Data from Haring et al. (C1 Fluidigm, GEO:
GSE103840, SRA: SRP117627) were downloaded from SRA. Each cell had its own
fastq ﬁle for a total of 1545 ﬁles. We followed the UMI tools single-cell tutorial to
remove the UMI and process the sequences (https://github.com/CGATOxford/
UMI-tools/blob/master/doc/Single_cell_tutorial.md). For the Rosenberg et al. data
(SplitSeq, GEO: GSE110823, SRA: SRP133097), data were downloaded in fastq
format. Count matrices were made using the split-seq-pipeline tool developed by
the Seelig Lab (https://github.com/yjzhang/split-seq-pipeline). The STAR align-
ment tool within cell range (v020201) was used to align the sequences from each
dataset to a reference genome that was custom built to include all introns and
exons, based on mm10, GRCm38 updated on 2016-01 (NCBI: GCA_000001635.6).
Reference: https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/
downloads/2.0/. Genome: https://cf.10xgenomics.com/supp/cell-exp/refdata-
cellranger-mm10-1.2.0.tar.gz.
Merged analysis and integration. Count matrices for each dataset were merged
to obtain the full data ﬁle and we then applied uniform data ﬁltering across the
merged ﬁle. We analyzed all cells and nuclei with at least 200 detected genes (to
exclude low quality or empty barcodes) and with less than 5% of transcripts being
mitochondrial (to exclude lysing cells or mitochondria-nuclei doublets). This
yielded over one hundred thousand total cells/nuclei. Of note, by starting with the
raw data and setting relatively relaxed thresholds for data inclusion, we analyzed
more cells/nuclei from several of the original studies than were analyzed in the
corresponding published datasets.
The merged data were analyzed using Seurat v323,131. The main integration was
performed using Seurat version 3.0 Standard Workﬂow (CCA) Integration131 such
that data were LogNormalized and scaled to 10,000 counts. Highly variable genes
were found using the default var.mean.plot method, a mean cutoff at 0.0125 and 3
and a dispersion cutoff at 0.5. The data were then scaled with a linear model and
while regressing out the number of counts and the percent mitochondria. The top
100 PCs were calculated. Integration anchors were calculated using 20 PCs and
used to integrate the data. This integration was compared to three independent
methods (Harmony25, Conos26, and LIGER27). In the case of Harmony integration,
SCTransform normalization was used prior to performing the integration.
Annotations from Seurat integration were then overlapped on the integrated
UMAP projections obtained from other integration methods and the cell type
clusters were compared for reproducibility. The neurons speciﬁc population of cells
was pulled out from Seurat integration results and integrated using Harmony
integration, in order to compare neuronal subclasses from two integration
protocols.
Clustering. Clustering was performed in three phases on (1) all cell types, (2) all
neurons, (3a) presumptive ventral neurons, and (3b) motor neurons. For phase 1,
data integration was performed by study, 2,000 highly variable genes were detected,
and the most signiﬁcant principal components were identiﬁed by elbow plot and
manual inspection of the contributing gene lists and 28 PCs were used for clus-
tering. To select cluster resolution, a range of values were tested from 0.2–8 and
cluster evolution or clustree plots were used to determine when cluster splitting
stabilized, and resolution 1.2 was selected. For phase 2, raw data from all cells in
neuronal clusters was used, re-scaled, re-normalized, and re-integrated, the top
4000 highly variable genes were detected and the top 40 PCs were selected (using
the approach described above as well as statistical jackstraw and elbow plot ana-
lysis, see Supplementary Fig. 4). In analyzing neuronal diversity, we favor an
approach of using a higher resolution, as long as clusters are still robust, and then
examining whether pairs of clusters should be merged, as we described in a recent
paper132. Here, the range of resolutions were examined by (1) the range of average
silhouette scores for the clusters, (2) visual inspection of UMAP cluster
distribution, and, most importantly (3) comparison of cluster markers with known
markers and with known co-expression patterns in the literature. (Supplementary
Fig. 4). The third phase of targeted sub-clustering was done because mid/ventral
and motoneuron sub-types did not separate well in preliminary neuron analysis.
Indeed, the robustness scores for mid/ventral cell types were very low until they are
analyzed in a focused principal component space (Supplementary Fig. 2). For phase
3a, presumptive ventral neurons were identiﬁed by markers and by coalescence on
UMAP into a central blob and for phase 3b, motorneurons were identiﬁed by
expression of classic markers (Chat, Isl1, Prph). In each case, the procedures
described above were used to sub-divide these cell types and the following para-
meters were used: 3a: 40 PCs, resolution 4; 3b 7 PCs, resolution 0.6.
For all three phases, each cluster was analyzed for candidate marker genes and
excluded if the cluster met either of the following criteria. Clusters were considered
low-quality if they had fewer than three signiﬁcant markers relevant to cell type,
particularly if they showed very low nGene. Clusters were considered doublets if
they had signiﬁcant markers for multiple unrelated cell types and a barnyard plot
of the top ten markers of each cell type showed that individual cells in the cluster
displayed both sets of markers. For all three phases, we used the following method
to determine whether candidate pairs of clusters should be merged: a dendrogram
based on mean gene expression and UMAP location were used to systemically
identify closely related clusters and we then probed for differential gene expression
(for example, see Supplementary Fig. 4). Pairs with fewer than three genes enriched
in each cluster (six total) were merged unless a classic marker gene from the
literature was one of ﬁve differentially expressed genes. Cell type annotations for
the non-neuronal cell types were based on the presence of well-established marker
genes (Supplementary Table 1) and on the gene expression patterns in the Allen
in situ hybridization database (for meningeal, ependymal, Schwann cell, and
peripheral glia clusters).
The meta-data (and associated ﬁnal cell labels) are available in Supplementary
Table 5.
Cell type relationships, comparison with prior studies, and differential gene +
GO analysis. To examine the relationship between the 69 neuronal clusters in the
harmonized analysis, the centroid of each cluster was calculated by grouping the
cells by their labels and determining the mean of each PC. Then, the pairwise
Euclidean distance between each cluster was calculated using 50 PCs. This was
passed to the stats::hclust function using method = “complete”. The ﬁnal den-
drogram was plotted using the graphics::plot function.
To examine the distribution of the original Haring and Sathyamurthy clusters
amongst the harmonized clusters, the frequency of each pair-wise combination of
original and harmonized clusters was counted. These data were then pivoted to
wide form to produce the matrix with harmonized clusters along the x-axis and
original clusters along the y-axis. Finally, the data was row-normalized, so that the
color represents the fraction of the original label occurring in each harmonized
cluster.
To examine the distance between the original Haring and Sathyamurthy
clusters in harmonized PC space, the pairwise distance between the centroids of the
original clusters was calculated as above. Small distances, representing close
clusters, are displayed with hot colors, while large distances, representing far apart
clusters, are displayed with cold colors.
To examine the correlation between PC distance and the expression of the 500
most highly variable genes in the harmonized data, the average expression of these
genes was calculated for each original cluster, which yielded two matrices: one a
gene by cluster matrix of the Haring data, and the other a gene by cluster matrix of
the Sathyamurthy data. The correlation of gene expression in each cluster between
these matrices was calculated using the lineup::corbetw2mat function (CRAN
version 0.37.11). These correlation scores were then plotted against the PC
distances calculated above. Linear regression with 95% conﬁdence intervals
is shown.
Differential gene expression for the dorsal/ventral and excitatory/inhibitory
analysis was performed using the ROC test in Seurat, with genes in >30% of each
class and with a log FC > 0.25. Genes with a ROC > 6 were compiled into lists and
analyzed using default parameters in GO DAVID, with molecular function and
biological process GO terms selected, as well as KEGG pathway terms.
RNA In situ hybridization, Immunoﬂuoresence, and WFA staining. For high
content RNA in situ hybridization, 14 µm fresh frozen spinal cord sections from
segment L4 were placed on Leica Apex slides and sets of 97 RNAScope HiPlex
probes were used (Supplementary Table 3) from ACDBio, according to the man-
ufacturer’s instructions. Images for each set were registered using RNAscope
HiPlex Image Registration Software and brightness/contrast were adjusted using
Adobe Photoshop. Counting of cells was done by ﬁrst using a general class marker
in each panel of probes (such as Slc17a6 or Slc6a5) to focus counting on neurons of
a particular neurotransmitter status and by considering one region at a time
(dorsal, mid, or ventral). In addition, the following guides were used. Set 1: All Chat
+ cells in any laminae. Set 2: Any dorsal cell that expressed any of Cpne4, Maf, or
Prkcg. Set 3: Any cell in the dorsal horn with any of Slc17a6, Rreb1, Reln, or Car12.
In addition, Gbx2 cells were counted separately amongst any cell in the deep dorsal
horn with Slc17a6. Set 4: Any cell in the dorsal horn with any of Col5a2, Enpp1,
Sox5, Tac1, Tac2, Nmu, Megf11, Mdga1, Pmfbp1, or Onecut2. Set 5: Any cell in
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
16
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

laminae 1-4 with any of Slc6a1, Gad2, or Kcnip2. Set 6: Any cell in the dorsal horn
with any of Mlxipl, Pdyn, Gal, Npy, Qrfpr, Sstr2, or Rspo3. Set 7: Any cell in
laminae 4-6 with any of Slc17a6, Adamts2, Lmx1b. Set 8: Any cell in laminae 4-6
with either Slc6a5 or Gad2. Set 9: Any cell in laminae 6-8 with Slc17a6. Set 10: Any
cell in laminae 6-8 with any of Pax2, Slc6a5, or Gad2. The number of cells counted
in each set are listed in Supplementary Table 3 and were from one section per
animal, though multiple sections per animal were inspected for expression pattern
consistency. Sections from three animals (2 male and 1 female or 2 female and 1
male) were counted for each set. For Fig. 3c, e, V2 RNAScope probes were used
(also from ACDBio, according to the manufacturer’s instructions). For immuno-
ﬂuorescence and lectin staining, animals were perfused, and 50 µm sections of the
frozen section were cut and stained. To detect CAMK2α, Millipore 905-532 was
used (1:500). For perineuronal net WFA-lectin staining, ﬂuorescent lectin (Vector
Laboratories, FL-1351-2) was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Single nucleus sequencing. Nuclei were obtained as previously described133 and
were processed for single-cell sequencing using the 10X Genomics Chromium
Single Cell 3′ Kit (v3 chemistry) and sequenced at a depth of approximately 50,000
reads per nucleus. Clustering was performed as described above and cluster
identities were determined using the combinatorial marker code in Table 1 where
possible (known clusters). Clusters that could not be identiﬁed in this manner were
analyzed for neurotransmitter status and given a placeholder identiﬁcation
(unknown clusters).
Computational classiﬁcation
Label transfer. Label transfer analysis was performed using Seurat v3(.1.5). For both
coarse cell types and clean neurons, 10% of cells were withheld as the query dataset,
whilst the remaining were used as the reference dataset. Broadly, label transfer
consists of two steps. First, the transfer anchors are identiﬁed using the Find-
TransferAnchors function. Second, these anchors are then used to transfer cluster
labels to the query dataset with the TransferData function.
For label transfer of coarse cell types, FindTransferAnchors was called with
reduction = “pcaproject”, dims = 1:28, and npcs = NULL to project the previously
calculated PCA onto the query data using the same dimensions as were used in
clustering the reference data. Transfer data was also called with dims = 1:28 for the
same reason.
Label transfer of clean neurons was performed in a two-step process. First, all
cells in mid- or ventral-clusters were grouped as one cluster. Then, the dorsal-
clusters were transferred along with one mid/ventral cluster. Second, those cells
classiﬁed as mid/ventral were labelled using only neurons from mid- or ventral-
neuron clusters. In each case, a new reference object was created from the
appropriate cells – all neurons for step 1 and mid-/ventral-neurons only for step
2–via integration, as previously discussed in the Merged Analysis and Clustering
section. Label transfer was run as described for coarse cell types, with the exception
that dims = 1:100 was set for all neurons, and dims = 1:30 was set for mid-/ventral-
neurons.
In the ﬁnal two-tier analysis, label transfer was performed as discussed for
coarse cell types. Any cells labelled neuron, motor neuron, or doublets were passed
to the neural network for further classiﬁcation. The decision to include doublets for
further classiﬁcation was founded on the observation that a non-trivial number of
neurons were misclassiﬁed as doublets at the coarse cell-type level.
Support vectror machine. Support vector machine analysis was performed using
scikit-learn version 0.22.2.post1. Count matrices were taken from the default Seurat
RNA assay count slot as sparse matrices. Cluster labels were numerically encoded
with LabelEncoder(). To preserve sparsity for reduced training time, these counts
were scaled with MaxAbsScaler(copy = False). As LinearSVC() is known to be
faster and more scalable than SVM(kernel = “linear”), it was selected for use
(https://scikit-learn.org/0.22/modules/svm.html#svm-classiﬁcation and https://
scikit-learn.org/0.22/modules/generated/sklearn.svm.LinearSVC.html#sklearn.svm.
LinearSVC). As the number of samples was signiﬁcantly greater than the number
of features, the dual parameter was set to “False”. Finally, to help ensure con-
vergence, the max_iter parameter was increased from the default of 1000 to 10000.
This pipeline achieved an overall accuracy of 80% on the validation data. Though
this performance could likely be improved by hyperparameter tuning, given the
performance of alternative models, the support vector machine was not selected for
further use.
Neural networks. Count Matrices were taken out of the default Seurat RNA assay
count slot as sparse matrices. Genes with no counts were dropped. The counts
were log x+1 transformed then scaled by the maximum number of counts for any
gene in a cell. The data were converted into TensorFlow sparse tensors for input
into neural networks deﬁne via the Keras interface to TensorFlow. Hyperpara-
meters were initially set to default values, with a network structure consisting of
direct connections between the input and output nodes. This simple linear model
was the baseline. We added additional layers from 1 to 4 hidden layers, at various
widths from 16 nodes to 512 nodes in a layer. The optimizer we switch from the
default “Adam” optimizer to singular gradient descent (sgd). L1, L2, and dropout
regularization were attempted. Additionally, various batch sizes were tested.
Initially, networks trained for coarse analysis used a batch size of 128 to speed
training. Whereas the training was faster, validation accuracy improved by
around 5% when we lowered the batch size to 32. No additional improvement was
seen at a batch size of 16, so the batch size was set to 32 for the rest of the study.
In general, we used the learning curves to guide the changing of
hyperparameters134.
For the analysis of coarse cell types (Fig. 5a), a model with two hidden layers of
512 nodes each and L2 regularization was used. For the analysis of the neuronal
subtypes (Fig. 5b), seven models were tested: (1.1) a linear model with no
regularization (1.2) a linear model with L2 regularization (learning rate 0.001) (1.3)
a neural network with two hidden layers of 512 nodes each (1.4) an ensemble-like
neural network with one hidden layer (128 nodes and L2 regularization) and two
hidden layers that were concatenated, (1.5) a neural network model with three
hidden layers (512, 256, 128 and L2 regularization on the 512 nodes hidden layer
(1.6) a neural network model with 3 layers (128, 128, 128 and L2 regularization on
the ﬁrst hidden layer) and (1.7) a linear model with no regularization with an SGD
optimizer. Interestingly, the baseline model had the largest validation accuracy.
Since the training accuracy is 100% as compared to 85% in the validation set, the
model is clearly overﬁtting the training data. Adding regularization helped to lower
the gap between the training and validation accuracy, but the overall validation and
test accuracies are still lower suggesting that the overtrained model will perform
better on unseen data. Additional work to improve this model is needed and
adding more data from further experimental studies in the future will help improve
the validation accuracy. For the analysis and training of neurons and doublets
together (Tier 2), ﬁve models were tested: (2.1) a linear model with no
regularization (2.2) a linear model with L2 regularization (2.3) a neural network
model with one hidden layer of 128 nodes (2.4) a neural network model with one
hidden layer of 128 nodes and SGD optimizer, and (2.5) a neural network model
with one hidden layer of 256 nodes and SGD optimizer. The ﬁnal model (2.5) was
selected for Tier 2.
In the analysis of unknown clusters (Fig. 5f), individual nuclei were identiﬁed if
(1) they were from an unknown cluster and were classiﬁed into a harmonized true
cell type (not junk or doublets) and (2) at least 80% of the total nuclei from their
cluster of origin were classiﬁed into the same single harmonized cell type.
For the two-tier classiﬁcation method, Tier 1 was run on an Apple MacBook
Pro Core i9 2.3 GHz, 32 GB, 1TB Radeon Pro, and took approximately 20 min. Tier
2 was run on Google Colab (the CPU was not guaranteed but was Intel® Xeon®
CPU @2.20 GHz 2 CPU, 13 GB RAM, 107 GB disk. The runtime was 16 s to read in
14 MB of test data and 1 s to run the neural network.
Supplementary Analysis Notes
1. Consideration of the decision to include formalin and rotarod experimental
samples as part of the Sathyamurthy et al. dataset: To ensure that the
inclusion of these samples would not bias the clustering or the gene
expression patterns, we performed the following analysis. First, we analyzed
the neuronal cluster distribution of each experimental condition. Overall,
nuclei from the formalin and rotarod conditions accounted for 11.0% of the
total neuronal cells/nuclei and also represented 11.1% (±0.7 standard error)
of each cluster. The only clusters that had >16% contribution from an
experimental condition were in the mid/ventral regions of the spinal cord
(in which the Sathyamurthy dataset is somewhat overrepresented in
general). Therefore, we concluded that the cluster contribution is not
biased by experimental conditions. Second, we analyzed whether the gene
expression of the clusters could be biased by the inclusion of the
experimental conditions in two ways. We used the original set of nuclei
from the Sathyamurthy dataset and tested whether any genes were
differentially expressed between the experimental conditions. The only
gene that was signiﬁcantly different (ANOVA, corrected p-value < 0.05) was
the immediate early gene Fos. This is not unexpected because the formalin
and rotarod samples in the Sathyamurthy dataset were collected ﬁve
minutes after the intervention, a very short time window that makes major
changes in gene expression or cell composition exceedingly unlikely. Next,
we performed a more reﬁned analysis and compared genes that were
differentially expressed (Wilcox test) within each cluster, between nuclei
from an experimental condition and all naïve cells/nuclei from any dataset.
Although there were genes that were different in many of the clusters, this
likely reﬂects the general differences in sample age and technique between
the studies. Only one differentially expressed gene was an immediate early
gene (Homer1a was found in a higher fraction of cells/nuclei from the
experimental condition in cluster Inhib-8 but also had a lower expression
level per cell/nucleus). Therefore, we concluded that the gene expression
proﬁles are not biased by the inclusion of these nuclei. In fact, the broadly
elevated levels of immediate early genes in the Haring and Zeisel datasets
(Supplementary Figs. 1 and 3) likely washes out any small effect of the
behavioral conditions from the Sathyamurthy dataset.
2. Examination of cell vs. nuclei gene expression differences: To explore
systematic differences in the gene expression proﬁles between studies that
used cells and those that used nuclei, we performed the following analysis.
First, we note that overall, the number of genes per cell/nucleus, the
expression of immediate early genes, and the expression of stress-related
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
17

genes were all different based on technique (Supplementary Fig. 3). In
examining cluster composition, we found that only studies that used nuclei
contributed to MN-alpha, MN-gamma, or PGC cells as well as Excit-7 and
most ventral neuronal clusters (Supplementary Table 6). We next compared
differential gene expression within each neuronal cluster for studies that
used cells or nuclei (Wilcox, minimum FC = 0.25, minimum percent of cells
expression = 10%), selected the top 30 genes ranked by adjusted p-value,
and removed duplicates. We found that 484 unique genes were differentially
expressed and of these, 482 (99.6%) were enriched in cells compared to
nuclei. GO analysis revealed that all of the enriched gene annotation clusters
were associated with basic cell metabolism terms such as the ribosome,
metabolic pathways, and proton transport (Supplementary Table 6). To
further probe genes that were enriched in nuclei compared to cells, we
sorted all signiﬁcant genes in each cluster by the average log fold change,
selected genes with a value > 2 (nuclei > cells), and identiﬁed a list of 10
protein-coding genes and 3 lncRNAs (Supplementary Table 6). In summary,
the major differences that we observed were that ventral cell types were
mainly detected in studies that used nuclei compared with cells, (which may
reﬂect a differential vulnerability of ventral cells to stressful cell dissociation
methods), and that general metabolism genes were enriched in studies that
used cells (which may reﬂect increased detection of genes that have low
levels of expression).
Reporting summary. Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The raw sequencing data generated in this study have been deposited in the NCBI
database under accession code GSE158380 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.
cgi?acc=GSE158380). In addition, the publicly available data utilized in this study are
available at: Sathyamurthy: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?
acc=GSE103892 Hayashi: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?
acc=GSE108788 Zeisel: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/SRP135960 Haring: https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE103840 Rosenberg: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE110823 Baek: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE130312 Blum: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.
cgi?acc=GSE161621 Alkaslasi: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?
acc=GSE167597 Delile: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/E-MTAB-7320/
ﬁles) A searchable version of all processed data from the harmonized analysis is available
www.seqseek.ninds.nih.gov.
Code availability
The code associated with this study is available at https://github.com/ArielLevineLabNINDS.
Speciﬁc code for the full SeqSeek classiﬁer is available at DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.5081263. Code
for the neuron neural network only is available at DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.5081268. Sample data
for running the classiﬁer is available at DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.5081266.
Received: 25 January 2021; Accepted: 21 July 2021;
References
1.
Sathyamurthy, A. et al. Massively parallel single nucleus transcriptional
proﬁling deﬁnes spinal cord neurons and their activity during behavior. Cell
Rep. 22, 2216–2225 (2018).
2.
Hayashi, M. et al. Graded arrays of spinal and supraspinal V2a interneuron
subtypes underlie forelimb and hindlimb motor control. Neuron 97, 869–884.
e5 (2018).
3.
Häring, M. et al. Neuronal atlas of the dorsal horn deﬁnes its architecture and
links sensory input to transcriptional cell types. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 869–880
(2018).
4.
Rosenberg, A. B. et al. Single-cell proﬁling of the developing mouse brain and
spinal cord with split-pool barcoding. Science 360, 176–182 (2018).
5.
Zeisel, A. et al. Molecular architecture of the mouse nervous system. Cell 174,
999–1014.e22 (2018).
6.
Baek, M., Menon, V., Jessell, T. M., Hantman, A. W. & Dasen, J. S. Molecular
logic of spinocerebellar tract neuron diversity and connectivity. Cell Rep. 27,
2620–2635.e4 (2019).
7.
Delile, J. et al. Single cell transcriptomics reveals spatial and temporal
dynamics of gene expression in the developing mouse spinal cord.
Development 146, dev173807 (2019).
8.
Mona, B. et al. Positive autofeedback regulation of Ptf1a transcription
generates the levels of PTF1A required to generate itch circuit neurons. Genes
Dev. 34, 621–636 (2020).
9.
Skinnider, M. A. et al. Cell type prioritization in single-cell data. Nat.
Biotechnol. 6, 377–5 (2020).
10. Blum, J. A. et al. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of the adult mouse spinal
cord reveals molecular diversity of autonomic and skeletal motor neurons.
Nat. Neurosci. 24, 572–583 (2021).
11. Alkaslasi, M. R. et al. Single nucleus RNA-sequencing deﬁnes unexpected
diversity of cholinergic neuron types in the adult mouse spinal cord. Nat.
Commun. 12, 2471 (2021).
12. Lu, D. C., Niu, T. & Alaynick, W. A. Molecular and cellular development of
spinal cord locomotor circuitry. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 8, 3003 (2015).
13. Koch, S. C., Acton, D. & Goulding, M. Spinal circuits for touch, pain, and itch.
Annu. Rev. Physiol. 80, 189–217 (2017).
14. Osseward, P. J. & Pfaff, S. L. Cell type and circuit modules in the spinal cord.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 56, 175–184 (2019).
15. Gosgnach, S. et al. Delineating the diversity of spinal interneurons in
locomotor circuits. J. Neurosci. 37, 10835–10841 (2017).
16. Lai, H. C., Seal, R. P. & Johnson, J. E. Making sense out of spinal cord
somatosensory development. Development 143, 3434–3448 (2016).
17. Kiehn, O. Decoding the organization of spinal circuits that control
locomotion. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 224–238 (2016).
18. Todd, A. J. Identifying functional populations among the interneurons in
laminae I-III of the spinal dorsal horn. Mol. Pain. 13, 1744806917693003
(2017).
19. Gatto, G., Smith, K. M., Ross, S. E. & Goulding, M. Neuronal diversity in the
somatosensory system: bridging the gap between cell type and function. Curr.
Opin. Neurobiol. 56, 167–174 (2019).
20. Dobrott, C. I., Sathyamurthy, A. & Levine, A. J. Decoding cell type diversity
within the spinal cord. Current 8, 1–6 (2019).
21. Lähnemann, D. et al. Eleven grand challenges in single-cell data science.
Genome Biol. 21, 31–35 (2020).
22. Nguyen, Q. H., Pervolarakis, N., Nee, K. & Kessenbrock, K. Experimental
considerations for single-cell RNA sequencing approaches. Front Cell Dev.
Biol. 6, 108 (2018).
23. Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell 177,
1888–1902.e21 (2019).
24. Argelaguet, R., Cuomo, A. S. E., Stegle, O. & Marioni, J. C. Computational
principles and challenges in single-cell data integration. Nat. Biotechnol. 1–14.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-021-00895-7 (2021).
25. Korsunsky, I. et al. Fast, sensitive and accurate integration of single-cell data
with Harmony. Nat. Meth 16, 1289–1296 (2019).
26. Barkas, N. et al. Joint analysis of heterogeneous single-cell RNA-seq dataset
collections. Nat. Meth 16, 695–698 (2019).
27. Welch, J. D. et al. Single-cell multi-omic integration compares and contrasts
features of brain cell identity. Cell 177, 1873–1887.e17 (2019).
28. Maniatis, S. et al. Spatiotemporal dynamics of molecular pathology in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science 364, 89–93 (2019).
29. Lein, E. S. et al. Genome-wide atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse
brain. Nature 445, 168–176 (2007).
30. Gong, S. et al. A gene expression atlas of the central nervous system based on
bacterial artiﬁcial chromosomes. Nature 425, 917–925 (2003).
31. Kandel, E. R., Dudai, Y. & Mayford, M. R. The molecular and systems biology
of memory. Cell 157, 163–186 (2014).
32. Chokshi, V. et al. Input-speciﬁc metaplasticity in the visual cortex
requires homer1a-mediated mGluR5 signaling. Neuron 104, 736–748.e6
(2019).
33. Won, S. & Roche, K. W. Regulation of glutamate receptors by striatal-enriched
tyrosine phosphatase 61 (STEP61). J. Physiol. 599, 443–451 (2021).
34. Yamamoto, T. et al. SPP1 expression in spinal motor neurons of the macaque
monkey. Neurosci. Res. 69, 81–86 (2011).
35. Friese, A. et al. Gamma and alpha motor neurons distinguished by expression
of transcription factor Err3. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA106, 13588–13593
(2009).
36. Schaller, S. et al. Novel combinatorial screening identiﬁes neurotrophic factors
for selective classes of motor neurons. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114,
E2486–E2493 (2017).
37. Springell, D. A., Powers-Martin, K., Phillips, J. K., Pilowsky, P. M. &
Goodchild, A. K. Phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
immunoreactivity identiﬁes a novel subpopulation of sympathetic
preganglionic neurons. Neuroscience 133, 583–590 (2005).
38. Mendelsohn, A. I., Dasen, J. S. & Jessell, T. M. Divergent Hox coding and
evasion of retinoid signaling speciﬁes motor neurons innervating digit
muscles. Neuron 93, 792–805.e4 (2017).
39. Blum, J. A. et al. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of the adult mouse spinal
cord reveals molecular diversity of autonomic and skeletal motor neurons.
Nat. Neurosci. 24, 572–583 (2021).
40. Alkaslasi, M. R. et al. Single nucleus RNA-sequencing deﬁnes unexpected
diversity of cholinergic neuron types in the adult mouse spinal cord. Nat.
Commun. 12, 2471 (2021).
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
18
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

41. Andrzejczuk, L. A. et al. Tal1, Gata2a, and Gata3 Have Distinct Functions in
the Development of V2b and Cerebrospinal Fluid-Contacting KA Spinal
Neurons. Front Neurosci. 12, 170 (2018).
42. Hubbard, J. M. et al. Intraspinal sensory neurons provide powerful inhibition
to motor circuits ensuring postural control during locomotion. Curr. Biol. 26,
2841–2853 (2016).
43. Petracca, Y. L. et al. The late and dual origin of cerebrospinal ﬂuid-contacting
neurons in the mouse spinal cord. Development 143, 880–891 (2016).
44. Djenoune, L. et al. Investigation of spinal cerebrospinal ﬂuid-contacting
neurons expressing PKD2L1: evidence for a conserved system from ﬁsh to
primates. Front Neuroanat. 8, 26 (2014).
45. Djenoune, L. et al. The dual developmental origin of spinal cerebrospinal
ﬂuid-contacting neurons gives rise to distinct functional subtypes. Sci. Rep. 7,
719–14 (2017).
46. Gatto, G. et al. A functional topographic map for spinal sensorimotor reﬂexes.
Neuron 109, 91–104.e5 (2021).
47. Pan, H. et al. Identiﬁcation of a spinal circuit for mechanical and persistent
spontaneous itch. Neuron 103, 1135–1149.e6 (2019).
48. Abraira, V. E. et al. The cellular and synaptic architecture of the
mechanosensory dorsal horn. Cell 168, 295–310.e19 (2017).
49. Acton, D. et al. Spinal neuropeptide Y1 receptor-expressing neurons form an
essential excitatory pathway for mechanical itch. Cell Rep. 28, 625–639.e6
(2019).
50. Bourane, S. et al. Identiﬁcation of a spinal circuit for light touch and ﬁne
motor control. Cell 160, 503–515 (2015).
51. Cheng, L. et al. Identiﬁcation of spinal circuits involved in touch-evoked
dynamic mechanical pain. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 804–814 (2017).
52. Duan, B. et al. Identiﬁcation of spinal circuits transmitting and gating
mechanical pain. Cell 159, 1417–1432 (2014).
53. Gutierrez-Mecinas, M., Furuta, T., Watanabe, M. & Todd, A. J. A quantitative
study of neurochemically deﬁned excitatory interneuron populations in
laminae I-III of the mouse spinal cord. Mol. Pain. 12, 174480691662906
(2016).
54. Liu, Y. et al. Touch and tactile neuropathic pain sensitivity are set by
corticospinal projections. Nature 561, 547–550 (2018).
55. Malmberg, A. B., Chen, C., Tonegawa, S. & Basbaum, A. I. Preserved acute
pain and reduced neuropathic pain in mice lacking PKCgamma. Science 278,
279–283 (1997).
56. Peirs, C. et al. Dorsal horn circuits for persistent mechanical pain. Neuron 87,
797–812 (2015).
57. Peirs, C. et al. Mechanical allodynia circuitry in the dorsal horn is deﬁned by
the nature of the injury. Neuron 109, 73–90.e7 (2021).
58. Bell, A. M. et al. Expression of green ﬂuorescent protein deﬁnes a speciﬁc
population of lamina II excitatory interneurons in the GRP::eGFP mouse. Sci.
Rep. 10, 13176–14 (2020).
59. Christensen, A. J. et al. In vivo interrogation of spinal mechanosensory
circuits. Cell Rep. 17, 1699–1710 (2016).
60. Fatima, M. et al. Spinal somatostatin-positive interneurons transmit chemical
itch. Pain 160, 1166–1174 (2019).
61. Huang, J. et al. Circuit dissection of the role of somatostatin in itch and pain.
Nat. Neurosci. 21, 707–716 (2018).
62. Mishra, S. K. & Hoon, M. A. The cells and circuitry for itch responses in mice.
Science 340, 968–971 (2013).
63. Huang, T. et al. Identifying the pathways required for coping behaviours
associated with sustained pain. Nature 565, 86–90 (2019).
64. Moriyama, M. et al. Presynaptic modulation by neuromedin U of sensory
synaptic transmission in rat spinal dorsal horn neurones. J. Physiol. 559,
707–713 (2004).
65. Petitjean, H. et al. Recruitment of spinoparabrachial neurons by dorsal horn
calretinin neurons. Cell Rep. 28, 1429–1438.e4 (2019).
66. Polgár, E. et al. Substance P-expressing neurons in the superﬁcial dorsal horn
of the mouse spinal cord: insights into their functions and their roles in
synaptic circuits. Neuroscience 450, 113–125 (2020).
67. Smith, K. M. et al. Calretinin positive neurons form an excitatory ampliﬁer
network in the spinal cord dorsal horn. Elife 8, 1750 (2019).
68. Cui, L. et al. Identiﬁcation of early RET+ deep dorsal spinal cord interneurons
in gating pain. Neuron 91, 1137–1153 (2016).
69. Gutierrez-Mecinas, M., Polgár, E., Bell, A. M., Herau, M. & Todd, A. J.
Substance P-expressing excitatory interneurons in the mouse superﬁcial dorsal
horn provide a propriospinal input to the lateral spinal nucleus. Brain Struct.
Funct. 223, 2377–2392 (2018).
70. Boyle, K. A. et al. Deﬁning a spinal microcircuit that gates myelinated afferent
input: implications for tactile allodynia. Cell Rep. 28, 526–540.e6 (2019).
71. Hughes, D. I. et al. Morphological, neurochemical and electrophysiological
features of parvalbumin-expressing cells: a likely source of axo-axonic inputs
in the mouse spinal dorsal horn. J. Physiol. 590, 3927–3951 (2012).
72. Petitjean, H. et al. Dorsal horn parvalbumin neurons are gate-keepers of
touch-evoked pain after nerve injury. Cell Rep. 13, 1246–1257 (2015).
73. Boyle, K. A. et al. A quantitative study of neurochemically deﬁned populations
of inhibitory interneurons in the superﬁcial dorsal horn of the mouse spinal
cord. Neuroscience 363, 120–133 (2017).
74. Brewer, C. L., Li, J., O’Conor, K., Seraﬁn, E. K. & Baccei, M. L. Neonatal
injury evokes persistent deﬁcits in dynorphin inhibitory circuits within
the adult mouse superﬁcial dorsal horn. J. Neurosci. 40, 3882–3895
(2020).
75. Brewer, C. L., Styczynski, L. M., Seraﬁn, E. K. & Baccei, M. L. Postnatal
maturation of spinal dynorphin circuits and their role in somatosensation.
Pain 161, 1906–1924 (2020).
76. Kardon, A. P. et al. Dynorphin acts as a neuromodulator to inhibit itch in the
dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Neuron 82, 573–586 (2014).
77. Seraﬁn, E. K. et al. Transcriptional proﬁle of spinal dynorphin-lineage
interneurons in the developing mouse. Pain 160, 2380–2397 (2019).
78. Bourane, S. et al. Gate control of mechanical itch by a subpopulation of spinal
cord interneurons. Science 350, 550–554 (2015).
79. Tashima, R. et al. A subset of spinal dorsal horn interneurons crucial for
gating touch-evoked pain-like behavior. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 118,
e2021220118 (2021).
80. Laing, I., Todd, A. J., Heizmann, C. W. & Schmidt, H. H. Subpopulations of
GABAergic neurons in laminae I-III of rat spinal dorsal horn deﬁned by
coexistence with classical transmitters, peptides, nitric oxide synthase or
parvalbumin. Neuroscience 61, 123–132 (1994).
81. Kluchová, D. et al. Partial colocalization of NADPH-diaphorase and
acetylcholinesterase positivity in spinal cord neurons. Physiol. Res. 49,
151–155 (2000).
82. Mesnage, B. et al. Morphological and functional characterization of
cholinergic interneurons in the dorsal horn of the mouse spinal cord. J. Comp.
Neurol. 519, 3139–3158 (2011).
83. Barik, A. et al. A spinoparabrachial circuit deﬁned by Tacr1 expression drives
pain. Elife 10, e61135 (2021).
84. Hilde, K. L. et al. Satb2 is required for the development of a spinal exteroceptive
microcircuit that modulates limb position. Neuron 91, 763–776 (2016).
85. Koch, S. C. et al. RORβ spinal interneurons gate sensory transmission during
locomotion to secure a ﬂuid walking gait. Neuron https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuron.2017.11.011 (2017).
86. Fink, A. J. P. et al. Presynaptic inhibition of spinal sensory feedback ensures
smooth movement. Nature 509, 43–48 (2014).
87. Azim, E., Jiang, J., Alstermark, B. & Jessell, T. M. Skilled reaching relies on a
V2a propriospinal internal copy circuit. Nature 508, 357–363 (2014).
88. Bikoff, J. B. et al. Spinal inhibitory interneuron diversity delineates variant
motor microcircuits. Cell 165, 207–219 (2016).
89. Alvarez, F. J. et al. Postnatal phenotype and localization of spinal cord V1
derived interneurons. J. Comp. Neurol. 493, 177–192 (2005).
90. Perry, S. et al. Firing properties of Renshaw cells deﬁned by Chrna2 are
modulated by hyperpolarizing and small conductance ion currents Ih and ISK.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 41, 889–900 (2015).
91. Gabitto, M. I. et al. Bayesian sparse regression analysis documents the
diversity of spinal inhibitory interneurons. Cell 165, 220–233 (2016).
92. Sweeney, L. B. et al. Origin and segmental diversity of spinal inhibitory
interneurons. Neuron 97, 341–355.e3 (2018).
93. Borowska, J., Jones, C. T., Deska-Gauthier, D. & Zhang, Y. V3 interneuron
subpopulations in the mouse spinal cord undergo distinctive postnatal
maturation processes. Neuroscience 295, 221–228 (2015).
94. Francius, C. et al. Identiﬁcation of multiple subsets of ventral interneurons
and differential distribution along the rostrocaudal axis of the developing
spinal cord. PLoS ONE 8, e70325 (2013).
95. Zagoraiou, L. et al. A cluster of cholinergic premotor interneurons modulates
mouse locomotor activity. Neuron 64, 645–662 (2009).
96. Talpalar, A. E. et al. Dual-mode operation of neuronal networks involved in
left-right alternation. Nature 500, 85–88 (2013).
97. Del Barrio, M. G. et al. A transcription factor code deﬁnes nine sensory
interneuron subtypes in the mechanosensory area of the spinal cord. PLoS
ONE 8, e77928 (2013).
98. Cheng, L. et al. Tlx3 and Tlx1 are post-mitotic selector genes determining
glutamatergic over GABAergic cell fates. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 510–517
(2004).
99. Rebelo, S., Reguenga, C., Lopes, C. & Lima, D. Prrxl1 is required for the
generation of a subset of nociceptive glutamatergic superﬁcial spinal dorsal
horn neurons. Dev. Dyn. 239, 1684–1694 (2010).
100. Qian, Y., Shirasawa, S., Chen, C.-L., Cheng, L. & Ma, Q. Proper development
of relay somatic sensory neurons and D2/D4 interneurons requires homeobox
genes Rnx/Tlx-3 and Tlx-1. Genes Dev. 16, 1220–1233 (2002).
101. Bui, T. V. et al. Circuits for grasping: spinal dI3 interneurons mediate
cutaneous control of motor behavior. Neuron 78, 191–204 (2013).
102. Bui, T. V., Stifani, N., Panek, I. & Farah, C. Genetically identiﬁed spinal
interneurons integrating tactile afferents for motor control. J. Neurophysiol.
114, 3050–3063 (2015).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
19

103. Glasgow, S. M., Henke, R. M., Macdonald, R. J., Wright, C. V. E. & Johnson, J.
E. Ptf1a determines GABAergic over glutamatergic neuronal cell fate in the
spinal cord dorsal horn. Development 132, 5461–5469 (2005).
104. Escalante, A. & Klein, R. Spinal inhibitory Ptf1a-derived neurons prevent self-
generated itch. Cell Rep. 33, 108422 (2020).
105. Gross, M. K., Dottori, M. & Goulding, M. Lbx1 speciﬁes somatosensory
association interneurons in the dorsal spinal cord. Neuron 34, 535–549 (2002).
106. Müller, T. et al. The homeodomain factor lbx1 distinguishes two major
programs of neuronal differentiation in the dorsal spinal cord. Neuron 34,
551–562 (2002).
107. Vallstedt, A. & Kullander, K. Dorsally derived spinal interneurons in
locomotor circuits. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1279, 32–42 (2013).
108. Osseward, P. J. et al. Conserved genetic signatures parcellate cardinal spinal
neuron classes into local and projection subsets. Science 372, 385–393 (2021).
109. Dubreuil, A., Valente, A., Beiran, M., Mastrogiuseppe, F. & Ostojic, S.
Complementary roles of dimensionality and population structure in
neural computations. bioRxiv https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/
2020.07.03.185942v1.full?%3Fcollection= (2020).
110. Sorg, B. A. et al. Casting a wide net: role of perineuronal nets in neural
plasticity. J. Neurosci. 36, 11459–11468 (2016).
111. Galtrey, C. M., Kwok, J. C. F., Carulli, D., Rhodes, K. E. & Fawcett, J. W.
Distribution and synthesis of extracellular matrix proteoglycans, hyaluronan,
link proteins and tenascin-R in the rat spinal cord. Eur. J. Neurosci. 27,
1373–1390 (2008).
112. Ji, R.-R., Kohno, T., Moore, K. A. & Woolf, C. J. Central sensitization and LTP:
do pain and memory share similar mechanisms? Trends Neurosci. 26, 696–705
(2003).
113. Mendell, L. M. Physiological properties of unmyelinated ﬁber projection to the
spinal cord. Exp. Neurol. 16, 316–332 (1966).
114. Randić, M., Jiang, M. C. & Cerne, R. Long-term potentiation and long-term
depression of primary afferent neurotransmission in the rat spinal cord. J.
Neurosci. 13, 5228–5241 (1993).
115. Svendsen, F., Hole, K. & Tjølsen, A. Long-term potentiation in single wide
dynamic range neurons induced by noxious stimulation in intact and
spinalized rats. Prog. Brain Res. 129, 153–161 (2000).
116. Ikeda, H. et al. Synaptic ampliﬁer of inﬂammatory pain in the spinal dorsal
horn. Science 312, 1659–1662 (2006).
117. Hughes, D. I. & Todd, A. J. Central nervous system targets: inhibitory
interneurons in the spinal cord. Neurotherapeutics 17, 874–885 (2020).
118. Woolf, C. J. Central sensitization: implications for the diagnosis and treatment
of pain. Pain 152, S2–S15 (2011).
119. Arber, S. Motor circuits in action: speciﬁcation, connectivity, and function.
Neuron 74, 975–989 (2012).
120. Rybak, I. A., Dougherty, K. J. & Shevtsova, N. A. Organization of the
mammalian locomotor CPG: review of computational model and circuit
architectures based on genetically identiﬁed spinal interneUrons(1,2,3).
eNeuro 2, ENEURO.0069–15.2015 (2015).
121. Zhang, Y. et al. An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of
glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci. 34,
11929–11947 (2014).
122. Lopez, R., Regier, J., Cole, M. B., Jordan, M. I. & Yosef, N. Deep generative
modeling for single-cell transcriptomics. Nat. Meth 15, 1053–1058 (2018).
123. Wagner, F. & Yanai, I. Moana: A robust and scalable cell type classiﬁcation
framework for single-cell RNA-Seq data. Preprint at bioRxiv https://www.
biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/456129v1 (2018).
124. Pliner, H. A., Shendure, J. & Trapnell, C. Supervised classiﬁcation enables
rapid annotation of cell atlases. Nat. Meth 16, 983–986 (2019).
125. Abdelaal, T. et al. A comparison of automatic cell identiﬁcation methods for
single-cell RNA sequencing data. Genome Biol. 20, 194–19 (2019).
126. Li, B. et al. Cumulus provides cloud-based data analysis for large-scale single-
cell and single-nucleus RNA-seq. Nat. Meth 17, 793–798 (2020).
127. Lotfollahi, M. et al. Query to reference single-cell integration with transfer
learning. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.16.205997 (2020).
128. Matson, K. J. E. et al. A single cell atlas of spared tissue below a spinal cord
injury reveals cellular mechanisms of repair. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.
org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862 (2021).
129. Chamessian, A. et al. Transcriptional proﬁling of somatostatin interneurons in
the spinal dorsal horn. Sci. Rep. 8, 6809–6816 (2018).
130. Nemesh, J. Dropseq Core Computational Protocol. https://manualzz.com/doc/
7408208/drop-seq-core-computational-protoco.
131. Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. & Satija, R. Integrating single-
cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species.
Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 411–420 (2018).
132. Patterson-Cross, R. B., Levine, A. J. & Menon, V. Selecting single cell
clustering parameter values using subsampling-based robustness metrics.
BMC Bioinforma. 22, 39–13 (2021).
133. Matson, K. J. E. et al. Isolation of adult spinal cord nuclei for massively parallel
single-nucleus RNA sequencing. J. Vis. Exp. e58413–e58413 (2018).
134. Ng, A. Machine Learning Yearning. https://www.deeplearning.ai/.
Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to Dr. Andreas Sagner and Dr. James Briscoe for sharing their
processed embryonic sequencing data, to Dr. Becky Seal (University of Pittsburgh),
Dr. Andreas Pfenning (Carnegie Mellon University), and Dr. Brian Roome (McGill
University) for their advice, discussion, and suggestions, and to Mr. Stefan Stoica for
technical assistance with the validation data analysis. This work was supported by NIH
Intramural funds through 1ZIA NS003153.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: D.E.R., K.J.E.M., S.C.K., and A.J.L.; Software, Methodology, Formal
analysis, and Investigation: D.E.R, R.B.P.C., K.J.E.M., A.Y., D.I.L., V.M., and M.R.A.;
Validation: L.L.; Data curation: D.E.R., S.C.K., and A.J.L.; Writing: D.E.R., R.B.P.C., L.L.,
S.C.K., K.J.E.M., and A.J.L.; Visualization: D.E.R. and A.J.L.; Supervision: V.M., C.E.LP.,
and A.J.L.; Funding acquisition: A.J.L.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.J.L.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for
their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation,
distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons
license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in
a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To
view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the US; foreign
copyright protection may apply 2021
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1
20
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5722 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25125-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

===== Sabin2015_DevBiol_Axolotl+Ependymoglia+SCI =====
Dynamic membrane depolarization is an early regulator of
ependymoglial cell response to spinal cord injury in axolotl
Keith Sabin a, Tiago Santos-Ferreira b, Jaclyn Essig a,1, Sarah Rudasill a,2, Karen Echeverri a,n
a Dept. of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota, USA
b CRTD/DFG-Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 5 June 2015
Received in revised form
8 October 2015
Accepted 8 October 2015
Available online 20 October 2015
Keywords:
Regeneration
Ependymoglial
Membrane potential
Axolotl
a b s t r a c t
Salamanders, such as the Mexican axolotl, are some of the few vertebrates fortunate in their ability to
regenerate diverse structures after injury. Unlike mammals they are able to regenerate a fully functional
spinal cord after injury. However, the molecular circuitry required to initiate a pro-regenerative response
after spinal cord injury is not well understood.
To address this question we developed a spinal cord injury model in axolotls and used in vivo imaging
of labeled ependymoglial cells to characterize the response of these cells to injury. Using in vivo imaging
of ion sensitive dyes we identiﬁed that spinal cord injury induces a rapid and dynamic change in the
resting membrane potential of ependymoglial cells. Prolonged depolarization of ependymoglial cells
after injury inhibits ependymoglial cell proliferation and subsequent axon regeneration. Using tran-
scriptional proﬁling we identiﬁed c-Fos as a key voltage sensitive early response gene that is expressed
speciﬁcally in the ependymoglial cells after injury. This data establishes that dynamic changes in the
membrane potential after injury are essential for regulating the speciﬁc spatiotemporal expression of
c-Fos that is critical for promoting faithful spinal cord regeneration in axolotl.
& 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The ability to regenerate lost tissue after injury is a widespread
phenomenon across diverse phyla, ranging from amphibian limb
regeneration to full body regeneration in planaria ﬂatworms (Al-
varado, 2000; Brockes, 1991, 1997; Poss et al., 2003; Tanaka, 2003).
Among vertebrates, amphibians, such as the Mexican axolotl, are
unique in their ability to regenerate multiple structures after in-
jury including limbs, skin, heart, liver and the central nervous
system (Abate et al., 1993; Diaz Quiroz and Echeverri, 2013; Gar-
diner et al., 2002; Goss, 1969; Tanaka and Reddien, 2011). In
contrast, mammals have a very limited regenerative capacity that
declines even more with age. Mammals can regenerate small le-
sions in skin, muscle or peripheral nerves and can regenerate part
of the liver (Becker and Diez Del Corral, 2015; Borena et al., 2015;
Cregg et al., 2014; Heinrich et al., 2015; Lepousez et al., 2015; Silver
and Miller 2004; Yamakawa and Ieda, 2015). Why mammals react
differently to injury than lower vertebrates like salamanders or
ﬁsh represents a fundamental question in regenerative biology.
Strikingly, after spinal cord injury (SCI) axolotls are able to
functionally regenerate their spinal cord, ultimately regaining
sensory and motor function comparable to pre-lesion levels
(Butler and Ward, 1965, 1967; Chernoff et al., 2003; Clarke et al.,
1988; Clarke and Ferretti, 1998; Clarke et al., 1986). In response to
SCI, ependymoglial cells, which function as resident neural stem
cells and line the central canal of the spinal cord, proliferate and
migrate to bridge the lesion and provide guidance signals to
support and direct subsequent axon regeneration (Butler and
Ward, 1965, 1967; Chernoff et al., 2003; Diaz Quiroz et al., 2014;
O’Hara et al., 1992; Quiroz and Echeverri, 2012). Despite extensive
characterization of the cellular response to SCI the molecular sig-
nals that drive functional regeneration are only now being
elucidated.
In recent years we have made extensive progress in under-
standing some of the signaling molecules that are necessary at the
injury site to ensure faithful regeneration in terms of size and
patterning of the lost appendage or damaged tissue (Becker and
Diez Del Corral, 2015; Chaar and Tsilﬁdis, 2006; Chernoff, 1996b;
Chernoff et al., 2003; Ferretti et al., 2003; Frobisch and Shubin,
2011; Gardiner and Bryant, 1996; Gardiner et al., 1999; Kumar and
Brockes, 2012). Many of the molecules recently shown to be es-
sential for spinal cord regeneration are also essential for neural
tube development. After tail amputation the transcription factor
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/developmentalbiology
Developmental Biology
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.10.012
0012-1606/& 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
n Corresponding author.
E-mail address: echev020@umn.edu (K. Echeverri).
1 Present Address: Neuroscience Program and Department of Physiology and
Biophysics, University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado,
USA.
2 Present Address: Wake Forest University.
Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 14–25

Sox2, a known neural progenitor cell marker, is required for
ependymoglial cell proliferation and subsequent spinal cord re-
generation (Fei et al., 2014). Additionally, sonic hedgehog, which is
important in specifying the dorsoventral axis in the developing
neural tube, is similarly important for ependymoglial cell pro-
liferation and patterning of the regenerated spinal cord after tail
amputation (Schnapp et al., 2005). Many of these gene products
are not expressed in uninjured adult tissue or are differentially
expressed after injury (Chernoff, 1988, 1996a; Chernoff et al., 2000,
2002, 2003; Chernoff and Robertson, 1990; Diaz Quiroz et al.,
2014; Monaghan et al., 2007; Scadding and Maden, 1986; Schnapp
et al., 2005; Sehm et al., 2009). How the expression of these genes
is precisely regulated after injury remains a fundamental question
in the ﬁeld.
Recent reports show that regulation of cellular membrane po-
tential (Vmem), the electrical charge separation across the plasma
membrane, plays an integral role in regulating regeneration (Bar-
ghouth et al., 2015; Beane et al., 2013; Borgens et al., 1986, 1977;
Levin, 2007, 2009a, 2009b; Stewart et al., 2007; Tseng and Levin,
2013, 2012). After Xenopus tadpole tail amputation the hydrogen
(Hþ) V-ATPase pump is highly upregulated in the regeneration
blastema within 6 hours after injury (Adams et al., 2007; Tseng
et al., 2011; Tseng and Levin, 2008, 2012). The Hþ V-ATPase
functions to repolarize the injury site to resting Vmem by 24 hours
post injury. If the expression or function of Hþ V-ATPase is blocked
then cells at the injury site fail to proliferate and tail regeneration
does not occur. Furthermore, inhibition of the early electrical re-
sponse to injury blocks expression of key morphogenetic factors,
such as Msx1, Notch and BMP, 48 hours post injury (Tseng et al.,
2010). Recent studies in the axolotl using ion sensitive dyes and
in vivo imaging shows rapid and dynamic changes in Hþ and Naþ
ion contents and a depolarization of the Vmem in cells adjacent to
the injury site (Ozkucur et al., 2010). However, the functional
signiﬁcance of these biophysical signals in regulating regeneration
was not addressed.
Using our in vivo spinal cord injury model, we analyzed the role
of membrane potential in the ependymoglial cells after spinal cord
injury. Here we demonstrate that there is a rapid depolarization of
ependymoglial cells after spinal cord injury and repolarization to
resting Vmem within 24 hours post injury. We show that per-
turbing this dynamic change in Vmem after injury, thereby
maintaining the cells in a more depolarized state, inhibits pro-
liferation of the ependymoglial cells and subsequent axon re-
generation across the lesion. Additionally, we identiﬁed c-Fos as an
important target gene that is normally upregulated after injury in
ependymoglial cells. However in ependymoglial cells whose nor-
mal electrical response is perturbed after injury, c-Fos is not up-
regulated and regeneration is inhibited. Our results indicate that
axolotl ependymoglial cells must undergo a dynamic change in
Vmem in the ﬁrst 24 hours post injury to initiate a pro-re-
generative response.
2. Results
2.1. Establishment of a spinal cord injury model in axolotl
To understand how axolotls respond to and repair lesions in the
spinal cord we developed a spinal cord ablation model. In our
model, we use animals 3–5 cm long and remove a portion of the
spinal cord equivalent to one muscle bundle, or approximately ﬁve
hundred micrometers in length using forceps (Quiroz and Eche-
verri, 2012). This technique effectively creates a lesion of ap-
proximately ﬁve hundred micrometers that eliminates motor and
sensory function caudal to the lesion site (Fig. 1A and B). The ef-
fectiveness of the spinal cord injury was assessed by monitoring
the animal’s response to touch and their swimming motion post-
surgery. Histological staining was used to monitor the repair
Fig. 1. Spinal cord reconnection after spinal cord injury. Histological, Acid fucidin orange green (AfoG) staining of longitudinal sections of uninjured (A) versus injured spinal
cords (B–E). At 1 day post injury an injury site of 490 μm is visible between the rostral and caudal ends of the severed spinal cord. Over time the distance between the rostral
and caudal ends of the spinal cord decreases and the severed ends seal over forming terminal vesicle like structures (C and D). By 7 days post injury in animals that are 3–
5 cm long the rostral and caudal ends of the spinal cord have reconnected and the central canal is reconnected (E). The location of the terminal vesicle in the rostral and
caudal spinal cord is denoted by the dotted lines. The distance (micrometers) between the rostral and caudal terminal vesicles throughout regeneration is shown between
the dotted lines. * denotes the original injury site. Each time point N¼10.
K. Sabin et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 14–25
15

process at the level of the ependymoglial cells over time. This
staining revealed an inﬂux of blood cells (yellow cells, Fig. 1B and
C) into the injury site by 1 day post injury, at which time point the
distance between the rostral and caudal ends was on average four
hundred and ninety micrometers. By 3 days post injury the size of
the lesion reduced slightly to around four hundred and twenty-
four micrometers. A ﬂuorescent rhodamine dextran dye was in-
jected into the rostral side of the ependymal tube 3 days post
injury. In vivo imaging of the injected samples revealed that the
dye did not pass from rostral to caudal, conﬁrming that the ends of
the spinal cord tightly seal over during the early phases of re-
generation (Fig. 1S). The main repair of the lesion occurs between
3 and 5 days post injury where the distance between the rostral
and caudal ends decreases from four hundred and twenty-four
micrometers to one hundred ninety-four micrometers (Fig. 1B–D).
By 7 days post injury it is very difﬁcult to identify where the ori-
ginal injury was, as at this time-point the rostral and caudal sides
of the injury have reconnected (Fig. 1E). To identify where the cells
are coming from to repair the lesion we used in vivo labeling and
imaging of ependymoglial cells. Ependymoglial cells were labeled
prior to injury using the GFAP promoter driving GFP or nestin
promoter driving GFP by injecting the plasmid into the central
canal of the spinal cord and electroporating the whole animal to
facilitate plasmid uptake (Echeverri and Tanaka, 2003). Animals
were screened 2 days later and those containing a small number of
labeled ependymoglial cells, approximately 10–15 labeled cells per
animal, were selected for injury. Selecting animals with a small
number of labeled cells enabled us to precisely follow and com-
pare how the cells behaved rostral and caudal to the injury. Using
this approach we imaged twenty-ﬁve animals that had labeled
cells within ﬁve hundred micrometers and sixteen animals with
labeled cells between 500 μm and one millimeter rostral to the
injury site. Additionally, we imaged twenty-three animals that had
labeled cells within ﬁve hundred micrometers and seventeen an-
imals with labeled cells between 500 μm and one millimeter
caudal to the injury site. Initially some cells closest to the injury
site appeared to die off as the ﬂuorescent signal disappeared
within hours of injury (Fig. 2B and C) but the remaining cells be-
gan to divide and migrate to repair the lesion (Fig. 2A–F). From our
live cell imaging experiments we determined that cells from the
rostral side contribute to both the rostral and caudal sides of the
regenerated spinal cord (Fig. 2). Furthermore, we determined that
cells within ﬁve hundred micrometers rostral and three hundred
micrometers caudal of the injury site are competent to contribute
to regeneration; cells lying outside this range do not contribute to
the regenerate (Fig. 2G).
Having established that cells from both rostral and caudal to
the injury site can participate in regeneration of the missing spinal
cord we also investigated the kinetics of ependymoglial cell pro-
liferation during spinal cord regeneration. A twenty-four hour
BrdU pulse was used to monitor S-Phase transition three, ﬁve and
seven days post injury. Cell proliferation was found to peak 3 days
post injury and to return to homeostatic levels by ﬁve days post
injury (Fig. 2S).
Fig. 2. Ependymoglial cells from both the rostral and caudal sides of the injury contribute to replacing the injured spinal cord. Ependymoglial cells were labeled using a GFAP
promoter driving GFP (A and A’). Ablation injury was performed adjacent to the injury site, asterisk denotes the injury site and arrow marks cells that were followed (B and
B’). Within 3 day post injury some of the labeled cells adjacent to the injury site died (arrow C and C’). 6 days post injury the labeled cells adjacent to the injury site increase
in number (D and D’). At 10 days post injury the labeled cells are found directly within the regenerating lesion area (E and E’). By 14 days post injury, when regeneration of
the lesion is almost complete, some cells that originated on the rostral side of the injury are now found caudal to the injury site (F and F’). Panel G is a schematic diagram to
summarize all in vivo imaging results, it was found that cells within 500 μm on the rostral side and 350 μm on the caudal side of the injury would migrate and contribute to
regeneration of the lesion. Cells that were labeled outside of these regions did not migrate and contribute to the regeneration of the missing tissue. Cells labeled rostral
within 500 μm N¼25, caudal within 500 μm N¼23. Cells labeled 500 μm1 mm away from injury, rostral N¼16, caudal N¼17. In each animal multiple cells were labeled
and followed.
K. Sabin et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 14–25
16

2.2. Injury induces rapid changes in ependymoglial cell membrane
potential
Our results suggest upon injury ependymoglial cells respond to
a speciﬁc signal that is transduced over a certain distance. Injury is
known to affect cellular processes including cytoskeletal dy-
namics, cell–cell contacts and membrane potential. Previous work
in planaria, axolotl and Xenopus have demonstrated dynamic
changes in the resting membrane potential (Vmem) occur after
injury and this response is essential for faithful regeneration to
occur (Beane et al., 2013; Blackiston et al., 2009; Borgens, 1986;
Ozkucur et al., 2010). However it remains unknown if a similar
response occurs after SCI. To address this question we used in vivo
imaging to measure the change in the Vmem after injury with the
ﬂuorescent
voltage
sensitive
dye
DiBAC4(3)
(bis-[1,3-dibu-
tylbarbituric acid]trimethine oxonol (Fig. 3A and B). This method
enabled us to identify a signiﬁcant increase in membrane potential
approximately seven hours post injury. However by twenty-four
hours post injury the membrane potential of the ependymoglial
cell population adjacent to the injury site had returned to almost
uninjured levels (Fig. 3C). This change in membrane potential was
observed in the cells adjacent to the injury site, within approxi-
mately ﬁve hundred micrometers of the injury but no change was
observed in cells further away. To investigate if this change in
membrane potential is essential for regeneration to occur we used
the commercially available drug ivermectin, which opens glycine
gated chloride channels and induces depolarization (Beane et al.,
2013; Blackiston et al., 2011). We conﬁrmed ivermectin treatment
caused prolonged depolarization of the ependymoglial cells by
causing a decrease in intracellular chloride levels by measuring the
chloride levels after ivermectin treatment compared to controls
(Fig. 3S).
Prolonged depolarization led to an overall decrease in the
number of BrdUþ ependymoglial cells 3 days post injury com-
pared to vehicle control (Fig. 4 A–C). In addition it was noted that
the distance between the rostral and caudal ends of the injured
spinal cord did not decrease over time like in the control animals
(Fig. 4S). Taken together, these data suggests that prolonged de-
polarization of ependymoglial cells causes a defect in cell division
and/or migration in response to injury.
To determine if ivermectin affects speciﬁcally the ependy-
moglial cells or other cell types present in the spinal cord we
performed immunohistochemistry looking for the target of iver-
mectin, the glycine gated chloride channel. The glycine receptor is
exclusively expressed by GFAPþ ependymoglial cells lining the
central canal of the spinal cord (Fig. 5A–D). To assess if prolonged
depolarization of the ependymoglial cells after injury had any ef-
fect on functional regeneration we looked at axon regeneration
7 days post injury using whole mount ß-III staining. In vehicle
control injected animals normal axon regeneration across the le-
sion site was observed (Fig. 6A, A’). However in animals injected
with ivermectin axons completely failed to grow across the lesion
(Fig. 6B, B’). To further verify that this effect was speciﬁc to the
ability of ivermectin to activate glycine gated chloride channels we
injected spinal cords with the native ligand, glycine, and assayed
for axon regeneration 7 days post injury. Axons in glycine injected
animals also failed to grow across the lesion, phenocopying the
ivermectin injected animals. (Fig. 6A–C). To further conﬁrm that
dynamic changes in ependymoglial cell Vmem regulates spinal
cord regeneration, we altered the Vmem in a predictable direction
by speciﬁcally electroporating the ependymoglial cells with over-
expression constructs of various ion channels. When we over-
expressed a constitutively active mutant of the potassium channel
Kir2.1, which causes hyperpolarization (Hinard et al., 2008), or the
GABA-gated Naþ/Ca2þ channel Exp-1, which causes depolariza-
tion (Beg and Jorgensen, 2003), in the ependymoglial cells ad-
jacent to the injury site these animals failed to regrow axons
across the lesion at 7 days post injury compared to vector control
(Fig. 6SA–C). A previous report has shown that depolarization of a
small group of cells during Xenopus development can cause mel-
anocyte hyperproliferation in a cell non-autonomous fashion
(Blackiston et al. 2011). To determine if our phenotype was the
result of cell non-autonomous function we labeled ependymoglial
cells with Kir2.1-GFP and followed GFPþ cells using live cell in vivo
ﬂuorescent microscopy throughout the time course of regenera-
tion. Using this approach we found that GFPþ cells did not pro-
liferate or migrate towards the injury site and instead remained
adjacent to the lesion suggesting that injury-induced changes in
ependymoglial
cell
Vmem
act
cell
autonomously
in
axolotl
(Fig. 5S). Collectively, these data show that a dynamic electrical
response of ependymoglial cells acts cell autonomously and is
necessary for the subsequent proliferative response to injury and
subsequent axon growth across the lesion.
*
* p≤0.05
Fig. 3. Spinal cord injury induces rapid but transient membrane depolarization. Animals were injected with the Vmem sensitive dye DiBAC and were imaged before injury,
immediately after injury, 7 h post injury and 24 h post injury. Representative images of the polarization state of (A) uninjured and (B) injured spinal cords shows a drastic
change in the polarization state following spinal cord ablation. (C) The spinal cord is signiﬁcantly depolarized at 7 h post injury compared to uninjured animals and is largely
repolarized by 24 h post injury. ***Po0.05; n¼5. Scale bar¼75 μm.
K. Sabin et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 14–25
17

2.3. Molecular pathways downstream of Vmem
To investigate the molecular pathways regulated by injury in-
duced Vmem depolarization in ependymoglial cells we performed
microarray transcriptional proﬁling in uninjured, 1 day post injury
vehicle control injected and 1 day post injury ivermectin injected
spinal cords. To gain further information of the pathways that
must be differentially regulated to ensure functional spinal cord
regeneration we also carried out transcriptional proﬁling on spinal
cord injury samples 1, 3 and 7 days post injury compared to un-
injured tissue (Table 1S). Further analysis using open source R
software allowed us to identify a subset of genes that is sig-
niﬁcantly upregulated at 1 day post injury but are rapidly down
regulated throughout the rest of regeneration (Fig. 7A, Table 2S).
We focused our attention on one of these genes, the transcription
factor c-Fos, which is known to regulate neuronal cell apoptosis in
mammals (Oshitari et al., 2002; Robinson, 1996). Using Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis many genes known to be regulated by c-Fos
were identiﬁed in our arrays (Fig. 7S). Interestingly, further ana-
lysis of the array data showed that ivermectin treatment blocked
the induction of c-Fos expression after injury (Fig. 7B). To conﬁrm
the array data and to determine where in the injured spinal cord
c-Fos is expressed we performed immunohistochemistry and
found that in vehicle control injected spinal cords c-Fos is localized
to the nucleus of ependymoglial cells at 1 day post injury. (Fig. 8A–
C). Quantiﬁcation of the c-Fos protein expression over the time
course of regeneration (1–10 days post injury) found that the peak
of c-Fos expression was at 1 day post injury, conﬁrming the initial
microarray data (Fig. 8D). Subsequent immunohistochemistry
analysis in ivermectin injected spinal cord shows that prolonged
Vehicle Control
BrdU
DAPI
BrdU/DAPI
IVR
BrdU
DAPI
BrdU/DAPI
***
Fig. 4. Prolonged depolarization inhibits ependymoglial cell proliferation in response to spinal cord injury. Animals were injected with vehicle control of PBS (n¼15) (A, A’,
A”) or ivermectin (IVR) to induce prolonged depolarization of the membrane (n¼16) (B, B’, B”) prior to spinal cord ablation. One day after injury animals were subjected to an
intraperitoneal injection with BrdU and harvested for staining 24 h later. (A”, B”) Comparison of the percent of BrdUþ cells in IVR treated and control axolotls shows there
are signiﬁcantly fewer BrdUþ cells in IVR treated animals 48 hours post injury compared to control axolotls (C). ***; Pr0.001. Error bars represent 7SEM. Scale bar is
75 μm.
K. Sabin et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 14–25
18

GFAP
DAPI
GlyCl
GlyCl/GFAP/DAPI
Fig. 5. GlyCl-R is expressed by ependymoglial cells in the axolotl spinal cord. Cross sections of axolotl tails were stained with antibodies against (A) GlyCl-R or (B) the
ependmyoglial marker GFAP. (D) Overlay with DAPI (Blue) GlyCl-R (red) is expressed by GFAPþ (green) ependymoglial cells (white arrows). Scale bar 50 μm. (For inter-
pretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
IVR Treated
*
Glycine Treated
*
Vehicle Control
*
Fig. 6. Prolonged depolarization of ependymal glial cell membrane using ivermectin or glycine inhibits axon regeneration across the injury site. Spinal cords were injected
with either vehicle control PBS (A), or the GlyCl-R agonists IVR (B) or the native ligand for GlyCl-R glycine (C) immediately before spinal cord ablation. Activation of GlyCl-R
causes Cl efﬂux leading to chronic depolarization. In control animals 7 days post injury the axons have regrown through the injury site, as visualized using whole mount
anti-ß III tubulin staining (A, A’). In animals where the ependymal glial cells were kept in a prolonged state of membrane depolarization by injection of ivermectin, axon
regeneration was inhibited (B, B’). Injection of the native ligand for glycine gated chloride channels, glycine, phenocopied the drug phenotype (C, C’). * denotes injury site.
Control N¼47, Ivermectin N¼32, Glycine N¼17.
K. Sabin et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 14–25
19

depolarization of the ependymoglial cells blocks c-Fos expression
after injury (Fig. 8SA, B).
Previous work has shown that c-Fos is activated via phos-
phorylation by the kinases ERK or JNK and enters the nucleus to
regulate target gene expression (Abate et al., 1993; Vesely et al.,
2009; Vial et al., 2003). In addition, activated c-Fos has been
shown to be an essential regulator of cell division (Bakiri et al.,
2007; Herdegen and Leah, 1998; van Dam and Castellazzi, 2001).
To test if c-Fos activation is necessary for ependymoglial cell
proliferation
after injury
we
injected
the
spinal
cord
with
inhibitors against the kinases ERK or JNK immediately after injury
and assessed regenerative defects by assaying ependymoglial cell
proliferation and axon regeneration. In both cases ependymoglial
cell proliferation and subsequent axon regeneration through the
lesion site was inhibited (data not shown and Fig. 9A–C). Fur-
thermore, using Western blot analysis we determined that ERK
phosphorylation (dpERK) is increased after injury compared to
uninjured spinal cord and that prolonged depolarization of epen-
dymoglial cells with ivermectin largely blocked ERK activation
after injury (Fig. 9D) This data would suggest that membrane
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
Mature
1dpi 
3dpi 
7dpi 
Log2 Expression
Untreated
IVR
Fig. 7. Transcriptional Proﬁling identiﬁes putative downstream targets of membrane potential. Microarray analysis of tissue samples taken 1, 3 and 7 days post injury and
compared to uninjured spinal cord identiﬁed a group of genes that are upregulated at 1 day post injury and quickly return to homeostatic levels (A). Additional array analysis
of control, 1 day post injury versus ivermectin treated 1 day post injury samples identiﬁed c-Fos as a early response genes whose normal dynamics in response to injury are
inhibited when ependymoglialglial cells are maintained in a depolarized state (B).
c-Fos
DAPI
c-Fos/DAPI
Fig. 8. Ependymoglial cells speciﬁcally up-regulate c-Fos expression 1 day post injury. Immunohistochemical analysis with anti-c-Fos antibody of 1 day post injury spinal
cords shows c-Fos is highly expressed by ependymoglial cells adjacent to the site of injury (A–C). c-Fosþ cells were quantiﬁed in uninjured, 1, 3, 7 and 10 day post injury
spinal cords and increased c-Fos expression is only observed in 1 day post injury spinal cords (D).
K. Sabin et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 14–25
20

depolarization after injury is upstream of ERK and c-Fos activation,
which is necessary for ependymoglial cell proliferation and sub-
sequent spinal cord regeneration. Taken together, our data show
that rapid depolarization of ependymoglial cell Vmem is essential
to activate the pro-regenerative circuitry necessary for spinal cord
regeneration.
3. Discussion
3.1. Ependymoglial cells within a deﬁned zone rostral and caudal to
the injury site contribute to the regenerating spinal cord
The present study offers insight, at the cellular and molecular
level, into the response of ependymoglial cells to acute injury.
Previous work in axolotl has shown that, in response to tail am-
putation, ependymoglial cells will amplify and migrate to re-
generate a new ependymal tube (Echeverri and Tanaka, 2002,
2003; McHedlishvili et al., 2007, 2012). However the molecular
signals that initiate this response to injury have remained elusive.
In this study we have developed a reproducible model of spinal
cord injury that creates a lesion of approximately ﬁve hundred
micrometers. Taking advantage of the ease of in vivo imaging in
the axolotl spinal cord, we electroporated a GFP reporter construct
to speciﬁcally label ependymoglial cells. We then performed an
injury and followed labeled cells on either the rostral or caudal
side of the injury throughout the time course of regeneration. This
approach allowed us to determine that regeneration occurs in a bi-
directional fashion, meaning that cells from both sides of the le-
sion could partake in replacing the lost portion of the spinal cord
(Fig. 2). Using these methods we also established that only cells
lying within a ﬁve hundred to three hundred micrometer zone
rostral or caudal to the injury site partake in regeneration. This
result is similar to what has been reported for axolotl tail re-
generation, whereby no matter what length of tail is amputated,
only the cells in a zone ﬁve hundred micrometers rostral to the
injury site will divide and migrate to contribute to regenerating
the lost spinal cord (McHedlishvili et al., 2007). In addition to
tracking the distance from which cells can migrate to participate in
regeneration we also noted the position in which cells lay within
the spinal cord (i.e. dorsal versus ventral or lateral). We noted that
cells starting in dorsal or ventral position could end up in a lateral
position in the regenerated tissue, however we never observed a
dorsal cell ending up in a ventral position or vice versa. This is in
contrast to what has been observed during spinal cord regenera-
tion in the context of tail amputation where dorsally positioned
cells can contribute to the ventral regenerate or vice versa
(McHedlishvili et al., 2007). This difference may be because a cell
switching from a dorsal to ventral position after spinal cord ab-
lation is a rare event that we may have missed due to the small
numbers of labeled cells followed in our experiments. However,
this discrepancy could represent an intrinsic difference in the re-
generative program required for repairing a gap in tissue versus an
amputated tail. More comprehensive cell tracing experiments
could help shed light on these potential differences.
3.2. Ependymoglial cell response to injury is dependent upon rapid
changes in membrane potential
Given our observation that cells from deﬁned zones rostral and
caudal to the injury site suggests to us that upon injury speciﬁc
signals are transmitted a certain distance that are responsible for
initiating a regenerative response in these cells. In recent years
several groups have reported that biophysical cues may be the ﬁrst
signals that are transmitted in response to injury to regulate gene
expression and elicit a regenerative response. After tail amputa-
tion in Xenopus tadpoles, the activation of the Hþ V-ATPase is
necessary and sufﬁcient to promote tail regeneration (Adams et al.,
2007). Recent work in the axolotl established that changes in
calcium, sodium and membrane potential occur in cells at the
injury site after tail amputation (Ozkucur et al., 2010). To de-
termine if these early injury-induced signals were essential for
spinal cord regeneration in the axolotl we injected the ﬂuorescent
voltage sensitive dye DiBAC into the spinal cord central canal and
used in vivo ﬂuorescent imaging to investigate the electrical re-
sponse of the ependymoglial cells to injury. We established that
there is a dynamic change in membrane potential after injury in
cells adjacent to the injury site (Fig. 3). We observed a rapid in-
crease in membrane potential within the ﬁrst 7 h that is largely
repolarized to resting membrane potential twenty-four hours after
injury. To determine if this dynamic change in the Vmem of
ependymoglial cell is essential to the regenerative response we
microinjected the depolarizing drug ivermectin, which activates
glycine gated chloride channels, into the spinal cord central canal
or overexpressed various ion channels before injury. We found
that prolonged depolarization of ependymoglial cells blocked their
proliferative response to injury and inhibited migration of the
rostral and caudal ends of the lesion (Fig. 4, Fig. 4S). Furthermore,
perturbation of the endogenous electrical response of the epen-
dymoglial cells to injury by overexpression of depolarizing or hy-
perpolarizing channels inhibited axon regeneration compared to
vector control animals (Fig. 6S). Our observation that prolonged
depolarization blocks ependymoglial cell proliferation conﬂicts
with a, previous study that shows that ivermectin treatment of
developing Xenopus embryos leads to a hyperproliferation of
melanocyte-producing neural crest cells in a cell non-autonomous
Vehicle Control
Erk Inhibitor
JNK Inhibitor
*
*
*
Uninjured
1dpi
dpERk
Total ERK
Uninjured    1dpi
Ivermectin
Vehicle Control
Fig. 9. Inhibition of ERK and JNK signaling results in defects in axon regeneration.
Inhibition of ERK and JNK signaling cause axonal regeneration defects similar to
blocking injury-induced changes in Vmem. Whole mount staining of anti-β-III tu-
bulin 7 days post injury shows that inhibition of (B) ERK signaling or (C) JNK sig-
naling during regeneration blocks axon growth as compared to control axolotls (A).
* denotes injury site. Scale Bar 75 μm, N¼15 for controls and each inhibitor. Panel
(D), western blot analysis of control versus ivermectin treated animals. In vehicle
control injured animals dpERK protein levels increase after spinal cord injury, this
normal increase of dpERK is inhibited in ivermectin treated animals.
K. Sabin et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 14–25
21

manner (Blackiston et al., 2011). Interestingly, other studies report
that global perturbation of the electrical response of damage tissue
blocks cell proliferation and subsequent regenerative outgrowth
after Xenopus tadpole tail amputation and zebra ﬁsh ﬁn amputa-
tion (Adams et al., 2007; Tseng et al., 2010; Monteiro et al., 2014).
Taken together, these observations suggest that Vmem-sensitive
changes in cell proliferation are cell type and context speciﬁc. A
recent study published by Pai et al. (2015) supports this idea. This
study took a comparative approach to identify conserved and di-
vergent voltage-sensitive signaling pathways in developing Xeno-
pus embryos, axolotl spinal cord regeneration and human me-
senchymal stem cell differentiation. The authors identiﬁed several
pathways that were similarly activated across species and across
cell types in response to prolonged depolarization (Pai et al., 2015).
Interestingly, there were also species/cell type speciﬁc responses
to prolonged depolarization supporting the idea that changes in
Vmem can differentially regulate cellular responses based on de-
velopmental context and cell type. How changes in Vmem are
detected and transduced into diverse biochemical pathways based
on cellular identity are still not clear.
Finally, to determine if the changes in ependymoglial cell
Vmem after injury acts in a cell autonomous manner we examined
the contribution of cells overexpressing Kir2.1-GFP construct to
the regenerate. Here we found that cells overexpressing Kir2.1 did
not migrate or partake in regeneration of the spinal cord, sug-
gesting that changes in Vmem act in a cell autonomous manner in
axolotl ependymoglial cells (Fig. 5S). Similarly, we overexpressed
Exp-1 and tracked GFPþ cells throughout regeneration and again
it appeared that GFPþ cells did not contribute to the regenerate.
However, Exp-1 was not tagged with a ﬂuorescent protein so the
construct was co-electroporated with a GFP plasmid. Therefore,
we do not deﬁnitely know that all GFPþ cells were also expressing
Exp-1.
3.3. Dynamic changes in membrane potential regulate gene
expression
To investigate how changes in ependymoglial cell Vmem could
lead to a physiologic response to injury we performed microarray
analysis and compared changes in gene expression in vehicle
treated and depolarized samples. Using this approach we identi-
ﬁed a group of genes that are upregulated within 1 day post injury
and then rapidly return to homeostatic levels (Fig. 7A). From this
group of genes we identiﬁed c-Fos as being upregulated speciﬁ-
cally in the ependymoglial cells after injury and this increase in
c-Fos levels is inhibited in ivermectin treated spinal cords (Fig. 7
and Fig. 8S). c-Fos is a well characterized early response gene that
has been studied in many model systems and is known to regulate
a diversity of signaling pathways and cellular processes including,
but not limited to, proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis
(Bakiri et al., 2007; Herdegen and Leah, 1998; Ueyama et al., 1997;
van Dam and Castellazzi, 2001; Vial et al., 2003). Here we show
that c-Fos upregulation is necessary to promote proliferation in
ependymoglial cells in response to injury and in addition we show
that inhibition of ERK signaling, that is necessary for phosphor-
ylation of c-Fos and its subsequent entry into the nucleus, also
inhibits regeneration (Fig. 9). It is interesting to note that the ERK/
c-Fos signaling cascade is a well established pathway associated
with activity-dependent synaptic signaling associated with neu-
ronal ﬁring (West and Greenberg, 2011). Our data suggests that
ERK/c-Fos signaling represents a conserved voltage-sensitive sig-
naling network, even in non-excitable cells such as ependymoglial
cells. It will be exciting in the future to determine if the voltage-
sensitive machinery that leads to ERK activation after injury is the
same as during neuronal ﬁring.
Taken together this data show that upon injury to the spinal
cord the ependymoglial cells experience a rapid and dynamic
change in resting membrane potential that is an essential signal to
induce downstream gene expression changes, like activation of
c-Fos to drive the ependymoglial cell response to injury to pro-
mote a pro-regenerative response (Fig. 10). c-Fos is well char-
acterized to heterodimerize with another early response gene
c-Jun to form the AP-1 transcription factor (Norwitz et al., 2002;
van Dam and Castellazzi, 2001). In axolotl we have found no evi-
dence for upregulation of c-Jun in ependymoglial cells, however it
is found in the nucleus of neurons close to the injury site (data not
shown). It will be interesting in the future to determine other
potential interacting partners of c-Fos in the ependymoglial cells.
In addition, it will be essential to investigate the other potential
signals, like changes in other ions or mechanical transduction that
act in parallel or directing downstream of membrane potential to
illicit a regenerative response.
4. Materials and methods
4.1. Animal handling
All axolotls used in these experiments were bred at the Uni-
versity of Minnesota in accordance with IACUAC protocol No.1411-
Injury
Vmem
Depolarization/Repolariz
ation
dpErk
c-Fos
Ependymoglial Cell 
Proliferation
Fig. 10. Schematic diagram of ependymoglial response to Injury. After injury to the
spinal cord the membranes of the ependymal glial cells rostral and caudal to the
injury site under go a rapid (7 h) depolarization and repolarization (24 h). This
transient depolarization event is essential to activate genes expression cascades
that are to initiate a pro-regenerative response. We identiﬁed one of these genes
c-Fos, whose activation is inhibited by maintaining cells is a prolonged state of
membrane depolarization, this subsequently inhibits regeneration.
K. Sabin et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 14–25
22

32049A. Prior to all in vivo experiments animals (3–5 cm) were
anesthetized in 0.01% p-amino benzocaine (Sigma). Spinal cord
ablations were performed 7–10 muscle bundles caudal to the
cloaca. Using a sterile 27-gage needle the skin and muscle super-
ﬁcial to the spinal cord was removed. A length of exposed spinal
cord approximately 500 μm was subsequently removed.
4.2. In vivo imaging of ependymoglial cells
Ependymoglial cells were labeled via injection and electro-
poration of plasmid containing the glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein
(GFAP) promoter driving expression of a green ﬂuorescent protein
(GFP) (Echeverri and Tanaka, 2003). 24 h post injection the ani-
mals were screened for the presence of ﬂuorescent cells in the
spinal cord. An image was taken of the cells before injury. A lesion
in the spinal cord was performed adjacent to the labeled cells,
positioning the cells either rostral or caudal to the injury site. An
image was taken directly after injury was performed, the position
and number of the cells was recorded. Cells were imaged using an
Inverted Zeiss Apotome Microscope (Carl Zeiss) at 10  magniﬁ-
cation every day until the end of the regeneration period; this was
on average 14 days post injury.
4.3. Immunohistochemistry
Tissue was harvested and ﬁxed in fresh 4% paraformaldehyde
(Sigma) overnight at 4 °C. Then tails were washed three times in
phosphate buffered saline þ0.1% Tween 20 (PBST). Next the tails
were incubated in a 50:50 solution of PBST and 30% sucrose. Fi-
nally, tails were transferred to 30% sucrose solution and allowed to
equilibrate overnight at 4 °C. The next day samples were em-
bedded for longitudinal or cross-sectioning in TissueTek (Sakura)
and stored at 20 °C.
For immunohistochemistry, tails were sectioned at either 10 or
20 μm using a Leica CM1850 cryostat. The following primary an-
tibodies were used for immunoﬂuorescent staining: anti-c-Fos
(1:100, Santa Cruz), anti-glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (1:100 Che-
micon), anti-5-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU)(1:100 Sigma) or
anti- glycine receptor (1:100 Millipore). All sections were in-
cubated in 70° PBS for 20 min and subsequently washed with
phosphate buffered saline þ0.1% Triton-X (PBSTx) 3 times. To
prevent non-speciﬁc binding of the antibodies the sections were
blocked for 1 h at room temperature in blocking buffer (PBSTxþ2%
bovine serum albumin þ2% goat serum). Primary antibodies were
diluted in blocking buffer and slides were stained overnight at
4 °C. The next day, slides were washed four times with phosphate
buffered saline plus 0.1% Tween 20 and then incubated with sec-
ondary antibody (Invitrogen) diluted in blocking buffer (1:200) for
2 h at room temp and cell nuclei were counterstained with 4’,6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (1:10,000). After secondary in-
cubation the slides were washed four times with phosphate buf-
fered saline plus 0.1% Tween 20 and mounted in 80% glycerol.
For BrdU samples, the slides were treated with 4 N hydro-
chloric acid (HCl) for 10 minutes are room temperature and wa-
shed three times in phosphate buffered saline plus 0.1% Tween 20
then treated as mentioned above. All samples were imaged using
an inverted Leica DMI 6000B ﬂuorescent microscope.
4.4. Whole mount immunohistochemistry
Tissue were harvested 7 days post injury and ﬁxed in freshly
made 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma) overnight at 4 °C. Tails were
subsequently washed three times in phosphate buffered saline
plus 0.1% Tween 20 and treated with 10 micrograms per milliliter
of Proteinase K (Roche) for 10 min. After Proteinase K treatment
the tails were washed an additional three times in phosphate
buffered saline plus 0.1% Tween 20. To further permeabilize the
tissue, the tails were washed with phosphate buffered saline plus
0.1% Triton X100, three times. To block non-speciﬁc binding of the
antibodies the tails were blocked for 1 h at room temp in blocking
buffer (phosphate buffered saline plus 0.1% Tween 20þ10% goat
serum). Then the tails were incubated with mouse anti-β-III tu-
bulin antibody (Sigma) diluted 1:500 in blocking buffer overnight
at 4 °C. The next day tails were washed four times in phosphate
buffered saline plus 0.1% Tween 20 before being incubated with
goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 568 (Invitrogen) secondary antibody
for 2 h at room temperature in blocking buffer. After the secondary
incubation the nuclei were stained with DAPI (1:1000) for 10 min
in phosphate buffered saline plus 0.1% Tween 20. To wash off ex-
cess secondary antibody and DAPI the tails were washed four
times in phosphate buffered saline plus 0.1% Tween 20. After
washing, tails were gradually stepped into methanol by incubating
with 25%, 50%, 75% then 100% methanol: PBST solution and then
stored at 20 °C until imaged. Prior to imaging, the tails were
cleared using 1:2 solution of benzyl alcohol and benzyl benzoate
(BABB) (Sigma) for 20 min and mounted onto a cover slip using
1:2 solution of benzyl alcohol and benzyl benzoate (BABB) as the
mounting medium.
4.5. In vivo modulation of Vmem using pharmacologic agents or
plasmid electroporation
Ivermectin (Sigma) was pressure injected at a ﬁnal concentra-
tion of 10 micromolarþphosphate buffered saline þ1% Fast Green
into the spinal cord central canal immediately prior to injury.
Control axolotls were injected with phosphate buffered salineþ1%
Fast Green. After injection and injury, the spinal cords were al-
lowed to regenerate for 7 days then animals were harvested for
immunohistochemistry as described above.
For overexpression experiments of selected ion channels the
indicated plasmids were diluted to 0.1 micrograms per microliter in
phosphate buffered saline þ1% Fast Green. After injection into the
spinal cord the injection site was electroporated (5 square pulses,
50 milliseconds, 50 V using an ECM830 Electro Square Porator, BTM
Harvard Apparatus) twice. To induce hyperpolarization we over-
expressed the constitutively active potassium channel Kir2.1 har-
boring Y242F mutation and a green ﬂuorescent protein tag (Hinard
et al., 2008). To induce depolarization we overexpressed the GABA-
gated cation channel Exp-1 and co-injected a plasmid that con-
tained a green ﬂuorescent protein tagged H2A construct, which
allows the electroporated cells to be identiﬁed (Beg and Jorgensen,
2003; Echeverri and Tanaka, 2003). All plasmids drove expression
of the transgene with the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter. All
injections were performed using PV820 Pneumatic PicoPump mi-
croinjection setup (Echeverri and Tanaka, 2003).
4.6. Imaging Vmem dynamics after injury
The ﬂuorescent voltage indicator dye, DiBAC4(3) (bis-[1,3-dibu-
tylbarbituric acid]trimethine oxonol) (Invitrogen) was used to de-
termine the change in Vmem during axolotl spinal cord regenera-
tion. Fluorescent images were taken in uninjured, immediately after
injury, 7 hours post injury and 24 h post injury. DiBAC was injected
10 min prior to imaging for each point at a ﬁnal concentration of 10
micromolarþPBSþ1% Fast Green. Fluorescent images were taken
using a Leica DMI 6000B Scope and Leica DFC 365 FX camera. The
excitation/emission spectra is 495/519 nm and subsequent images
were exported as TIFF ﬁles and were pseudocolored using ImageJ.
The average ﬂuorescence intensity of injured spinal cords was
measured using ImageJ and normalized to the average ﬂuorescence
intensity of uninjured spinal cords.
K. Sabin et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 14–25
23

4.7. Acid fuchsin orange G (AfoG) staining
Tissue samples were collected at various time points through-
out regeneration and were ﬁxed in fresh made 4% paraformalde-
hyde overnight. Samples were processed for longitudinal sec-
tioning as described above. After sectioning, the tissue samples
were post ﬁxed in Bouin’s solution (Sigma) overnight and then
washed with running distilled water for 30 min. After washing, the
samples were stained by successive 5 min incubations in 1%
phosphomolybdic acid (Sigma), acid fuchsin orange G solution
(0.5% aniline blue (Waldeck-Chroma), 1% orange G (Flucka), 1.5%
acid fuchsin (Sigma)) and 0.5% acetic acid. Between incubations in
staining solutions the slides were washed for 5 min in distilled
water. Upon completion of the staining protocol the samples were
dehydrated by successive incubations in 96% ethanol for 2 min
then 100% ethanol for 2 min then xylene for 5 min. Finally, the
slides were embedded in 80% glycerol and imaged using an
Olympus BX40 inverted microscope.
4.8. In vivo chloride measurement
Ivermectin and vehicle treated animals were injured as described
above. Uninjured or 1 day post injury spinal cord tissue was collected
and chloride concentration was determined using the calorimetric
Chloride Assay Kit (Abnova) as per the manufacturers instructions.
Tissue from 5 animals was pooled and homogenized in autoclaved
deionized water representing one biological replicate. Absorbance
readings were taken at 610 nm with a SpectraMax M2 plate reader
(Molecular Devices). Absorbance readings were taken in triplicate and
averaged for each treatment and chloride concentration was calcu-
lated using a standard curve.
4.9. Microarray analysis
Custom Affymetrix GeneChip Amby002 arrays were used for
genome wide gene expression analysis. This array has approxi-
mately 20,000 unique probe sets. Probe annotations are from Sal-
Site (www.ambystoma.org).
Control and ivermectin treated spinal cord samples were taken
at 1 day post injury. Samples were also processed at 1, 3 and 7 days
post injury and compared to control uninjured tissue. Total RNA
was extracted using Trizol (Invitrogen). Each sample was com-
posed of pooled tissue from 10 axolotls. All probe preparation,
hybridization and quality control was performed by the DNA Mi-
croarray Core Facility at the Max Planck Institute CBG, Dresden.
Array quality and differential gene expression was assessed
using standard microarray techniques in R/Bioconductor using
custom scripts. All arrays were deemed of high quality and were
included in all following analysis. Background correction, normal-
ization, and expression summaries were obtained using the robust
multi-array average (RMA) algorithm. Differential gene expression
was examined using the limma R/Bioconductor package, p-values
were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini and
Hochberg method. The ﬁnal list of differentially regulated genes
was further analyses for pathway interaction using the Ingenuity
Pathway analysis software. Data submission number is GSE71934.
Inhibition of Extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) and
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling.
To selectively inhibit ERK signaling, 10 micromolar of the in-
hibitor FR180202 (Tocris, Cat. No.3706) was pressure injected into
the central canal of the spinal cord directly prior to spinal cord
ablation. Control animals were injected with an equivalent con-
centration of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).
To inhibit JNK signaling 10 micromolar of inhibitor SP600125
(Tocris, Cat. No. 1496) was pressure injected into the central canal of
the spinal cord directly before injury. Control animals were injected
with an equivalent concentration of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).
4.10. Western blot analysis
Control or ivermectin injected samples were harvested and placed
directly into radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA buffer)
containing a protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Cell Signaling
Technology). The tissue was homogenized using the pestle mortar
mixer (Argos Technologies), centrifuged and the supernatant was
placed into a new tube. The protein concentration was determined
using absorbance at 280 nm. Samples were separated on a 4–12% Bis-
Tris NuPAGE gel (Life Technologies) and transferred onto a ni-
trocellulose membrane. Membranes were probed with anti-Erk or
anti-phospho-Erk antibodies (Cell Signaling Technologies) overnight at
4 °C. After washing, membranes were incubated with goat anti-rabbit
secondary (Thermo Scientiﬁc) and developed using SuperSignal West
Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo Scientiﬁc).
5. Statistical analyses
All results are presented as mean 7 s.e.m. unless otherwise
stated.
Analyses
were
performed
using
Microsoft
EXcel
or
GraphPad Prism. Data set means were compared using ANOVA for
three or more tests. When two groups were compared a Students
t-test was used. Differences between groups was considered sig-
niﬁcant at three different levels (p-values of o0.05, o0.01 and
o0.001) and are indicated in the ﬁgure legends.
Acknowledgments
We thank M. Levin for kind gifts of plasmids. We thank
members of the Echeverri lab for feedback on the project. K. Sabin
was funded in part by a Ray Anderson Fellowship from UMN and
by the NIH T32 Stem Cell Biology Training Program at the UMN.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in
the online version at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.10.012.
References
Abate, C., Baker, S.J., Lees-Miller, S.P., Anderson, C.W., Marshak, D.R., Curran, T.,
1993. Dimerization and DNA binding alter phosphorylation of Fos and Jun. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 6766–6770.
Adams, D.S., Masi, A., Levin, M., 2007. Hþ Pump-dependent Changes in Membrane
Voltage are an Early Mechanism Necessary and Sufﬁcient to Induce Xenopus
Tail Regeneration. Development. 134. Cambridge, England, pp. 1323–1335.
Alvarado, A.S., 2000. Regeneration in the metazoans: why does it happen? Bioes-
says 22, 578–590.
Bakiri, L., Takada, Y., Radolf, M., Eferl, R., Yaniv, M., Wagner, E.F., Matsuo, K., 2007.
Role of heterodimerization of c-Fos and Fra1 proteins in osteoclast differ-
entiation. Bone 40, 867–875.
Barghouth, P.G., Thiruvalluvan, M., Oviedo, N.J., 2015. Bioelectrical regulation of cell
cycle and the planarian model system. Biochim. Biophys. Acta.
Beane, W.S., Morokuma, J., Lemire, J.M., Levin, M., 2013. Bioelectric Signaling Reg-
ulates Head and Organ Size During Planarian Regeneration. Development. 140.
Cambridge, England, pp. 313–322.
Becker, C.G., Diez Del Corral, R., 2015. Neural Development and Regeneration: It’s
All in Your Spinal Cord. Development. 142. Cambridge, England, pp. 811–816.
Beg, A.A., Jorgensen, E.M., 2003. EXP-1 is an excitatory GABA-gated cation channel.
Nat. Neurosci. 6, 1145–1152.
Blackiston, D., Adams, D.S., Lemire, J.M., Lobikin, M., Levin, M., 2011. Transmem-
brane potential of GlyCl-expressing instructor cells induces a neoplastic-like
conversion of melanocytes via a serotonergic pathway. Dis. Models Mech. 4,
67–85.
Blackiston, D.J., McLaughlin, K.A., Levin, M., 2009. Bioelectric controls of cell pro-
liferation: ion channels, membrane voltage and the cell cycle. Cell Cycle 8,
3527–3536.
K. Sabin et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 14–25
24

Borena, B.M., Martens, A., Broeckx, S.Y., Meyer, E., Chiers, K., Duchateau, L., Spaas, J.
H., 2015. Regenerative skin wound healing in mammals: state-of-the-art on
growth factor and stem cell based treatments. Cell. Physiol. Biochem.: Int. J.
Exp. Cell. Physiol. Biochem. Pharmacol. 36, 1–23.
Borgens, R.B., 1986. The role of natural and applied electric ﬁelds in neuronal re-
generation and development. Prog. Clin. Biol. Res. 210, 239–250.
Borgens, R.B., Blight, A.R., Murphy, D.J., 1986. Axonal regeneration in spinal cord
injury: a perspective and new technique. J. Comp. Neurol. 250, 157–167.
Borgens, R.B., Vanable Jr., J.W., Jaffe, L.F., 1977. Bioelectricity and regeneration: large
currents leave the stumps of regenerating newt limbs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
74, 4528–4532.
Brockes, J.P., 1991. Some current problems in amphibian limb regeneration. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 331, 287–290.
Brockes, J.P., 1997. Amphibian limb regeneration: rebuilding a complex structure.
Science 276, 81–87.
Butler, E.G., Ward, M.B., 1965. Reconstitution of the spinal cord following ablation
in urodele larvae. J. Exp. Zool. 160, 47–65.
Butler, E.G., Ward, M.B., 1967. Reconstitution of the spinal cord after ablation in
adult Triturus. Dev. Biol. 15, 464–486.
Chaar, Z.Y., Tsilﬁdis, C., 2006. Newt opportunities for understanding the dediffer-
entiation process. Sci. World J. 6 (Suppl. 1), 55–64.
Chernoff, E.A., 1988. The role of endogenous heparan sulfate proteoglycan in ad-
hesion and neurite outgrowth from dorsal root ganglia. Tissue Cell 20, 165–178.
Chernoff, E.A., 1996a. Spinal cord regeneration: a phenomenon unique to urodeles?
Int. J. Dev. Biol. 40, 823–831.
Chernoff, E.A., 1996b. Spinal cord regeneration: a phenomenon unique to urodeles?
Int. J. Dev. Biol. 40, 823–831.
Chernoff, E.A., O’Hara, C.M., Bauerle, D., Bowling, M., 2000. Matrix metalloprotei-
nase production in regenerating axolotl spinal cord Wound repair and re-
generation: ofﬁcial publication of the Wound Healing Society [and] the Eur-
opean Tissue Repair Society. 8, pp. 282–291.
Chernoff, E.A., Robertson, S., 1990. Epidermal growth factor and the onset of epi-
thelial epidermal wound healing. Tissue Cell 22, 123–135.
Chernoff, E.A., Sato, K., Corn, A., Karcavich, R.E., 2002. Spinal cord regeneration:
intrinsic properties and emerging mechanisms. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 13,
361–368.
Chernoff, E.A., Stocum, D.L., Nye, H.L., Cameron, J.A., 2003. Urodele spinal cord re-
generation and related processes. Dev. Dyn.: Off. publ. Am. Assoc. Anat. 226,
295–307.
Clarke, J.D., Alexander, R., Holder, N., 1988. Regeneration of descending axons in the
spinal cord of the axolotl. Neurosci Lett 89, 1–6.
Clarke, J.D.W., Ferretti, P., 1998. CNS Regeneration in lower vertebrates. In: Ferretti,
P.G.J. (Ed.), Cellular and Molecular Basis of Regeneration. Wiley and sons, New
York, pp. 255–269.
Clarke, J.D.W., Tonge, D.A., Holder, N., 1986. Stage-dependent restoration of sensory
dorsal columns following spinal cord transections in anuran tadpoles. Proc. Roy.
Soc. Lond. 227, 67–82.
Cregg, J.M., DePaul, M.A., Filous, A.R., Lang, B.T., Tran, A., Silver, J., 2014. Functional
regeneration beyond the glial scar. Exp. Neurol. 253, 197–207.
Diaz Quiroz, J.F., Echeverri, K., 2013. Spinal cord regeneration: where ﬁsh, frogs and
salamanders lead the way, can we follow? Biochem. J. 451, 353–364.
Diaz Quiroz, J.F., Tsai, E., Coyle, M., Sehm, T., Echeverri, K., 2014. Precise control of
miR-125b levels is required to create a regeneration-permissive environment
after spinal cord injury: a cross-species comparison between salamander and
rat. Dis. Models Mech. 7, 601–611.
Echeverri, K., Tanaka, E.M., 2002. Ectoderm to mesoderm lineage switching during
axolotl tail regeneration. Science 298, 1993–1996.
Echeverri, K., Tanaka, E.M., 2003. Electroporation as a tool to study in vivo spinal
cord regeneration. Dev. Dyn. 226, 418–425.
Fei, J.F., Schuez, M., Tazaki, A., Taniguchi, Y., Roensch, K., Tanaka, E.M., 2014. CRISPR-
mediated genomic deletion of Sox2 in the axolotl shows a requirement in
spinal cord neural stem cell ampliﬁcation during tail regeneration. Stem Cell
Rep. 3, 444–459.
Ferretti, P., Zhang, F., O’Neill, P., 2003. Changes in spinal cord regenerative ability
through phylogenesis and development: lessons to be learnt. Dev. Dyn.: Off.
Publ. Am. Assoc. Anat. 226, 245–256.
Frobisch, N.B., Shubin, N.H., 2011. Salamander limb development: integrating genes,
morphology, and fossils. Dev. Dyn.: Off. Publ. Am. Assoc. Anat. 240, 1087–1099.
Gardiner, D.M., Bryant, S.V., 1996. Molecular mechanisms in the control of limb
regeneration: the role of homeobox genes. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 40, 797–805.
Gardiner, D.M., Carlson, M.R., Roy, S., 1999. Towards a functional analysis of limb
regeneration. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 10, 385–393.
Gardiner, D.M., Endo, T., Bryant, S.V., 2002. The molecular basis of amphibian limb
regeneration: integrating the old with the new. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 13,
345–352.
Goss, R.J., 1969. Principles of Regeneration. Academic Press, New York.
Heinrich, C., Spagnoli, F.M., Berninger, B., 2015. In vivo reprogramming for tissue
repair. Nat. Cell Biol. 17, 204–211.
Herdegen, T., Leah, J.D., 1998. Inducible and constitutive transcription factors in the
mammalian nervous system: control of gene expression by Jun, Fos and Krox,
and CREB/ATF proteins. Brain Res. Brain Rese. Rev. 28, 370–490.
Hinard, V., Belin, D., Konig, S., Bader, C.R., Bernheim, L., 2008. Initiation of Human
Myoblast Differentiation via Dephosphorylation of Kir2.1 Kþ Channels at Tyr-
osine 242. Development. 135. Cambridge, England, pp. 859–867.
Kumar, A., Brockes, J.P., 2012. Nerve dependence in tissue, organ, and appendage
regeneration. Trends Neurosci. 35, 691–699.
Lepousez, G., Nissant, A., Lledo, P.M., 2015. Adult Neurogenesis and the future of the
rejuvenating brain circuits. Neuron 86, 387–401.
Levin, M., 2007. Large-scale biophysics: ion ﬂows and regeneration. Trends Cell
Biol. 17, 261–270.
Levin, M., 2009a. Bioelectric mechanisms in regeneration: Unique aspects and fu-
ture perspectives. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 20, 543–556.
Levin, M., 2009b. Regeneration: Recent advances, major puzzles, and biomedical
opportunities. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 20, 515–516.
McHedlishvili, L., Epperlein, H.H., Telzerow, A., Tanaka, E.M., 2007. A clonal analysis
of neural progenitors during axolotl spinal cord regeneration reveals evidence
for both spatially restricted and multipotent progenitors. Development 134,
2083–2093.
McHedlishvili, L., Mazurov, V., Grassme, K.S., Goehler, K., Robl, B., Tazaki, A.,
Roensch, K., Duemmler, A., Tanaka, E.M., 2012. Reconstitution of the central and
peripheral nervous system during salamander tail regeneration. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 109, E2258–E2266.
Monaghan, J.R., Walker, J.A., Page, R.B., Putta, S., Beachy, C.K., Voss, S.R., 2007. Early
gene expression during natural spinal cord regeneration in the salamander
Ambystoma mexicanum. J. Neurochem. 101, 27–40.
Monteiro, J., Aires, R., Becker, J.D., Jacinto, A., Certal, A.C., Rodríguez-León, J., 2014.
V-ATPase proton pumping activity is required for adult zebraﬁsh appendage
regeneration. PLoS One 9 (3), e92594. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0092594.
Norwitz, E.R., Xu, S., Xu, J., Spiryda, L.B., Park, J.S., Jeong, K.H., McGee, E.A., Kaiser, U.
B., 2002. Direct binding of AP-1 (Fos/Jun) proteins to a SMAD binding element
facilitates both gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)- and activin-mediated
transcriptional activation of the mouse GnRH receptor gene. J. Biol. Chem. 277,
37469–37478.
O’Hara, C.M., Egar, M.W., Chernoff, E.A., 1992. Reorganization of the ependyma
during axolotl spinal cord regeneration: changes in intermediate ﬁlament and
ﬁbronectin expression. Dev. Dyn.: Off. Publ. Am. Assoc. Anat. 193, 103–115.
Oshitari, T., Dezawa, M., Okada, S., Takano, M., Negishi, H., Horie, H., Sawada, H.,
Tokuhisa, T., Adachi-Usami, E., 2002. The role of c-fos in cell death and re-
generation of retinal ganglion cells. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 43,
2442–2449.
Ozkucur, N., Epperlein, H.H., Funk, R.H., 2010. Ion imaging during axolotl tail re-
generation in vivo. Dev. Dyn.: Off. Publ. Am. Assoc. Anat. 239, 2048–2057.
Pai, V.P., Martyniuk, C.J., Echeverri, K., Sundelacruz, S., Kaplan, D., Levin, M., 2015.
Genome-wide analysis reveals conserved transcriptional responses down-
stream of resting potential change in Xenopus embryos, axolotl regeneration,
and human mesenchymal cell differentiation. Regeneration (in press).
Poss, D.K., Keating, T.M., Nechiporuk, A., 2003. Tales of regeneration in Zebraﬁsh.
Dev Dyn. 226, 202–210.
Quiroz, J.F.D., Echeverri, K., 2012. In vivo modulation of microRNA levels during
spinal cord regeneration. Lab. Methods Cell Biol.: Biochem. Cell Cult. 112,
235–246.
Robinson, G.A., 1996. Changes in the expression of transcription factors ATF-2 and
Fra-2 after axotomy and during regeneration in rat retinal ganglion cells. Brain
Res. Mol. Brain Res. 41, 57–64.
Scadding, S.R., Maden, M., 1986. The effects of local application of retinoic acid on
limb development and regeneration in tadpoles of Xenopus laevis. J. Embryol.
Exp. Morphol. 91, 55–63.
Schnapp, E., Kragl, M., Rubin, L., Tanaka, E.M., 2005. Hedgehog signaling controls
dorsoventral patterning, blastema cell proliferation and cartilage induction
during axolotl tail regeneration. Development 132, 3243–3253.
Sehm, T., Sachse, C., Frenzel, C., Echeverri, K., 2009. miR-196 is an essential early-
stage regulator of tail regeneration, upstream of key spinal cord patterning
events. Dev. Biol. 334, 468–480.
Silver, J., Miller, J.H., 2004. Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5
(2), 146–156.
Stewart, S., Rojas-Munoz, A., Izpisua Belmonte, J.C., 2007. Bioelectricity and epi-
morphic regeneration. BioEssays: News Rev. Mol. Cell. Dev. Biol. 29, 1133–1137.
Tanaka, E.M., 2003. Regeneration: if they can do it, why can’t we? Cell 113,
559–562.
Tanaka, E.M., Reddien, P.W., 2011. The cellular basis for animal regeneration. Dev.
Cell 21, 172–185.
Tseng, A., Levin, M., 2013. Cracking the bioelectric code: probing endogenous ionic
controls of pattern formation. Commun. Integr. Biol. 6, e22595.
Tseng, A.S., Beane, W.S., Lemire, J.M., Masi, A., Levin, M., 2010. Induction of verte-
brate regeneration by a transient sodium current. J. Neurosci.: Ofﬁ. J. Soc.
Neurosci. 30, 13192–13200.
Tseng, A.S., Carneiro, K., Lemire, J.M., Levin, M., 2011. HDAC activity is required
during Xenopus tail regeneration. PloS One 6, e26382.
Tseng, A.S., Levin, M., 2008. Tail regeneration in Xenopus laevis as a model for
understanding tissue repair. J. Dent. Res. 87, 806–816.
Tseng, A.S., Levin, M., 2012. Transducing bioelectric signals into epigenetic path-
ways during tadpole tail regeneration. Anat. Rec. 295, 1541–1551.
Ueyama, T., Sakoda, T., Kawashima, S., Hiraoka, E., Hirata, K., Akita, H., Yokoyama,
M., 1997. Activated RhoA stimulates c-fos gene expression in myocardial cells.
Circ. Res. 81, 672–678.
van Dam, H., Castellazzi, M., 2001. Distinct roles of Jun: Fos and Jun: ATF dimers in
oncogenesis. Oncogene 20, 2453–2464.
Vesely, P.W., Staber, P.B., Hoeﬂer, G., Kenner, L., 2009. Translational regulation
mechanisms of AP-1 proteins. Mutat. Res. 682, 7–12.
Vial, E., Sahai, E., Marshall, C.J., 2003. ERK-MAPK signaling coordinately regulates
activity of Rac1 and RhoA for tumor cell motility. Cancer Cell 4, 67–79.
West, A.E., Greenberg, M.E., 2011. Neuronal activity-regulated gene transcription in
synapse development and cognitive function. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.
3.
Yamakawa, H., Ieda, M., 2015. Strategies for heart regeneration: approaches ranging
from induced pluripotent stem cells to direct cardiac reprogramming. Int. Heart
J. 56, 1–5.
K. Sabin et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 14–25
25

===== Sabourin2009_StemCells_SpinalCordNSCniche =====
THE STEM CELL NICHE
A Mesenchymal-Like ZEB11 Niche Harbors Dorsal Radial Glial
Fibrillary Acidic Protein-Positive Stem Cells in the Spinal Cord
JEAN-CHARLES SABOURIN,a KARIN B. ACKEMA,b DAVID OHAYON,a PIERRE-OLIVIER GUICHET,a FLORENCE E. PERRIN,a
ALAIN GARCES,a CHANTAL RIPOLL,a JEROEN CHARITE´,c LIONEL SIMONNEAU,d H. KETTENMANN,e AZEL ZINE,a
ALAIN PRIVAT,a JEAN VALMIER,a ALEXANDRE PATTYN,a JEAN-PHILIPPE HUGNOTa
aInstitut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale (INSERM) U583, Physiopathologie et The´rapie des
de´ﬁcits sensoriels et moteurs, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Hoˆpital St. ELOI, Montpellier, France;
bGrowth & Development, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland; cDepartment of Cell Biology,
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; dLaboratoire interdisciplinaire de recherche en didactique
et formation, University Montpellier, Montpellier, France; eMax-Delbru¨ck-Centrum fu¨r Molekulare Medizin
(MDC), Berlin, Germany
Key Words. Neural stem cells • Spinal cord • Niche • ZEB1
ABSTRACT
In humans and rodents the adult spinal cord harbors neu-
ral stem cells located around the central canal. Their iden-
tity, precise location, and speciﬁc signaling are still ill-
deﬁned and controversial. We report here on a detailed
analysis of this niche. Using microdissection and glial
ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-green ﬂuorescent protein
(GFP) transgenic mice, we demonstrate that neural stem
cells are mostly dorsally located GFAP1 cells lying epen-
dymally and subependymally that extend radial processes
toward the pial surface. The niche also harbors doublecor-
tin protein (Dcx)1 Nkx6.11 neurons sending processes into
the lumen. Cervical and lumbar spinal cord neural stem
cells maintain expression of speciﬁc rostro-caudal Hox
gene combinations and the niche shows high levels of sig-
naling proteins (CD15, Jagged1, Hes1, differential screen-
ing-selected gene aberrative in neuroblastoma [DAN]).
More surprisingly, the niche displays mesenchymal traits
such as expression of epithelial-mesenchymal-transition
zinc ﬁnger E-box-binding protein 1 (ZEB1) transcription
factor and smooth muscle actin. We found ZEB1 to be
essential for neural stem cell survival in vitro. Prolifera-
tion within the niche progressively ceases around 13 weeks
when the spinal cord reaches its ﬁnal size, suggesting an
active role in postnatal development. In addition to hippo-
campus and subventricular zone niches, adult spinal cord
constitutes a third central nervous system stem cell niche
with speciﬁc signaling, cellular, and structural characteris-
tics that could possibly be manipulated to alleviate spinal
cord traumatic and degenerative diseases. STEM CELLS
2009;27:2722–2733
Disclosure of potential conﬂicts of interest is found at the end of this article.
INTRODUCTION
Compared with brain neural stem cell niches (subventricular
zone [SVZ]) and hippocampus), very little is known about stem
cells in the adult spinal cord [1–3]. Bona ﬁde neural stem cells
able to form long-term passageable neurospheres appear to be
located only around the central canal [4]. After spinal cord
trauma and also in various degenerative diseases, these migrate
to the lesion site and differentiate into both astrocytes and oli-
godendrocytes [5]. This may contribute to the exacerbation of
the glial scar or inversely to axonal regeneration. Formation of
neuronal-like cells and oligodendrocytes from the adult spinal
cord both in physiological and pathological situations has also
been reported [6–10]. The precise identity and diversity of
stem/progenitor cells around the central canal is not yet known.
Single cell puriﬁcation and studies with transgenic animals
expressing green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) in cells around the
canal led to the conclusion that neural stem cells are glial ﬁbril-
lary acidic protein (GFAP)-negative ependymal cells [11, 12].
Stem cells in the adult spinal cord can also be sorted based on
their high aldehyde dehydrogenase activity and these can then
be induced to differentiate in vitro to form motoneurons thus
opening new approaches to treat motoneuron disease [13]. We
recently reported the existence of a Sox2þ Nestinþ stem/pro-
genitor cell niche around the human central canal cord [14].
Author contributions: J.C.S., K.B.A. P.O.G., F.E.P., and C.R.: conception and design; D.O., J.C., L.S., H.K., A.Z., and A.P.: provision
of study material; A.G.: collection and/or assembly of data; A.P. and J.V.: ﬁnancial support; J.P. H.: conception and design, manuscript
writing, ﬁnal approval of manuscript.
A.P. and J.P.H. contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence: Jean-Philippe Hugnot, Ph.D., Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale (INSERM) U583,
Physiopathologie et The´rapie des de´ﬁcits sensoriels et moteurs, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Hoˆpital St. ELOI,
Montpellier, France. Tel: 00 33 4 99 63 60 08; Fax: 00 33 4 99 63 60 20; e-mail: hugnot@univ-montp2.fr
Received May 11, 2009;
accepted for publication September 8, 2009; ﬁrst published online in STEM CELLS EXPRESS September 25, 2009. V
C AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2009/$30.00/0 doi: 10.1002/stem.226
STEM CELLS 2009;27:2722–2733 www.StemCells.com

The two brain neural stem cell niches have been exten-
sively described but on the contrary the cellular composition,
organization, and molecular signalings in the spinal cord
niche remain ill-deﬁned. Here we report a detailed analysis of
this third central nervous system (CNS) niche and show an
unexpected cellular and molecular complexity. Neural stem
cells
were
accurately
identiﬁed
as
mostly
dorsal
radial
GFAPþ cells lying in a multicellular niche displaying mesen-
chymal features. These cells maintain correct rostro-caudal
Hox gene pattern and require the epithelial-mesenchymal tran-
sition transcription factor zinc ﬁnger E-box-binding protein 1
(ZEB1) for their expansion in vitro. A better knowledge of
this niche may ultimately allow its manipulation, permitting
endogenous regeneration of the spinal cord.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Spinal Cord Dissection and Neural
Stem Cell Culture
Mice were handled in compliance with French regulations. Spinal
cords from 12- to 15-week-old OF1 wild-type (Janvier, Le Gen-
est-Saint-Isle, France) or transgenic (hGFAP-GFP [15]) mice
euthanized with CO2 were dissected and rapidly processed for
neurosphere assay as described in Johansson et al. [12] without
the bovine serum albumin step. For ﬂow cytometry, erythrocytes
were lysed between the dissociation and sucrose centrifugation
steps with a solution containing 0.15 M NH4Cl, 1 mM KHCO3
and 0.1 mM Na2EDTA. Neural stem cells were cultured as
described in Deleyrolle et al. [16] and Dromard et al. [17]. Neu-
rosphere assays were performed with a cell density of 1 cell per
microliter in T25 or T75 ﬂasks. Flask manipulation was mini-
mized to decrease neurosphere aggregation. Using mixtures of
ﬂuorescent (actin-GFP) and nonﬂuorescent neurospheres, we
checked that under these conditions the vast majority of spheres
were clonal. The total number of neurospheres formed was
assessed 10 days later by carefully microscopic scanning of the
entire ﬂask. For the neurosphere assay using spinal cord sections,
lumbar spinal cord was sliced with a tissue chopper (McIlwain;
Mickle Laboratory Engineering Co., Guildford, U.K., http://
www.micklelab.co.uk) set at 750 lm and slices were collected in
Hanks’ balanced salt solution (HBSS). Under a binocular micro-
scope, each section was microdissected in two or three parts (Fig. 1)
using a diamond blade (Sapphire knife 0.22 mm, 15; World Preci-
sion Instruments, Sarasota, FL, http://www.wpiinc.com) or the cen-
tral canal region was removed by punching with a ﬁre-reduced Pas-
teur pipette (Fig. 1). Spinal cord fragments were then incubated in
250 ll HBSS, 30 ll trypsin 13 mg/ml, 30 ll hyaluronidase 7 mg/ml,
7 ll DNaseI 10 mg/ml, and 13 ll kinureic acid 4 mg/ml for 30
minutes at 37C and dissociated by pipetting with yellow tips. The
cell suspension was ﬁltered on a 40-lm sieve (BD, Franklin Lakes,
NJ, http://www.bdbiosciences.com) and plated in neurosphere me-
dium at clonal density (1 cell per microliter).
Figure 1.
Proliferation in the niche and localization of spinal cord neural stem cells. (A): Example of a Ki67þ cell (red) in the niche. (B): Aver-
age number of Ki67þ cells per section (13-lm thick, 32 sections per animal) in the niche from 0–13 weeks after birth. Values are means 
standard error of mean (SEM) (n ¼ 96 sections from three animals). (C): Spinal cord length from 0–13 weeks after birth measured with a ruler.
Values are means  SEM (n ¼ 3 spinal cords analyzed). (D): Photographs of spinal cord 1 or 9 weeks after birth (scale bar ¼ 5 mm). (E, G, I):
Schematic representations of lumbar spinal cord microdissections. (E): An approximately 550-lm diameter central fragment (red circle) was dis-
sected from the parenchyma and both parts were processed for neurosphere formation. (G): Spinal cords were cut in half. (I): A narrow dorsal
medial strip (3) was dissected. (F, H, J): Number of neurospheres formed per 1,000 cells seeded from dissections shown in (E, G, I). Values are
means  SEM (n ¼ 7 ﬂasks) of one experiment representative of three completely independent experiments. For experiment in (G), the absolute
numbers of neurospheres (deduced from the total number of cells obtained in the dorsal and ventral parts  frequency of neurosphere formation)
were 84,000 in the dorsal versus 36,000 in the ventral part. For experiment in (I), the absolute numbers of neurospheres were 1,500, 5,500, and
22,690 for the three indicated parts. Long dorsal GFAPþ cells are depicted in green in (E, G, I) to indicate that they may be damaged by the
excision procedure in (E) but preserved in (G) and (I). (K): Diameter of neurospheres derived from the different spinal cord regions shown in
(I). Dorsal medial-derived neurospheres are larger. Number of neurospheres measured from regions 1, 2, and 3 are 21, 9, and 30, respectively.
(L): Multipotency of dorsal medial neurospheres. After differentiation for 4 days, most individual neurospheres show the presence of three cell
types: astrocytes (GFAP; green, yellow arrow), oligodendrocytes (O4; blue, white arrow), and young neurons (Dcx; red, arrowhead). Abbrevia-
tions: C, central canal; D, dorsal; Dcx, doublecortin protein; GFAP, glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein; P, parenchyma; V, ventral.
Sabourin, Ackema, Ohayon et al.
2723
www.StemCells.com

Statistical Analysis
Tests were performed using one-way analysis of variance. Sim-
ple, double and triple asterisks indicate, respectively, 0.05%,
0.01% and 0.001% statistically signiﬁcant differences.
RESULTS
Proliferation in the Central Region Ceases
Around 13 Weeks and Correlates with
Postnatal Spinal Cord Extension
As the postnatal development of the central canal region has
been barely explored, we started by exploring the rate of pro-
liferation from 0–13 weeks after birth using immunodetection
of Ki67þ cells (Fig. 1A). We found a progressive decrease of
proliferating cells around the central canal until 9 weeks, after
which proliferation was no longer detected (Fig. 1B). This was
conﬁrmed by injecting bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) for 4 days
every 4–8 hours and counting the number of BrdUþ cells. No
BrdUþ cells were found around the canal in 42 sections corre-
sponding to 500 lm in thickness, whereas positive cells were
constantly found in the parenchyma. To test the possibility that
postnatal central canal proliferation is linked to postnatal spinal
cord extension, spinal cord length was measured during the 13
postnatal weeks. As shown in Figure 1D, spinal cord length
increases 2-fold after birth and a clear opposite correlation
exists between cellular proliferation and extension (Fig. 1C).
This substantiates the involvement of the central canal prolifer-
ation in the increase of spinal cord length after birth and shows
that this region is not or hardly proliferative in adult.
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells Are Principally
Located Dorsally
Although proliferation in the central region is completed
around 13 weeks, neural stem cells are still present after this
age as evidenced by the formation of neurospheres by approx-
imately 0.2% of clonally seeded cells (not shown). We speci-
ﬁed the location of these neurosphere-forming cells using
microdissection. As the lumbar spinal cord has more neural
stem cells than at other levels [1], our study was concentrated
on this region. Using a ﬁre-reduced Pasteur pipette (diameter
540 lm) as a puncher on adult spinal cord sections, we ﬁrst
conﬁrmed
that
neurosphere-forming
cells
are
essentially
located around the central canal (Fig. 1E, 1F). Microdissec-
tion was then used to divide spinal cord sections into dorsal
and ventral regions (Fig. 1G, 1H), which were then processed
for neural stem cell assay. Surprisingly, the majority of neuro-
sphere-forming cells were found to be located dorsally. Dis-
secting further down to a dorsal strip including the central
canal showed the highest enrichment for neurosphere-forming
cells (Fig. 1I, 1J). After 2 weeks, the neurospheres reached a
size larger than 500 lm, suggesting that they originate from
stem rather than progenitor cells [18]. Upon differentiation
(Fig. 1L; supporting information Fig. 3F), the neurospheres
generate astrocytes, O4þ oligodendrocytes, and young Dcxþ
neurons. The latter were GABAergic as indicated by GABA
immunodetection (data not shown). Neurosphere formation
and multipotentiality were maintained even after nine pas-
sages (supporting information Fig. 3F). Neurospheres arising
from the other regions might be due to contamination or to
the presence of few non dorsal-medial located neurosphere-
forming-cells. Such neurospheres are smaller (Fig. 1K), sug-
gesting that they may be derived from progenitors rather than
stem cells [18]. Of note, fourfold more neurospheres were
obtained from 1,000 cells of the dorsal medial part (Fig. 1J)
than from the central part (Fig. 1F), indicating that punching
the central region for excision may damage part of the neuro-
sphere-forming cells, as would be expected if these possessed
long radial processes (see below).
The Central Canal Region Is Composed
of Several Cell Types
The predominant dorsal location of neural stem cells prompted
us to investigate the identity of these cells using a series of
antibodies known to label different immature cells of the neural
lineage. Simple histological examination of the adult mouse
central canal shows that this region is not composed of a single
layer of cells but like in humans contains several cell types dif-
fering in their morphology and position (ependymal and sub-
ependymal) (Fig. 2A). Here, the term ‘‘ependymal’’ indicates
that the cell nucleus is within the ﬁrst row of cells. Most cells
around the canal express the immature intermediate ﬁlament
proteins vimentin (Fig. 2B) and nestin (not shown), the Sox2
and Sox9 transcription factors (Fig. 2E, 2F), the polysialated
form of neural cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM, Fig. 2D),
and Cadherin 13 (also known as t-cadherin, Fig. 2H), an adhe-
sion molecule expressed by various neural precursor cells in
vitro [19]. Cadherin 13 levels are however higher in young ani-
mals than in adults (supporting information Fig. 1A). Sox4, a
marker of the oligodendrocytic lineage, was not detected in
adults; however we found positive cells in younger animals
(Fig. 2G). Anti-CD133, a well-known marker of neuroepithelial
and neural stem cells, stains the apical side of central canal
cells (Fig. 2C). The endothelin receptor B (EdnrB), which is
strongly
expressed
in
spinal
cord
neurospheres
[16],
is
expressed by most cells around the canal but, signiﬁcantly, dor-
sal cells extending a process toward the pial surface are
strongly stained (Fig. 2I). Anti-brain lipid binding protein
(BLBP; also known as fatty acid binding protein 7), a radial
glial marker, labels a small population of cells with radial mor-
phology most often situated in the dorsal part (Fig. 2J). Staining
for GFAP, an astrocytic/neural stem cell marker, labels several
cell types (Fig. 2K, 2L; supporting information Fig. 1B, 1C,
1H). Of note, these GFAPþ cells are detected with a polyclonal
antibody and only a fraction can be detected with a monoclonal
antibody (not shown). A group of cells extending very long
GFAPþ processes toward the pial layer were always observed
in the dorsal part (Fig. 2L; supporting information Fig. 1B, 1C).
These cells were either in the ependymal layer adjacent to the
canal (supporting information Fig. 1B, 1C) or further above in
a subependymal location (supporting information Fig. 1B, 1C,
1H) when they sent a process toward the canal (Fig. 2K, 2L;
supporting information Fig. 1H). Interestingly a fraction of
these cells express the radial glia marker BLBP (Fig. 2K). Ep-
endymal and subependymal GFAPþ are also occasionally
observed in the lateral and ventral part of the canal (Fig. 2L;
supporting information Fig. 1C). CD15 (also known as Lewis
X antigen or stage-speciﬁc embryonic antigen-1), a marker for
various stem cells including neural stem cells [20], stained the
central spinal cord region dissymmetrically with the dorsal
region around the canal displaying a higher diffuse staining
than the ventral part (Fig. 2P). Central canal cells were not la-
beled but remarkably a fraction of dorsal GFAPþ cells and their
luminal extension were labeled (Fig. 2Q). Double-labeled
BLBP and CD15 could also be observed (not shown).
Staining for b-III-tubulin (Fig. 2M) revealed the presence
of neuronal cells lying close to the ependymal region often
extending a process toward the lumen. These neurons express
Dcx, a marker for young neurons, indicating that they may
retain immaturity characteristics (Fig. 2N). Interestingly, these
cells show a large bulge at the tip of their process in the canal
2724
Adult Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cell Niche

lumen (Fig. 2M, 2N). The presence of these neurons was con-
ﬁrmed by the observation of ﬂuorescent cells using a trans-
genic mouse expressing GFP under a Dcx promoter (support-
ing information Fig. 1D). To gain further insight on this
neuronal subtype, we colabeled Dcx with the homeoprotein
Nkx6.1, as during spinal cord development, the central canal
region is derived from a ventral domain expressing this gene
[21]. Nkx6.1 cells are mostly subependymal (Fig. 2O) and
coexpressed Dcx, suggesting a ventral developmental origin
of these central canal neurons (Fig. 2N, inset). Nkx6.1þ rarely
stained GFAPþ dorsal cells (data not shown). Since we
detected postnatal proliferation within the niche, we evaluated
the possibility that these neuronal cells were born postnatally.
Three-week-old mice were injected with BrdU for 5 days,
then the presence of Dcx or b-III-tubulin neurons was
assessed after 3 or 7 days. No BrdUþ neuronal cells were
detected, suggesting that these cells are generated during the
embryonic or the early postnatal period. As in the lumbar
central canal, a diversity of cells (CD133þ, GFAPþ, and
Nkx6.1þ) is also observed at the cervical level (supporting in-
formation Fig. 1E–1G).
We further examined the cellular diversity around the
canal with electron microscopy and immunogold techniques
(supporting information Fig. 2). There is a clear ventral/dorsal
dissymmetry of the central canal organization with the most
dorsal part showing a higher cell density (supporting informa-
tion Fig. 2A) often organized in two or three rows (supporting
information Fig. 2C). In agreement with immunoﬂuorescence
analysis, cells with long radial extensions containing interme-
diate ﬁlament recognized by GFAP antibodies were observed
Figure 2.
Diversity of cells in the spinal cord niche. (A): A lumbar spinal cord section stained with toluidine blue. Arrows indicate subependymal
cells and arrowhead points to a cell with neuronal features. (B–Q): Immunoﬂuorescence detection of indicated marker on adult spinal cord sections.
(C): CD133 labeling is conﬁned mainly to the apical pole of cells around the canal (arrowhead). (G): Sox4 labeling (arrow) is often observed in
twin cells, suggesting recent mitosis. (I): The EdnRB stains central canal cells and long dorsal radial processes (arrow). (J): BLBP (red) stains a few
dorsal cells with a radial process. (K): High magniﬁcation of the BLBPþ cell in (J). This cell coexpresses GFAP (middle picture). (L): GFAP stain-
ing shows processes contacting the lumen (arrows) and a dorsal group of GFAPþ cells (arrowhead). (M, N): b-III-tubulinþ and Dcxþ neuronal-like
cells extending a process into the lumen (arrow). A bulge (arrowheads) is often observed at the tip of the processes. (O): Nkx6.1 cells (red nuclei)
are located mostly subependymally. These cells coexpress Dcx (inset in [N]). (P): CD15 staining is present mostly dorsally. (Q): High magniﬁcation
of box in (P). CD15 stains a fraction of GFAPþ dorsal cells (arrowhead) and some luminal extension (arrow). Ventral central canal is at the bottom
on all images. Scale bar ¼ 10 lm. Abbreviations: BLBP, brain lipid binding protein; Dcx, doublecortin protein; EdnrB, endothelin receptor B;
GFAP, glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein; PSA-NCAM, polysialated form of neural cell adhesion molecule; Vim, vimentin.
Sabourin, Ackema, Ohayon et al.
2725
www.StemCells.com

in this region (supporting information Fig. 2B). Subependymal
cells were common all around the central canal (supporting
information Fig. 2D). These cells had either similar ultrastruc-
tural features to ependymocytes or were clearly distinct (sup-
porting information Fig. 2D). This analysis provides evidence
for a dorsal-ventral dissymmetry of the central canal and the
presence of several ependymal and subependymal cell types.
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells Are Radial
GFAP1 Cells
Since in both humans and mice, many data indicate that neu-
ral stem cells in the adult brain are GFAPþ cells closely asso-
ciated with the ependymal cell layer, we investigated whether
the GFAPþ cells around the canal behaved like neural stem
cells in vitro using a human GFAP promoter-GFP transgenic
mouse [15]. Around the canal of the lumbar spinal cord, most
bright GFPþ cells (>80%) were found in the dorsal part (Fig.
3A, 3B, supporting information Fig. 1H), located in the epen-
dymal layer in direct contact with the lumen (Fig. 3A), or
located subependymally, sending a process toward the lumen
(Fig. 3B). GFP further revealed the presence of very long ra-
dial processes originating from the GFAPþ dorsal cells
(Fig. 3A). All GFPþ cells around the central canal were found
to be GFAPþ (52 of 52 cells) (Fig. 3B; supporting informa-
tion Fig. 1H), but inversely a fraction of GFAPþ cells are
GFP. To examine whether GFPþ cells could generate neuro-
spheres, after spinal cord dissection GFPþ and GFP cells
were separated by ﬂow cytometry and seeded at clonal den-
sity (supporting information Fig. 1I). We found that 90% of
Figure 3.
Identiﬁcation of spinal cord neural stem cells. (A, B): GFPþ cells around the canal of hGFAP-GFP mouse. (A): Example of three
dorsal GFPþ cells abutting the central canal. These cells are located ependymally (inset). Note the presence of long tortuous GFP dorsal radial
processes (arrow) and, in the ventral part, a group of weakly GFPþ cells (arrowhead). (B): Example of one dorsal GFPþ cell located subependy-
mally (box) sending a process into the lumen (arrowhead). This cell coexpresses GFAP (red, left-hand image). (C): Neurospheres are derived
mostly from GFPþ cells. After dissection of hGFAP-GFP spinal cord GFPþ and GFP cells were separated by ﬂow cytometry (supporting infor-
mation Fig. 1I) and seeded at clonal density. Values are means  SEM (n ¼ 7 ﬂasks) of one experiment representative of four completely inde-
pendent experiments. (D, D0): All primary derived neurospheres contain one or several strongly GFAPþ cells (green). Two examples are shown.
(E): Most of primary neurospheres from the hGFAP-GFP mice contain one or several GFPþ cells that coexpressed GFAP (arrows). Inversely,
some GFAPþ cells did not express GFP (arrowhead). (F–L): Immunoﬂuorescence detection of indicated antigen in undifferentiated neurospheres.
Note that after centrifugation and attachment on coverslips for immunoﬂuorescence analysis, undifferentiated neurospheres can partially disaggre-
gate giving an aspect of dissociated cells (F, H). Scale bars ¼ 10 lm. Abbreviations: BLBP, brain lipid binding protein; DAN, differential
screening-selected gene aberrative in neuroblastoma; EdnrB, endothelin receptor B; GFAP, glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein; GFP, green ﬂuorescent
protein; PSA-NCAM, polysialated form of neural cell adhesion molecule.
2726
Adult Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cell Niche

the neurospheres are formed in the GFPþ fraction (Fig. 3C).
These neurospheres could be cultured for at least 10 passages
(not shown). In all neurospheres (179 of 179) cultured for
only a few days at clonal density at least one or several
strongly expressing GFAPþ cells were found (Fig. 3D, D0),
some of which expressed CD133 (supporting information Fig.
3A). We conﬁrmed the presence of GFAPþ cells by deriving
neurospheres from the hGFAP-GFP mouse. We found that
104 of 158 neurospheres contain one or several GFPþ cells
coexpressing GFAP (Fig. 3E). Spheres that do not contain
GFPþ cells may be derived from the subpopulation of GFAPþ
GFP cells mentioned above. The observation of both GFAPþ
and GFAP cells within a clonally expanded neurosphere sug-
gests cellular diversity, probably resulting from asymmetric
division as would be expected for neural stem cells. The vast
majority of GFAP cells were found to express Olig2,
Map2ab, CD15, and Dcx markers, presumably representing
bipotent neuronal-glial progenitors (supporting information
Fig. 3B–3E). Of note, all neurospheres were found to strongly
express the markers we observed in the niche, namely Cad-
herin 13, Sox4, Nkx6.1, DAN (see below), BLBP, PSA-
NCAM, and EdnRB, (Fig. 3F–3L). All together, these results
demonstrate that the adult spinal cord neural stem cells are
mostly dorsal medial GFAPþ cells directly or indirectly in
contact with the central lumen.
Elevated Signalings and Mesenchymal
Features of the Niche
Various adult stem cells are commonly maintained in their
niche through activation of key signalings. In the central
canal, we evaluated the presence of such local stem cell sig-
nalings by detection of the HES1 protein, a key effector of
Sonic hedgehog and Notch pathways. HES1 is expressed in
the nuclei of most cells around the canal (Fig. 4A), but also
frequently in the cytoplasm, notably in long dorsal processes
(Fig. 4B). This nuclear/cytoplasmic localization may reﬂect
regulatory shuttling of the protein. The Jagged1 protein, one
of the ligands of the Notch pathway, is also readily observed
on the luminal side of the cells around the canal (Fig. 4C).
Several stem cell niches are characterized by the presence of
bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and anti-BMP signaling
molecules, such as BMP4 and noggin in the SVZ. In the adult
spinal cord, we found that DAN, a BMP inhibitor highly
expressed in spinal cord neurospheres [16], is expressed by,
depending on the section, most or a restricted number of cen-
tral canal cells (Fig. 4D). Double labeling indicated that dor-
sal GFAPþ cells express DAN (Fig. 4D). In addition to ca-
nonical stem cell signalings, recent studies have shown the
implication of transcription factors of the epithelial-mesenchy-
mal transition (EMT) in the maintenance of stem cells both in
vertebrates and invertebrates [22]. This prompted us to examine
the expression of ZEB1/2, SNAI1/2, and TWIST1/2 in neuro-
spheres and in the niche. As shown in Figure 4E, reverse-tran-
scription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis shows the
expression of SNAI2, ZEB1, and ZEB2 genes in spinal cord
neurospheres. Expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 was also demon-
strated at the protein level by immunoﬂuorescence (Fig. 4F,
4G). The mesenchymal feature of cultured neural stem cells
was further conﬁrmed by the expression of vimentin, ﬁbronec-
tin, CD44, and smooth muscle a-actin (SMA also known as
actin a 2), four proteins commonly found in mesenchymal cells
(Fig. 4H–4K and PCR on Fig. 4E). Upon neurosphere differen-
tiation, the majority of GFAPþ astrocytic cells are SMAþ (Fig.
4L). In the spinal cord, the majority of cells around the canal
were found to express CD44, SMA, and ZEB1 (Fig. 4M–4O),
whereas ZEB2 was not detected. Dorsal-medially or ventral-
medially located cells tended to be stained more strongly for
ZEB1 and dorsal GFAPþ cells were intensely labeled (Fig. 4O,
4P). ZEB1 expression was also examined in the adult brain
SVZ (supporting information Fig. 4A, 4B). The majority of
GFAPþ cells, considered to be stem cells [23], were positive,
whereas only a fraction of PSA-NCAMþ young neuronal cells
expressed ZEB1 at a detectable level.
Collectively, these data provide evidence for the mainte-
nance of several typical developmental signalings and more
unexpectedly of EMT genes in the spinal cord niche and in
cultured neural stem cells. Compared with epithelial cells, mes-
enchymal cells are characterized by a high ability to migrate in
vivo and in vitro. We thus assessed this mesenchymal feature
on cultured adult spinal cord neural stem cells by plating neu-
rosphere cells on laminin and measuring the cellular mobility
by videomicroscopy. Primary mouse skin ﬁbroblasts were used
as a positive control for the mesenchymal phenotype, whereas
HeLa and HEK293 cells were used as two control lines for epi-
thelial phenotype. As shown on Figure 4Q and supporting in-
formation Videos V1–V4, we found that neurosphere cells
were as motile as ﬁbroblasts, whereas as expected, epithelial
cells were nearly immobile within this studied time frame.
Critical Role of ZEB Proteins in Spinal Cord
Neural Stem Cells In Vitro
The ZEB transcription factors constitute a family of transcrip-
tional factors acting as essential regulators of the epithelial to
mesenchymal transition [22]. They are also involved in the regu-
lation of apoptosis, proliferation, senescence, and cellular polar-
ity. As their expression in spinal cord neural stem cells has not
been reported, we explored their role in these cells by generating
a transgenic mouse conditionally expressing DB-ZEB, a domi-
nant negative form of ZEB proteins [24], and GFP (Fig. 5A).
DB-ZEB contains only the DNA-binding domain of ZEB1 and
blocks the activity of both ZEB1 and ZEB2. Translation of DB-
ZEB and GFP is blocked by an upstream loxed-stop cassette
that can be removed by cre-mediated recombination. Neuro-
spheres were derived from the adult spinal cord of DB-ZEB ani-
mals and no overt proliferation deﬁcit was observed, as expected
since no expression of DB-ZEB was detected in these cultures
(data not shown). Recombination and DB-ZEB expression were
performed in this culture by infecting with a canine adenovirus
(CAV) expressing cre recombinase (CAV-cre). More than 75%
of the cells were infected and recombined as measured by the
presence of GFPþ cells (Fig. 5B). The capacity of this culture to
form new clonal neurospheres was compared with culture
infected with control CAV-GFP virus. Figure 5C and 5D show
that the expression of DB-ZEB causes a massive reduction of
the neurosphere number and a concomitant reduction of the total
number of cells. As a control, neurosphere cells derived from
nontransgenic animals and infected with CAV-cre and CAV-
GFP show no signiﬁcant differences for the formation of new
neurospheres (Fig. 5E), demonstrating the absence of cre recom-
binase-induced toxicity. To examine how DB-ZEB affects cells,
during the 3 days following infection, the number of apoptotic
cells was measured by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-
mediated dUTP-biotin nick-end labeling. Figure 5F shows that
CAV-cre infection triggers a rapid and drastic increase of apo-
ptotic cells, suggesting an essential role of ZEB transcription
factors in the maintenance of spinal cord neural stem cells.
Maintenance of a Hox Gene Pattern in Adult
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells Along the
Rostro-Caudal Axis
Recent data have demonstrated that the SVZ harbors a hetero-
geneous population of neural stem cells derived from several
Sabourin, Ackema, Ohayon et al.
2727
www.StemCells.com

Figure 4.
Elevated signaling and mesenchymal features of the spinal cord niche. (A, B): Hes1 staining. Hes1 protein is mostly nuclear (A, red)
or in the cytoplasm (B, arrowhead), notably in long dorsal processes (B, arrow). (B): A magniﬁcation of white box is presented on right-hand
image. (C): Jagged1 staining (red) is conﬁned to the apical part of central canal cells. (D): Cells in the niche express DAN (red), notably the
GFAPþ cells (green) on right-hand image. (E): Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction expression analysis of indicated mRNA in neuro-
spheres with (þ) or without () reverse transcriptase during cDNA synthesis. Sizes in base pair. (F): ZEB1 staining was heterogeneous in neuro-
sphere cells: absent (yellow arrow), nuclear (arrow), or cytoplasmic (arrowhead), whereas in (G), ZEB2 was mainly cytoplasmic. (H–K):
Neurospheres express high level of vimentin, ﬁbronectin, CD44, and SMA. (L): Immunocytochemistry on differentiated neurospheres showing
cells coexpressing the astrocytic marker GFAP (green) and SMA (red). Most of cells around the canal stained for CD44 (M, red staining on lumi-
nal side), SMA (N, red), ZEB1 (O, red). ZEB1 is often more strongly expressed in the dorsal part (arrow in [O]). GFAPþ dorsal cells display
intense ZEB1 staining (P). SMA staining was also observed with a polyclonal and another monoclonal antibody (clone O-N-5) (data not shown).
Scale bars ¼ 10 lm. (Q): Velocity of indicated cells measured by videomicroscopy during 6 hours. NSC and ﬁbroblast velocity did not differ
signiﬁcantly. Abbreviations: bp, base pair; DAN, differential screening-selected gene aberrative in neuroblastoma; Fibro, primary mouse skin
ﬁbroblasts; GFAP, glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein; NSC, mouse adult spinal cord neurosphere cells; Sma, smooth muscle a-actin; Snai2, Snail hom-
olog 2; Vim, vimentin; Zeb, zinc ﬁnger E-box-binding protein.
2728
Adult Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cell Niche

embryonic regions that generate speciﬁc neuron subtypes
upon differentiation ([23] for review). This diversity of stem
cells relies on the adult maintenance of different embryonic
patterning genes such as homeobox genes. During spinal cord
development, the regionalization of the neural tube results
from expression of different rostro-caudal combinations of
genes of the large Hox family [25]. It is not known whether
these genes are still expressed in adult spinal cord neural
stem cells and whether stem cells from different rostro-caudal
levels would maintain regional fetal combinations of Hox
genes. This was explored by growing neurospheres derived
from the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar levels for four pas-
sages and assessing the expression of the 39 Hox genes by
semiquantitative PCR. For comparison, Hox gene expression
was also measured in the three adult spinal cord levels. We
found that Hox genes are differentially expressed in the adult
spinal cord, with a clear propensity for genes located toward
the 50 end of a given cluster to be uniquely or more highly
expressed in the adult lumbar region (see for instance Hox
a13, b13, c13, d13) (Fig. 6). In neurospheres, Hox genes were
expressed and their rostro-caudal pattern was, overall, very
well conserved. Whereas some genes expressed in the lumbar
spinal cord were not detected in lumbar-derived neurospheres
(a13, d11, d13), all other genes expressed only in lumbar
Figure 5.
Critical role of ZEB proteins for survival of cultured neural stem cells. (A): Schematic representation of cre-inducible ZEB dominant
negative (DB-ZEB) construction injected to obtain the DB-ZEB mouse. Upon recombination, the loxed Stop cassette is removed allowing transla-
tion of an IRES-mediated bicistronic DB-ZEB and GFP messenger. (B): Immunodetection of GFP after infection with CAV-cre adenovirus in
DB-ZEB transgenic neurosphere cells. For this experiment, neurospheres were plated on adherent substrate. IRES-mediated GFP expression was
too low to be detected by direct ﬂuorescence. (C, D): Histograms show the number of neurospheres and the total number of cells obtained 7
days after seeding 1,000 noninfected or infected cells in T25 ﬂasks. In this experiment, neurospheres were derived from adult spinal cord of DB-
ZEB mice, passaged four times, then infected with CAV virus as described in Methods. This experiment is representative of three independent
experiments. Value given are means  standard error of means (n ¼ 7 ﬂasks). (E): Control experiment of (C) performed with neurospheres
derived from nontransgenic mice showing that CAV-cre virus is not toxic to the cells. Value given are means  standard error of means (n ¼ 7
ﬂasks). (F): Percentage of TUNELþ cells after infection with CAV-GFP and CAV-cre. The latter induces massive cell death of neurosphere cells.
Value given are means  standard error of means (n ¼ 3 coverslips). Abbreviations: CaV, canine adenovirus; CaV-cre, CaV expressing cre
recombinase; CaV-GFP, CaV expressing green ﬂuorescent protein; GFP, green ﬂuorescent protein; h, hours; TUNEL, terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick-end labeling.
Sabourin, Ackema, Ohayon et al.
2729
www.StemCells.com

spinal cord were expressed only in lumbar-derived neuro-
spheres (b13, c11, c12, d10). Hoxa11, expressed mainly in
lumbar spinal cord but also weakly expressed in thoracic spi-
nal cord (maybe as a result of a small dissection contamina-
tion), was detected exclusively in lumbar-derived neuro-
spheres.
The
only
exception
was
Hoxc13,
which
is
moderately expressed in lumbar spinal cord and neurospheres
but was also detectable, albeit at a lower level, in cervical
neurospheres. These data provide evidence for the preserva-
tion in the adult spinal cord of a range of regionally speciﬁed
neural stem cells expressing speciﬁc rostro-caudal Hox gene
combinations.
DISCUSSION
In contrast with recently published data [11], we provide evi-
dence here that the spinal cord ependymal niche is composed
of at least three cell types (Dcxþ Nkx6.1þ neuronal cells,
GFAPþ radial cells, and BLBPþ cells) in addition to typical
ependymocytes. A schematic view of the central canal niche
is presented in Figure 7. Proliferation within this niche corre-
sponds to the period of spinal cord extension. The neural
stem cells present in this niche are represented mainly by dor-
sal GFAPþ cells in contact with the central canal. In vitro,
spinal cord neural stem cells derived from different spinal
cords accurately maintain the rostra-caudal Hox gene pattern.
The niches expresses high levels of Notch signaling and anti-
BMP protein and, more surprisingly, display typical mesen-
chymal traits. Finally, we demonstrated the requirement of the
ZEB transcription factors for neural stem cell expansion
in vitro.
Several cell types in the ependymal region of the adult
spinal cord (tanycytes, cerebral-ﬂuid contacting neurons) have
been described in several species [28, 29] since the ﬁrst
observations of Ramon y Cajal [30]. Less is known about mo-
lecular markers characterizing cellular subpopulations and dif-
ferences between the ventral and dorsal parts of the canal.
Whereas most of cells around the canal express Sox2, Sox9,
Cadherin 13, and EdnrB, the dorsal part is distinguished by
the presence of higher CD15 staining and by a group of
GFAPþ radial cells, at least some of which have stem cell
properties. This is also consistent with our observation that in
the hGFAP-GFP mouse, the dorsal part consistently contains
GFPþ cells, whereas in the ventral and lateral of the canal
this was only occasionally observed. The central canal dorsal-
ventral dissymmetry can be further demonstrated by checking
the GENSAT expression database (http://www.gensat.org),
which reports that some markers are restricted to the dorsal or
ventral ependymal regions. In human spinal cord, CD15 and
PSA-NCAM labeling of central canal cells also revealed a
manifest ventral-dorsal dissymmetry [14].
Recently Meletis et al. [11] did not ﬁnd any molecular
markers delineating subpopulations of central canal cells and
concluded that spinal cord neural stem cells are GFAP
unlike in the SVZ. Here, in contrast, we found abundant
GFAPþ cells around the canal, the discrepancy most probably
resulting from the use of different antibodies. There are sev-
eral isoforms of GFAP, some of which are expressed mostly
around the ventricle [31]. The use of a monoclonal rather
than polyclonal antibody (as in this study) may not reveal all
GFAPþ cells. The presence of such cells was conﬁrmed in
our study using polyclonal and monoclonal GFAP antibodies,
a hGFAP-GFP transgenic mouse, and immunogold analysis.
These cells either are located directly in contact with the cere-
brospinal ﬂuid or lie subependymally sending a process
between the cells, a situation quite different from that in the
SVZ where GFAPþ cells are mostly subependymal.
As in the SVZ, we found that most spinal cord neural
stem cells express GFAP. However considering that in the
SVZ, GFAP transit-amplifying cells cell can be converted
into stem cells with epidermal growth factor [32] and that
neurospheres are composed mainly of GFAP cells, the possi-
bility still exists that, similarly, in the spinal cord a limited
fraction of neurospheres could be derived from GFAP cells.
Dorsal GFAPþ cells have a radial morphology and some
expressed BLBP, a typical radial glial marker. In the spinal
cord, these cells have been classiﬁed as tanycytes by other
investigators [33–35]. This cell population is however hetero-
geneous [29] and we could distinguish a subpopulation of
dorsal radial GFAPþ expressing BLBP or CD15. This subpo-
pulation may constitute a signiﬁcant fraction of adult spinal
cord neural stem cells as (a) during development BLBPþ ra-
dial glial cells are considered as the main population of multi-
potent neural cells [36], (b) neurospheres are composed
mainly of BLBPþ and CD15þ cells (this study and [17]), and
(c) CD15 can be used to purify neural stem and progenitor
cells in the adult SVZ and radial glial stem cell in the embryo
Figure 6.
Hox gene expression in spinal cord neural stem cells.
(A): Examples of RT-PCR showing expression of 50 Hox genes re-
stricted to the lumbar part of the adult spinal cord and in correspond-
ing neurospheres. Hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase (HPRT)
ampliﬁcation was used as a PCR quality control. (B): Schematic rep-
resentation of expression of the 39 Hox genes in adult spinal cord and
in neurospheres. A black square (nd) indicates that no expression was
detected using 2 ll of cDNA and 40 cycles. A colored square indi-
cates that a product of the predicted size was obtained with 2 (dark
red), 0.2 (red), and 0.02 (orange) ll of cDNA corresponding to low,
moderate, and high expression, respectively. Abbreviations: C, cervi-
cal; L, lumbar; NS, neurospheres; SP, spinal cord; T, thoracic.
2730
Adult Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cell Niche

[20]. The interaction of tanycytes with the vascular system is
reminiscent of the situation observed with type B1 astrocyte
in the SVZ [26, 37, 38] and, signiﬁcantly, we observed that
these cells strongly express the B receptor for endothelins, a
family of cytokines released by endothelial cells that inﬂuen-
ces neural stem cell proliferation in vitro [16].
Using FoxJ1-GFP transgenic mice, a gene involved in
the formation of motile cilia and expressed only by cells
around the canal in the spinal cord, Meletis et al. [11]
found that neurospheres are derived from FoxJ1þ cells.
This supports the conclusion that neural stem cells are
GFAP in the spinal cord since, in the SVZ, type B astro-
cytes have a single primary cilium [27] considered as
immotile and are thus supposed to be FoxJ1, assumptions
remaining to be formally demonstrated. In contrast, dorsal
radial cells are likely to express FoxJ1 as these were clearly
GFPþ upon cre activation in FoxJ1-cre Z/EG transgenic
mice [11].
In addition to GFAPþ and BLBPþ cells, cerebrospinal-
ﬂuid contacting neurons (CSF-Ns) were commonly observed
around the canal. They have already been noted in various
brain regions and in the spinal cord from cyclostomes to
mammals [28], although their function is still unknown. They
could act as mechanoreceptors sensitive to pressure or ﬂow of
the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) or to spinal cord ﬂexion, or they
might release neurotransmitters into the CSF as they express
GABA and vasoactive intestinal peptide. The Dcx expression
reported here may reﬂect an immature trait of these cells as
Dcx is expressed transiently during development. It is how-
ever unlikely that these CSF-Ns are produced from a continu-
ous adult spinal cord neurogenesis as we did not detect
BrdUþ cells after 13 weeks. In addition, we provided evi-
dence that these neurons are not generated postnatally and a
recent study performed in the rat showed that they are in fact
produced during embryogenesis [39]. The expression of the
Nkx6.1 homeogene we found in these CSF-Ns is consistent
Figure
7.
Schematic
representation
of
adult spinal cord niche. The presence of a
single short cilia on GFAPþ cells was not
investigated in this study but was extrapo-
lated from the study in the SVZ performed
by [26, 27]. Red shapes indicate CD15
staining.
Sabourin, Ackema, Ohayon et al.
2731
www.StemCells.com

with the fact that the adult central region is derived from the
embryonic ventral Nkx6.1þ pMN/p2 domains [21].
The persistence of immature cells around the central canal
coincides with the presence of a high level of both Notch
(HES1, Jagged1) and transforming growth factor b (TGFb;
DAN) signaling proteins. As in CNS development [40], Notch
signaling in the adult spinal cord may help to maintain the
BLBP radial cell. HES1 and Jagged1 expression is however
not restricted to the dorsal stem cells but extends to other
cells around the canal. The latter appears to be able to gener-
ate neuroblasts, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes after lesions
[10, 11, 41] and can thus be considered as progenitor cells.
This region is thus a new illustration of an adult CNS niche
where developmental signals maintain and regulate various
cells with different proliferation and differentiation potentials
(stem cells, progenitors, young neurons) [42]. One remarkable
protein we observed in the niche is DAN, also known as
NBL1, a member of a cystine knot protein family that
includes Noggin, Cerberus, Gremlin, and protein related to
DAN and cerberus [43]. These proteins act as secreted inhibi-
tors of BMP and growth differentiation factor proteins and
are thus key regulators of TGFb signaling. In the brain SVZ,
Noggin is expressed by ependymocytes [44]. Here we found
that DAN is expressed by cells of the spinal cord niche, nota-
bly by the dorsal group, and in vitro by most cells of the neu-
rospheres. DAN causes growth suppression of a variety of
cells lines and thus its expression in the spinal cord niche and
in neural stem cells may serve a similar function.
In addition to the presence in the niche of typical stem cell
signaling pathways, one important ﬁnding is the expression of
SMA and ZEB1, two genes typically expressed during EMT.
This suggests the existence of close relationships between
EMT and stemness, as has recently also been found in breast
cancer stem cells [45, 46]. We conﬁrmed this hypothesis by
showing that (a) ZEB protein inactivation in cultured neural
stem cells led to a massive cell death, (b) neurospheres
expressed several mesenchymal markers, and (c) neurosphere
cells are as motile in vitro as typical mesenchymal cells. ZEB
transcription factors are important regulators of the EMT
required for development and cancer [22] and their expression
is controlled by a number of ligands including TGF b1, proges-
terone, estrogen, insulin-like growth factor 1, and several
micro-RNAs. They operate as transcriptional activators or
repressors (notably for E-Cadherin) for controlling several cel-
lular processes such as migration, senescence, and apoptosis.
Signiﬁcantly, ZEB1 transactivates the SMA promoter [47] and
thus may be directly implicated in the expression of smooth
muscle actin in central canal niche cells and in the neuro-
spheres. As both ZEB1 and ZEB2 are expressed in neuro-
spheres and DB-ZEB inactivates both, it is difﬁcult to decide
how much each protein contributes to the survival of neuro-
sphere cells. The detection of only ZEB1 in the spinal cord ep-
endymal region indicates it plays a predominant role in the
maintenance of several cell types in the niche. In Drosophila,
the orthologous ZEB protein Zfh-1 was recently shown to have
a critical role in maintenance of the somatic stem cell compart-
ment in the testis stem cell niche [48]. ZEB proteins may thus
have a general role in the maintenance of stem/progenitor cells
in the SVZ and spinal cord adult niches. Finally, EMT is asso-
ciated with cellular delamination and migration, two phenom-
enon observed in CNS lesions such as in spinal cord injury
where neural precursor cells readily leave their niche to migrate
to the lesion site [10, 11]. The expression of EMT genes in the
niche may be involved in keeping the cells competent to, or to
prime them to, perform this process. In a normal situation, the
EMT genetic program could be counterbalanced by local sig-
nalings to keep the cells in their normal position.
Whereas CNS adult neural stem cell niches display com-
parable gene expression and organization, it is now becom-
ing clear that these niches harbor different types of neural
stem cells capable of generating distinct types of neurons
and glial cells [49]. This implies that expression of particular
genes and epigenetic modiﬁcations operate to retain neural
stem cell diversity in adult CNS. Here, we found that cul-
tured spinal cord stem cells maintained distinct Hox gene
expression proﬁles typical of the embryonic spinal cord pat-
tern [25], suggesting that different Hox gene combinations
still operate in adult spinal cord stem cells probably to spec-
ify their rostro-caudal features, as recently observed by Kul-
batski and Tator [50]. The maintenance within the SVZ and
along the rostro-caudal spinal cord axis of different pattern-
ing genes in neural stem cells suggests that not all neural
stem cells may be equivalent and useful for stem cell-based
therapy [51].
CONCLUSION
Compared with the brain SVZ and hippocampal niches, the
role of this adult spinal cord niche is unclear, as the produc-
tion of new cells is absent or low. In contrast, we found that
after birth, this niche is mitotically active until 9 weeks in
association with a higher expression of two markers (Sox4,
Cadherin 13) so its role may be limited to postnatal spinal
cord development. Since the spinal cord extends 2-fold in
length after birth, this niche may be involved in the produc-
tion of new cells for the central canal wall to extend in paral-
lel with the spinal cord. As the spinal cord niche cells are
able to produce neurons, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes in
vitro, this niche may produce such cells in the postnatal pe-
riod. In the adult brain, the activity of the neural stem niches
is modulated by various environmental parameters and, like-
wise, the adult spinal cord niche may be reactivated in partic-
ular physiological situations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the European Union FP6 ‘‘Rescue’’
STREP, the ‘‘Association Franc¸aise contre les Myopathies’’
(Evry, France), the Princess Grace of Monaco Fundation (Mon-
aco). We are very grateful to Dr N. Heintz (New York), Dr P. Jay
(Montpellier, France), Dr Darling (Louisville, KY), Dr Sudo
(Toray, Japan), Dr Wegner (Erlangen, Germany), Dr A. Postigo
(St. Louis), and Dr T. Walker (Brisbane, Australia) who gener-
ously provided us with BLBP, Sox9, ZEB1, Hes1, Sox10 anti-
bodies, DB-ZEB construct, and Dcx-GFP mice, respectively.
J.C.S. is a recipient of an AFM Ph.D. fellowship. We thank Dr C.
Cazevielle (electron microscopy platform), Dr C. Duperray
(cytometry platform), Dr H. Boukhaddaoui and C. Sar (cell
imaging platform), I. Sassetti (histology platform), and Y.
Gerber/G. Bonniface for high-quality technical assistance and
experiment designs. We are grateful to Dr K. Langley for critical
reading of the manuscript. A.P. and J.P.H. contributed equally to
this work.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS
OF INTEREST
The authors indicate no potential conﬂicts of interest.
2732
Adult Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cell Niche

REFERENCES
1
Weiss S, Dunne C, Hewson J et al. Multipotent CNS stem cells are
present in the adult mammalian spinal cord and ventricular neuroaxis.
J Neurosci 1996;16:7599–7609.
2
Kehl LJ, Fairbanks CA, Laughlin TM et al. Neurogenesis in postnatal
rat spinal cord: a study in primary culture. Science 1997;276:586–589.
3
Shihabuddin LS, Ray J, Gage FH. FGF-2 is sufﬁcient to isolate pro-
genitors found in the adult mammalian spinal cord. Exp Neurol 1997;
148:577–586.
4
Martens DJ, Seaberg RM, Van der Kooy D. In vivo infusions of exogenous
growth factors into the fourth ventricle of the adult mouse brain increase
the proliferation of neural progenitors around the fourth ventricle and the
central canal of the spinal cord. Eur J Neurosci 2002;16:1045–1057.
5
Barnabe´-Heider F, Frisen J. Stem cells for spinal cord repair. Cell
Stem Cell 2008;3:16–24.
6
Danilov AI, Covacu R, Moe MC et al. Neurogenesis in the adult spi-
nal cord in an experimental model of multiple sclerosis. Eur J Neuro-
sci 2006;23:394–400.
7
Shechter R, Ziv Y, Schwartz M. New GABAergic interneurons sup-
ported by myelin-speciﬁc T cells are formed in intact adult spinal
cord. Stem Cells 2007;25:2277–2282.
8
Ke Y, Chi L, Xu R et al. Early response of endogenous adult neural progeni-
tor cells to acute spinal cord injury in mice. Stem Cells 2006;24:1011–1019.
9
Chi L, Ke Y, Luo C et al. Motor neuron degeneration promotes neural
progenitor cell proliferation, migration, and neurogenesis in the spinal
cords of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mice. Stem Cells 2006;24:34–43.
10 Moreno-Manzano V, Rodriguez-Jimenez FJ, Garcia-Rosello M et al.
Activated spinal cord ependymal stem cells rescue neurological func-
tion. Stem Cells 2009;27:733–743.
11 Meletis K, Barnabe-Heider F, Carlen M et al. Spinal cord injury reveals
multilineage differentiation of ependymal cells. Plos Biol 2008;6:e182.
12 Johansson CB, Momma S, Clarke DL et al. Identiﬁcation of a neural stem
cell in the adult mammalian central nervous system. Cell 1999;96:25–34.
13 Corti S, Locatelli F, Papadimitriou D et al. Transplanted ALDHhiS-
SClo neural stem cells generate motor neurons and delay disease pro-
gression of nmd mice, an animal model of SMARD1. Hum Mol
Genet 2006;15:167–187.
14 Dromard C, Guillon H, Rigau V et al. Adult human spinal cord har-
bors neural precursor cells that generate neurons and glial cells in
vitro. J Neurosci Res 2008;86:1916–1926.
15 Nolte C, Matyash M, Pivneva T et al. GFAP promoter-controlled
EGFP-expressing transgenic mice: a tool to visualize astrocytes and
astrogliosis in living brain tissue. Glia 2001;33:72–86.
16 Deleyrolle L, Marchal-Victorion S, Dromard C et al. Exogenous and
ﬁbroblast growth factor 2/epidermal growth factor-regulated endoge-
nous cytokines regulate neural precursor cell growth and differentia-
tion. Stem Cells 2006;24:748–762.
17 Dromard C, Bartolami S, Deleyrolle L et al. NG2 and Olig2 expres-
sion provides evidence for phenotypic deregulation of cultured central
nervous system and peripheral nervous system neural precursor cells.
Stem Cells 2007;25:340–353.
18 Louis SA, Rietze RL, Deleyrolle L et al. Enumeration of neural stem
and progenitor cells in the neural colony-forming cell assay. Stem
Cells 2008;26:988–996.
19 Gurok U, Steinhoff C, Lipkowitz B et al. Gene expression changes in the
course of neural progenitor cell differentiation. J Neurosci 2004;24:
5982–6002.
20 Capela A, Temple S. LeX is expressed by principle progenitor cells in
the embryonic nervous system, is secreted into their environment and
binds Wnt-1. Dev Biol 2006;291:300–313.
21 Fu H, Qi Y, Tan M et al. Molecular mapping of the origin of post-
natal spinal cord ependymal cells: evidence that adult ependymal cells
are derived from Nkx6.1þ ventral neural progenitor cells. J Comp
Neurol 2003;456:237–244.
22 Peinado H, Olmeda D, Cano A. Snail, Zeb and Bhlh factors in tumour
progression: an alliance against the epithelial phenotype? Nat Rev
Cancer 2007;7:415–428.
23 Chojnacki AK, Mak GK, Weiss S. Identity crisis for adult periventric-
ular neural stem cells: subventricular zone astrocytes, ependymal cells
or both? Nat Rev Neurosci 2009;10:153–163.
24 Postigo AA, Dean DC. ZEB, a vertebrate homolog of Drosophila Zfh-1, is a
negative regulator of muscle differentiation. EMBO J 1997;16:3935–3943.
25 Carpenter EM. Hox genes and spinal cord development. Dev Neurosci
2002;24:24–34.
26 Mirzadeh Z, Merkle FT, Soriano-Navarro M et al. Neural stem cells
confer unique pinwheel architecture to the ventricular surface in neu-
rogenic regions of the adult brain. Cell Stem Cell 2008;3:265–278.
27 Doetsch F, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A. Regeneration of
a germinal layer in the adult mammalian brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1999;96:11619–11624.
28 Vigh B, Manzano e Silva MJ, Frank CL et al. The system of cerebro-
spinal ﬂuid-contacting neurons: its supposed role in the nonsynaptic
signal transmission of the brain. Histol Histopathol 2004;19:607–628.
29 Bruni JE. Ependymal development, proliferation, and functions: a
review. Microsc Res Tech 1998;41:2–13.
30 Ramon y Cajal S. Histologie du Syste`me Nerveux de L’hommes et
des Verte´bre´s. Paris: Maloine, 1911.
31 Roelofs RF, Fischer DF, Houtman SH et al. Adult human subventricu-
lar, subgranular, and subpial zones contain astrocytes with a special-
ized intermediate ﬁlament cytoskeleton. Glia 2005;52:289–300.
32 Doetsch F, Petreanu L, Caille I et al. EGF converts transit-amplifying
neurogenic precursors in the adult brain into multipotent stem cells.
Neuron 2002;36:1021–1034.
33 Rafols JA, Goshgarian HG. Spinal tanycytes in the adult rat: a correla-
tive Golgi gold-toning study. Anat Rec 1985;211:75–86.
34 Bruni JE, Reddy K. Ependyma of the central canal of the rat spinal
cord: a light and transmission electron microscopic study. J Anat
1987;152:55–70.
35 Seitz R, Lohler J, Schwendemann G. Ependyma and meninges of the
spinal cord of the mouse: a light-and electron-microscopic study. Cell
Tissue Res 1981;220:61–72.
36 Anthony TE, Klein C, Fishell G et al. Radial glia serve as neuronal
progenitors in all regions of the central nervous system. Neuron 2004;
41:881–890.
37 Tavazoie M, Van der Veken L, Silva-Vargas V et al. A specialized
vascular niche for adult neural stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 2008;3:
279–288.
38 Shen Q, Wang Y, Kokovay E et al. Adult SVZ stem cells lie in a vas-
cular niche: a quantitative analysis of niche cell-cell interactions. Cell
Stem Cell 2008;3:289–300.
39 Marichal N, Garcia G, Radmilovich M et al. Enigmatic central canal
contacting cells: immature neurons in ‘‘standby mode’’? J Neurosci
2009;29:10010–10024.
40 Anthony TE, Mason HA, Gridley T et al. Brain lipid-binding protein
is a direct target of Notch signaling in radial glial cells. Genes Dev
2005;19:1028–1033.
41 Carle´n M, Meletis K, Goritz C et al. Forebrain ependymal cells are
Notch-dependent and generate neuroblasts and astrocytes after stroke.
Nat Neurosci 2009;12:259–267.
42 Ninkovic J, Gotz M. Signaling in adult neurogenesis: from stem cell
niche to neuronal networks. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2007;17:338–344.
43 Balemans W, Van Hul W. Extracellular regulation of BMP signaling
in vertebrates: a cocktail of modulators. Dev Biol 2002;250:231–250.
44 Alvarez-Buylla A, Lim DA. For the long run: maintaining germinal
niches in the adult brain. Neuron 2004;41:683–686.
45 Morel AP, Lievre M, Thomas C et al. Generation of breast cancer
stem cells through epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Plos One 2008;
3:e2888.
46 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ et al. The epithelial-mesenchymal transi-
tion generates cells with properties of stem cells. Cell 2008;133:
704–715.
47 Nishimura G, Manabe I, Tsushima K et al. DeltaEF1 mediates TGF-
beta signaling in vascular smooth muscle cell differentiation. Dev Cell
2006;11:93–104.
48 Leatherman JL, Dinardo S. Zfh-1 controls somatic stem cell self-
renewal in the Drosophila testis and nonautonomously inﬂuences
germline stem cell self-renewal. Cell Stem Cell 2008;3:44–54.
49 Lledo PM, Merkle FT, Alvarez-Buylla A. Origin and function of ol-
factory bulb interneuron diversity. Trends Neurosci 2008;31:392–400.
50 Kulbatski I, Tator CH. Region-speciﬁc differentiation potential of
adult rat spinal cord neural stem/precursors and their plasticity in
response to in vitro manipulation. J Histochem Cytochem 2009;57:
405–423.
51 Thuret S, Moon LD, Gage FH. Therapeutic interventions after spinal
cord injury. Nat Rev Neurosci 2006;7:628–643.
See www.StemCells.com for supporting information available online.
Sabourin, Ackema, Ohayon et al.
2733

===== Sader2022_DevDyn_LimbRegen-Tgfb =====
R E V I E W
Tgf-β superfamily and limb regeneration: Tgf-β to start and
Bmp to end
Fadi Sader1
|
Stéphane Roy1,2
1Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Université de Montréal, Montréal,
Québec, Canada
2Department of Stomatology, Faculty of
Dentistry, Université de Montréal,
Montréal, Québec, Canada
Correspondence
Stéphane Roy, Department of
Stomatology, Faculty of Dentistry,
Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC,
Canada.
Email: stephane.roy@umontreal.ca
Funding information
Canadian Institute of Health Research:
Institute of Musculoskeletal Health and
Arthritis, Grant/Award Number: 111013;
Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada, Grant/
Award Number: rgpin/03912-2017
Abstract
Axolotls represent a popular model to study how nature solved the problem of
regenerating lost appendages in tetrapods. Our work over many years focused
on trying to understand how these animals can achieve such a feat and not
end up with a scarred up stump. The Tgf-β superfamily represents an interest-
ing family to target since they are involved in wound healing in adults and pat-
tern formation during development. This family is large and comprises Tgf-β,
Bmps, activins and GDFs. In this review, we present work from us and others
on Tgf-β & Bmps and highlight interesting observations between these two
sub-families. Tgf-β is important for the preparation phase of regeneration and
Bmps for the redevelopment phase and they do not overlap with one another.
We present novel data showing that the Tgf-β non-canonical pathway is also
not active during redevelopment. Finally, we propose a molecular model to
explain how Tgf-β and Bmps maintain distinct windows of expression during
regeneration in axolotls.
K E Y W O R D S
axolotl, Bmp, limb regeneration, Tgf-β, wound healing
1
|
INTRODUCTION
1.1
|
Limb regeneration: Major events
The ability to repair and regenerate damaged or lost tis-
sues represents for many a dream of fiction only observed
in Hollywood movies and restricted to superheroes. How-
ever, a quick glance at the treasure trove that nature has
acquired over time reveals that indeed some animals
have acquired these superhero capabilities. If we look at
all the animal kingdom, we realize that regeneration is
not extremely rare: hydra, flat worms, earth worms,
crickets, arthropods, can all regenerate quite well.1 Even
in the more complex vertebrate world, regeneration is
present, albeit less frequently or to a less extraordinary
extent where no vertebrates can be cut in half to give rise
to 2 animals.1 One vertebrate that has captured our
collective imagination is the salamander whose limb can
be
fully
regenerated
after
amputation.
Lazzaro
Spallanzani was the first to publish and describe in
details this process in 17682 and it has been studied ever
since in labs around the world. The majority of salaman-
ders tested can regenerate very well.3 Although most sal-
amanders
can
regenerate,
only
a
few
have
been
extensively used for regeneration studies in the last cen-
tury: the axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum) and the newt
(Notophthalmus viridescens) (comprehensive reviews on
the complexity of the limb regeneration process publi-
shed by Brockes and Yokohama, which covers multiple
aspects that are not covered in this review, are available
for interested readers4,5). The process of limb regenera-
tion is well described with a staging system that is widely
used.6 These stages are based on macroscopic observa-
tions making it convenient to assess how well the
Received: 4 March 2021
Revised: 31 May 2021
Accepted: 2 June 2021
DOI: 10.1002/dvdy.379
Developmental Dynamics. 2022;251:973–987.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/dvdy
© 2021 American Association for Anatomy.
973

regeneration process is proceeding. Theses stages are usu-
ally described as follows: wound healing where epithelial
cells migrate to close the wound (the first 2-3 hours post-
amputation); the following 96 hours post amputation
(pa) is when fibroblasts and muscle cells dedifferentiate
and start migrating to form the blastema which is called
early bud (EB) as soon as it appears usually around 6 to
7 days pa (depends on animal size and temperature);
medium bud (MB) blastema is when it reaches a nice
round conical shape; late bud (LB) blastema when it
starts to flatten out; palette (Pal) with the first indenta-
tion between the fingers appear; early differentiation
(ED) when the fingers start to be discernable; and finally
late differentiation when the fingers are separate and
starting to function.
1.2
|
Regeneration: A biphasic process
Although limb regeneration is comprised of many stages
as enumerated above, it can also be divided into two
major
phases:
1—preparation
phase
&
2—re-
development phase. These two general phases basically
separate the events required to making the stump permis-
sible to allow regeneration to occur and the events
required to actually re-develop the missing limb.7,8 The
start of the preparation phase results from a trauma
(in labs this is a pair of scissors) followed by rapid wound
healing without the appearance of scar tissue, then cellu-
lar dedifferentiation and migration to form the blastema.
Nerves are also essential during the preparation phase9,10
but become unnecessary when the blastema reaches
LB. Farkas and Monaghan provide a comprehensive
review of the history and facts regarding nerve depen-
dency and regeneration.11 The re-development phase of
limb regeneration is, as the name indicates, very similar
to limb development. Pattern formation becomes evident
as the different tissues that compose the limb start appe-
aring, and many genes are expressed in a similar pattern
between limb regeneration and development.12-15 Of
course it is difficult to draw absolute lines as to when
exactly
the
preparation
and
redevelopment
phases
become distinct. Previous authors used the fact that
nerves are required until the end of MB and are no longer
required from LB on to propose that the separation
between preparation and redevelopment was between
these two stages.7,16 However, our work on the role of the
transforming growth factor beta (Tgf-β) superfamily has
made us reconsider whether the transition between prep-
aration
and
redevelopment
occurs
earlier
than
LB
namely around EB when regeneration transition from
Tgf-β to bone morphogenetic proteins (Bmp) signaling.
The Tgf-β superfamily is large and includes multiple
extracellular cytokines, such as Tgf-βs, Bmps, activins,
and growth differentiation factor (Gdfs). Not all are impli-
cated in wound healing or pattern formation. This review
focuses on Tgf-β and Bmps in limb regeneration.
Multiple studies looking at gene expression during
limb regeneration have been published providing impor-
tant data to understand how regeneration proceeds.17-19
Our lab has been interested in understanding why axo-
lotls do not form scar tissue following amputation like
most other vertebrates. Many of the events that occur
immediately following amputation of a limb in axolotls
are very similar to what is observed during would healing
in non-regenerating mammals.8,20 Yet, axolotls will not
form scar tissue which would prevent regeneration. How
is this possible and what signaling pathway could be
involved? To address these questions our lab has focused
on the Tgf-β superfamily since it is involved in wound
healing in basically every animal studied and is believed
to be involved in scarring.21-27
2
|
TGF-β SUPERFAMILY
The Tgf-β signal is transduced by a pair of transmem-
brane serine/threonine kinases, known as type I (TβR-I)
and type II (TβR-II) receptors.28,29 Both the TβR-I and
TβR-II
receptors
are
expressed
in
axolotl
cells.30
According to the current model of Tgf-β signaling, the
binding of Tgf-β to the TβR-II, a constitutively active
kinase, leads to the recruitment and phosphorylation of
the TβR-I resulting in its activation. The activated TβR-I
then propagates the signal inside the cell by phosphory-
lating Smad2 and/or Smad3. Phosphorylated Smad2
and/or Smad3 are released from the receptor and form a
complex with Smad4. This heteromeric Smad complex
then translocates to the nucleus and interacts with DNA
to regulate target gene expression by recruiting transcrip-
tional co-activators and co-repressors as depicted in
Figure 1.28,31,32
The Smad transcription factors represent the major
intracellular mediators of the Tgf-β superfamily signaling
(ie, canonical signaling). There are eight identified Smads
in mammals, Smad 1 to 8, which are responsible for
transmitting the Tgf-β superfamily response from the cell
surface receptors to the nucleus (Figure 1).21,31,33,34 The
Smads are divided into three types: the receptor-Smads
(R-Smads)
[phosphorylated by TβR-I],
the
co-Smad
(Smad4 which heterodimerizes with the R-Smads to
induce transcription) and the inhibitory-Smads (I-Smads)
which block phosphorylation of the R-Smads. Tgf-ßs and
Bmps utilize different subsets of cell surface receptors as
well as different Smads to transmit their signals to the
cell's nucleus (Figure 1). The Tgf-β (isoforms 1, 2, & 3 in
974
SADER AND ROY

mammals and 5 in Xenopus laevis) and the activins trans-
mit their signals via the R-Smads 2 and 3 which are nega-
tively controlled by the I-Smad7. The Bmps transmit their
signal via the R-Smads 1, 5, & 8 and are negatively con-
trolled by the I-Smad6. Smad4 is the co-Smad for all the
R-Smads 1 to 5, & 8 and is therefore used for Tgf-
β/activins & Bmps.
Of the four Smads that are implicated in Tgf-β signal-
ing (Smads 2, 3, 4 to 7), Smad3 stands out in the context
of tissue regeneration because of its central role in medi-
ating the fibrotic response in mammals and inhibiting
cell proliferation.35-37 Activation of Smad3 has been
shown to be involved in mediating the fibrotic response
in keloid fibroblast and myocardial infarction.35,38 Vari-
ous knockout (KO) mice have been generated for the dif-
ferent R-Smads where Smad2 and Smad4 were lethal,
while the Smad3 KO was viable.39-45 Smad2 is an impor-
tant mediator of Tgf-β signaling but the lethality of the
KO mouse model makes it difficult to delineate its role in
mediating the entire wound healing process in vivo.
There are presently no promoters available that would
allow the elimination of Smad2 via the Cre-Lox system in
all the various cell types (keratinocytes, fibroblasts, mac-
rophages) simultaneously that are involved in the healing
process. However, the phenotype of the Smad3 KO mice
was interesting in multiple ways: (a) the mice were viable
and relatively normal46; (b) the Tgf-β response was some-
what amplified in fibroblasts which is contrary to what
you would expect for an R-Smad KO47; (c) they displayed
improved wound healing capacities for various types of
injuries which were marked by increased rate of re-
epithelialization and significantly reduced scarring48-50;
and (d) they had less inflammation following skin
wounding.44,48,51 All of these changes observed in the
Smad3 KO mice, compared to their wild type littermates,
actually share a striking resemblance with the earlier
phases of regeneration in axolotls.8 Axolotl fibroblasts are
activated during regeneration and re-epithelialization is
very fast compared to mammals and they do not
scar.8,52,53
Also,
axolotls
display
a
very
minimal
FIGURE 1
Schematic
representation of Tgf-β and Bmp
signaling. The left panel shows Tgf-β
pathway and right panel the Bmp
pathway. Following Tgf-β or Bmp
binding to their respective type
2 receptor, the type 1 and type
2 receptors dimerize. The type
2 receptors phosphorylate the type
1 receptors. The type1 receptor can
then phosphorylate the R-Smads
(Smad2 and Smad3 for Tgf-β and
Smad1, Smad5, and Smad8 for Bmp).
Following their phosphorylation, the
R-Smad will form a trimer with
another R-Smad and Smad4. The
complex will then translocate into
the nucleus to induce target gene
expression. The I-Smads (Smad7 for
Tgf-β pathway and Smad6 for Bmp
pathway) can negatively affect Smad
signaling at the gene transcription
level or by competing with Smad4
SADER AND ROY
975

inflammatory response (compared to mammals) follow-
ing amputation.54-56
During normal development, Bmp signaling has
known roles in patterning, control of cell survival and
proliferation, as well as osteogenesis.57-62 Bmp2, Bmp4,
Bmp5, and Bmp7 are all expressed in the developing
limb63 and, except for Bmp5, have also been studied in
mice digit tip regeneration. In neonatal mice, digit tip
regeneration is limited to the region expressing Msx1.
Msx1/ mice do not regenerate, but that phenotype is
rescued by implanting Bmp4 soaked beads.64 Also, Bmp7
soaked beads extend the region normally capable of
regeneration beyond the first phalange in normal mice.65
2.1
|
Tgf-β to begin (initiation/
preparation phase)
Tgf-ß has been studied in numerous contexts and models.
Its key role in mammalian wound healing has inspired
many studies in different animal models, such as axolotl
limb regeneration. The first study using axolotl limb
regeneration as a model associating perfect regeneration
to Tgf-β signaling was published almost 15 years ago.30
Using a small pharmacological inhibitor, SB-431542, the
necessity of Tgf-β signaling was established. This inhibi-
tor is known to block the Tgf-β Smad2/3 cascade at the
receptor level. The initial study showed that treating ani-
mals with the drug stopped the regeneration process, as
the blastema was not formed.
SB-431542 is a specific inhibitor to the Tgf-β receptor
and does not discriminate between Smad2 and Smad3.66
Many studies that focus on Tgf-β pathway discuss or pre-
sent Smad2 and Smad3 together as one effector. How-
ever, the function of Smad2 and Smad3 can differ greatly
depending on the context and cell type.67 For example,
Smad2 has been associated with proliferation and migra-
tion in mesenchymal cells, while Smad3 has been associ-
ated with scaring. Knowing that blocking Tgf-β signaling
stopped regeneration, it was important to establish the
roles
of
Smad2
and
Smad3
during
regeneration.
Although it is not possible presently to specifically block
Smad2 pharmacologically, many inhibitors of Smad3 are
available. While a treatment with SB-431542 blocks both
Smad2 and Smad3 activity as well as blastema formation,
a treatment with a specific Smad3 inhibitor such as SiS3
blocks the phosphorylation of Smad3 but allows the limb
to fully regenerate.68 Overexpressing constitutively active
Smad3 protein in blastema cells resulted in an increase
in apoptotic cells.68 In addition, phospho-Smad3 levels
are extremely low compared to phospho-Smad2 during
the preparation phase. Presently it is not clear why there
is a differential activation in both intensity and timeline
between Smad2 and Smad3 during limb regeneration
and future studies will be required to elucidate how/why
this occurs. Smad3 activation is correlated with scarring
in mammals,36 but axolotl regeneration is a scarless pro-
cess.69,70 During the preparation phase of regeneration
cells start to migrate and proliferate, c-Myc expression is
increased and as mentioned above no scarring occurs.
These are all hallmark of absence of Smad3 signaling
since Smad3 inhibits migration, c-Myc expression and
proliferation which is induce by c-Myc.46,71 Combined,
these observations have led to the conclusion that both
Smads have different functions during limb regeneration,
and more specifically, that blastema formation is depen-
dent on Smad2 and not Smad3. Interestingly, zebrafish
heart regeneration seems to depend on phospho-Smad3,
however, SB-431542 was used in that study and it is
known to block both Smad2 and Smad3 activation and
phospho-Smad2 was not looked at.72 The difference
between axolotl limb regeneration and zebrafish heart
regeneration could very well be a species specific differ-
ence; yet, it would be interesting to assess the levels of
phospho-Smad2 and also to use SiS3 to specifically target
Smad3 in zebrafish to rule out the possibility that Smad2
also plays a role in zebrafish regeneration.
The inhibition of Tgf-β has led to questions regarding
its role during the regeneration process: is the lack of
regeneration a consequence of a secondary process
resulting from the treatment or is Tgf-β needed for a
regeneration specific function? One hypothesis was that
inhibiting Tgf-β signaling with SB-431542 caused the
basal lamina to reform prematurely. The unintended
presence of the basal lamina would then block signaling
from occurring between the AEC (apical epidermal cap)
and the dedifferentiated cells accumulating at the tip of
the stump. If the basal lamina reforms prematurely, it
would be similar to grafting a full thickness piece of skin
on the stump which is known to inhibit regeneration.73,74
Such a hypothesis would suggest that there is no direct
function of Tgf-β for regeneration and that SB-431542
induced inhibition would be the result of physical block-
age of signals between the AEC and blastema cells. Inter-
estingly, blocking Tgf-β did not result in premature
formation of the basal lamina.68 Even long-term treat-
ment with SB-431542 never resulted in a reformation of
the basal lamina. This observation leads to the conclusion
that blocking regeneration following Tgf-β inhibition is
related to the function of the pathway and not a physical
barrier of signaling caused by the formation of a prema-
ture basal lamina.68
Our results led us to establish that Smad2 is the prin-
cipal effector for the Tgf-β pathway during limb regenera-
tion. Many functions can be associated with the protein
in different contexts, but what is the role of Smad2
976
SADER AND ROY

during limb regeneration? Cellular proliferation is the
first function associated with the Tgf-β/Smad2 pathway.
Following SB-431542 treatment, BrDU incorporation
experiments show a clear reduction in proliferating cells
leading to the absence of the blastema in treated ani-
mals.30
Smad2
is
also
associated
with
matrix
metalloproteinases (Mmp) expression. Mmps are enzymes
that can remodel the extracellular matrix (ECM), all-
owing cells to migrate. Mmp2 and Mmp9 are two exam-
ples of Mmps that are known to be Tgf-β target and have
been shown to be involved in ECM restructuring during
regeneration.75,76 Dedifferentiated cells have to be able to
migrate through the limb to form the blastema and the
ECM has to be restructured at least enough for the cells
to move through it. The involvement of Tgf-β signaling
on cellular migration has also been shown through SB-
431542 treatment.30 In addition, both Mmp2 and Mmp9
expression are significantly reduced following SB-431542
treatment.68
Tgf-β can also signal via non-canonical pathways
involved in many cellular processes.77,78 These non-
canonical pathways share a unifying element in that they
are independent of Smad signaling, and in some cases
are independent from phosphorylation of Tgf-β receptors.
The Tak1 kinase is a Tgf-β signaling protein that is Smad
independent and is known to be involved in MAPK acti-
vation, such as p38 and JnK.77 The Tak1/p38/JnK path-
way has been shown to be involved in regeneration and
is limited to the early stages of regeneration, more specifi-
cally to the first few hours pa, that is, the wound closure
stage.79 Wound closure is the first stage of regeneration
and is completed in the first few hours of regeneration. It
is characterized by the migration of wound adjacent
keratinocytes. Although, these non-canonical pathways
are involved in regeneration, their roles seem to interact
with the canonical pathway in modulating regeneration.
When animals are treated singularly with a p38, JnK, or
Smad2/3 inhibitor, no effect is observed on wound clo-
sure.79 When used in combination, or when a Tak1
inhibitor which blocks Tgf-β activation of both p38 and
JnK is used, a significant reduction in the rate of wound
closure occurs. Wound closure in axolotl has also been
linked to epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT), a
process widely related to Tgf-β canonical and non-
canonical signaling.80,81 The inhibition of wound closure
following a combination of canonical and non-canonical
Tgf-β inhibitors resulted in the reduced expression of sev-
eral EMT markers.79 In other words, both canonical and
non-canonical pathways intersect in the regulation of
EMT and wound closure during the preparation phase
of limb regeneration.
The role of the Tgf-β/Smad2 & 3 pathway has been
strictly limited to the preparation phase during limb
regeneration.68 Blastema formation is blocked following
a treatment with SB-431542 and expression patterns
show that phospho-Smad2 is active up to 24 to 48 hours
pa and phospho-Smad3 activation is limited to the first
6 to 24 hours pa. Additionally, the Tgf-β1 active form
(≈12-15 kDa band on Western blots) is only detectable
up to 48 hours pa even though Tgf-β1 mRNA expression
is detectable up to early bud. Tgf-ß2 and Tgf-β3 did not
show any changes in expression (Q-RT-PCR) during the
entire regeneration process (unpublished data). Unfortu-
nately, we were not able to find antibodies that cross-
reacted with these axolotl proteins. Our results link Tgf-
β1/Smad signaling to the preparation phase. In addition,
the role of the non-canonical Tgf-β1/Tak1 pathway is
limited to the wound closure stage.79 Taken together,
these results have really solidified the idea that the Tgf-β
pathways (canonical & noncanonical) are involved solely
in the preparation phase of limb regeneration. This leads
to the question of which pathways are important during
the redevelopment phase and are other members of this
superfamily involved in other aspects of regeneration?
2.2
|
Bmp to end (redifferentiation/
redevelopment phase)
The Tgf-β superfamily is large and although the specific
Tgf-β cytokine (Tgf-β1, β2, & β3) have been extensively
studied in wound healing and fibrosis another large
branch of this superfamily has been extensively studied
during limb development and pattern formation in early
embryogenesis; the Bmps.82-85 Limb regeneration is com-
plex as it is a process that has to deal with healing from
an
amputation
and
eventually
reforming
(ie,
redeveloping) a three dimensional structure comprised of
multiple tissues. Because of our longstanding interest in
the role of Tgf-β during limb regeneration, it was logical
to also assess whether or not the Bmp component of this
superfamily played a role during regeneration. In addi-
tion, previous work by the group of Muneoka had dem-
onstrated that Bmps played a role during digit tip
regeneration in mice.64,86 Another important study by
Beck et al demonstrated that Bmp signaling was essential
for limb bud and tail regeneration in Xenopus laevis tad-
poles.87 Beck et al generated transgenic Xenopus using
the heat shock protein promoter to temporally over-
express Noggin to block Bmp signaling during regenera-
tion. The latter provided a strong incentive to look at
Bmps during limb regeneration in axolotls. Our first foray
in Bmp function during regeneration focused on Bmp-2
expression and its relation to sonic hedgehog (Shh) sig-
naling.88 Axolotls pattern their hand in a sequence that is
different than mice or chicks in that it forms the 1st digit
SADER AND ROY
977

first and the 4th one last (ie, reverse sequence of pattern-
ing compared to mice and chicks). Many studies have
linked Shh and Bmp signaling in patterning the limbs.89
Our work showed that Bmp-2 expression was indepen-
dent from Shh signaling and corresponded more with
skeletogenesis than Shh signaling. Cyclopamine was used
to block Shh during both limb development and limb
regeneration in axolotls and in both situation Bmp-2
expression correlated with skeletal element formation.88
In addition, Sox-9 expression also correlated with Bmp-2
expression in control and cyclopamine treated animals.
Noggin overexpression was used, as in the Beck et al
study,87 to block Bmp signaling during regeneration
(starting at late bud) and yielded hypomorphic limbs.
Interestingly,
when
Bmp-2
was
overexpressed,
the
regenerated limbs were also hypomorphic (no digits
formed). Further analyses showed that overexpression of
Bmp-2 caused an increase in apoptosis and also an
increase in tissue condensation. Noggin analyses, on the
other hand, showed a decrease in both apoptosis and cell
proliferation without any sign of hypercondensation of
tissues.88 This difference between the models put forth
for amniotic limb development with a cross talk between
Shh and Bmp signaling does not seem to be present in
axolotls.89 However, some work in mice also showed
results that correspond to what we see in axolotls.82 Shh
has a highly conserved role in patterning the axolotl limb
during both development and regeneration similar to
what happens in other tetrapods.90-92 In the Guimond
et al study the focus was on Bmp-2 and we did not assess
the expression of Bmp inhibitors like Gremlin, which was
recently shown to be expressed in developing axolotl
limbs,93 that are important in preventing Bmps from
overwhelming Shh function.94 Interestingly, in the KO
mouse for Shh the limb does produce what looks like a
digit
(most
likely
the
thumb)
and
skeletogenesis
occurs.95,96
That initial study focused on Bmp-2 and it did not
assess the canonical signaling pathway of Bmps: Smad1,
Smad5, & Smad8 in regenerating limbs. In a recent study
our group showed that Bmp2 is not the only Bmp that is
upregulated during limb regeneration but that Bmp5 and
Bmp7 are also active (n.b. we could not clone axolotl
Bmp4 so it was not looked at, but the genome sequencing
revealed that it is not present in axolotls97).12 Our data
indicated that Bmp2, 5, & 7 were all up-regulated starting
at EB. In addition, multiple genes that are considered
downstream of Bmp signaling were also assessed like
Msx-1, Msx-2, Sox-9, Col2a1, all of which also showed an
increase in expression starting at EB.12 The expression of
Shh, Fgf-8 and Fgf-10 were also measured. All of the
aforementioned genes are known to be expressed during
limb development and interestingly none of them were
upregulated before EB which is in large part the time
considered to be the preparation phase of regeneration.7,8
In order to really determine the activity of Bmps, it is
important to be able to look at the canonical signaling
(Smad1, Smad5, & Smad8) and if possible block its func-
tion. Antibodies which cross reacted with the axolotl
Smad1,
Smad5
and
phospho-Smad1/5
showed
that
indeed the intracellular signaling is upregulated starting
at EB just as the expression of Bmps is starting to
increase.12
Since Bmps comprise a large sub-group of the Tgf-β
superfamily (at least 12 identified in mammals98) and
multiple members of that sub-group are involved in limb
development it can be challenging to target the pathway
genetically, especially in axolotls. The ability to block the
Bmp signaling pathway directly at the receptor represents
an interesting approach as it inhibits all Bmps from sig-
naling therefore preventing compensation from any
Bmps. The Bmp inhibitor, LDN193189, which is highly
specific for the Bmp type I receptor99 was used to test
what impact blocking Bmp signal has on limb regenera-
tion. Dose responses were done and the levels of
phospho-Smad1/5 measured. Three doses were used
based on the reduction observed on phospho-Smad1/5
levels (40%-50%, 60%-70%, & 90%-100% inhibition) to
assess how the lack of Bmp signal affects limb regenera-
tion
and
the
expression
of
Bmp
target
genes.
If
LDN193189 is administered from the start a partial inhi-
bition is observed at the low dose of 0.2 μM and a com-
plete inhibition with 0.5 μM and 1.0 μM, however a
blastema was formed in each case and eventually
regressed for the 2 higher doses. These results correlate
with those reported by Beck et al with their transgenic
Xenopus where they observed an inhibition of regenera-
tion when Bmp was blocked by overexpressing Noggin.87
Treatments of 48 h prior to reaching either EB, MB, LB,
Pal or ED were done to assess the impact on the expres-
sion of Bmp target genes and Fgf-8, Fgf-10, and Shh. Bmp
target genes had reduced expressions and Shh was only
reduced at EB and not at the other stages. These latter
results support our initial study which indicated that in
large Bmps and Shh are independent of one another. The
Fgf results were surprising in that Fgf-8 was inhibited but
Fgf-10 was not affected at all. In addition, the expression
levels of Fgf-10 did not follow those of Fgf-8 even in
untreated controls. Fgf-8 expression peaks at MB and
decreases rapidly after in correlation with cellular prolif-
eration.100 Fgf-10 also peaks at MB but remains high up
to ED although proliferation is basically over. This high-
lights a difference with the limb development model
which links Fgf-8 and Fgf-10.101 Our results are in line
with the work of Seifert on axolotl limb development
which showed that Fgf-8 is essential for proliferation.93
978
SADER AND ROY

Axolotls do not have a defined apical ectodermal ridge
which possibly explain the lack of interaction between
Fgf-8 and Fgf-10 as observed in chicks and outgrowth
may be controlled differently.101,102 This observation
highlights the possibility of species specific differences or
possibly limb regeneration specific interactions. Future
studies looking at Fgf-8 and Fgf-10 specific function dur-
ing axolotl limb regeneration will be required to deter-
mine what roles each protein play.
As far as we know, our group is the only one that
studied Bmps in the standard limb regeneration model in
salamanders which is the amputation of the limb through
the upper or lower arm/leg. However, a few groups have
looked at Bmps in the context of the accessory limb
model (ALM).103-106 The ALM model is an intricate way
to obtain a limb outgrowth on either the upper or lower
limb of axolotls by making a wound and grafting a piece
of skin from a contralateral position to create a positional
confrontation, leaving a space on one side of the graft to
induce a wound healing response, and the deviation of a
nerve.103,107 The ALM is well suited to study the role of
nerves during limb regeneration. The group of Satoh has
published several papers where they looked at the inter-
action of Bmps and Fgfs in replacing the nerves to sup-
port the regenerative process.104,105,108 They also reported
the expression of Bmps and Fgfs in dorsal root ganglia.105
McCusker's group also looked at Bmps and Fgfs in addi-
tion to retinoic acid in mediating the regenerative
response in ALM.106 The aforementioned studies, using
the ALM, administered exogenous Bmps and Fgfs to
assess their ability to either replace the nerve or the skin
graft (or both) in the regenerative response. Most studies
did not look or manipulate endogenous levels of Bmps
and Fgfs, nonetheless, their results do offer important
insight on how these signaling molecules can work in
synergy to promote a regenerative response. The fact that
two independent groups see a cooperation between Bmps
and Fgfs fits with our results which show that Fgf-8
expression is linked to Bmp signaling. The ability of Bmps
and Fgfs to compensate/replace the presence of nerves in
the ALM is intriguing since we do not see any Bmps and
Fgfs expression during the early phase of limb regenera-
tion when nerves are required.12 The Bryant lab demon-
strated that Fgf-2 can rescue limb regeneration following
denervation,16 however, no studies has so far looked at
whether Bmps can do the same. A recent study showed
that Bmps can induce dedifferentiated newt muscle cells
to re-enter the cell cycle.109 Interestingly, the increase in
endogenous Bmp expression at EB corresponds with the
beginning of proliferation of dedifferentiated cells during
limb regeneration and blocking Bmp signaling inhibits
proliferation.12,110
In
addition,
Msx-1
expression
is
decreased when Bmp signaling is inhibited12 which fits
with a role in modulating dedifferentiated cell prolifera-
tion.111,112 It is possible that in the ALM system Bmps
influence cellular dedifferentiation (maybe via Msx-1)
and Fgfs drive cellular proliferation once cells are prop-
erly dedifferentiated.
Blocking Bmp signaling up until EB did not affect cel-
lular proliferation, but at LB cellular proliferation was
significantly decreased. LDN193189 treatment increased
apoptosis at both EB and LB significantly. This highlights
the sensitive nature of the Bmp signaling pathway in
mediating both apoptosis and cell proliferation since both
overexpression and inhibition can lead to a dysregulation
of these processes.12,88 Perhaps the most interesting
results from the Bmp studies came from starting the
LDN193189 treatments at different stages of regenera-
tion. It became apparent that the later you started the
treatment the more proximal elements were regenerated
in sequence going from proximal to distal elements.
Treatment started at EB did not yield any skeletal ele-
ments. However, this is not surprising since treatment
from the beginning of regeneration inhibits regeneration
and Bmps only start being expressed at EB (same with
signaling via phospho-Smad1/5) before skeletogenesis
has started. Treatment started at MB yielded very small
bone fragments (at 0.5 μM) which could not be identified
clearly, but were aligned with the radius and ulna. Treat-
ment started at LB yielded limbs with a complete forearm
and some carpal elements. Treatment started at Pal
yielded a complete forearm, wrist and some phalanges.
The elements that were missing were always distal ele-
ments and never from middle arm section (ie, no interca-
lation occurred). This is in line with results published by
the Tanaka group.15 Their work looked at the expression
of HoxA genes (mRNA and protein expression) (A9,
A11, & A13) and determined that the sequence in which
these genes were expressed supported a progressive speci-
fication of limb segments during regeneration. Their data
is in contrast to Gardiner et al which had looked at the
expression of HoxA9 and HoxA13 mRNA and observed a
pattern which suggested that the most distal part of the
limb was specified first (ie, supporting intercalation)
because of the overlapping expression of Hox A9 & A13
as early as EB.113 Vincent et al with the manipulation of
Bmp signaling provided a functional assay which demon-
strated experimentally that indeed limb regeneration is a
progressive process.12
2.3
|
Tgf-β and Bmp restricted to their
phase
If one thing stands out in the studies involving the Tgf-
β and Bmp pathways during limb regeneration, is how
SADER AND ROY
979

each pathway is restricted to a specific phase of regen-
eration without any apparent overlap. The role of the
Tgf-β/Smad2 & 3 pathway has been shown to be limited
to the preparation phase during limb regeneration in
axolotls.30,68 In Xenopus, Tgf-β/Smad2 has also been
shown to be activated early pa during tail regenera-
tion.114 Blastema formation is hindered following a
treatment
with
SB-431542
in
both
axolotls
and
Xenopus. In axolotls, the expression patterns of Smad2
shows that the protein is active (phosphorylated) up to
24 hours to 48 hours pa and that Smad3 activation is
limited to the first 24 hours following amputation albeit
at a much lower level of detection.68 Additionally, the
Tgf-β1 active form is only detectable by Western Blot up
to 48 hours pa. However, Tgf-β1 mRNA is detectable up
to EB. Taken together, these results show that Tgf-β
/Smad signaling is restricted to the preparation phase
of regeneration. In addition, our work showed that the
activation of p38/JnK in the hours following amputa-
tion was induced by the non-canonical Tgf-β pathway
via Tak1.79 Tak1 activates p38 and JnK and blocking
Tak1 or p38/JnK (in conjunction) resulted in identical
phenotypes in the first 6 hours pa.79 Interestingly this
observation was observed only for the preparation
phase immediately following amputation during the
rapid wound closure stage. P38 and JnK are not only
activated during the wound closure stage but also dur-
ing the redevelopment phase of regeneration. However,
these two proteins can be activated by pathways other
than Tgf-β.115 Unpublished results from our lab show
that treatments with a Tak1 inhibitor compared to a
combination of p38/JnK specific inhibitors initiated
after wound closure is complete, displayed a difference
in phenotypes. The simultaneous inhibition of p38/JnK
activation had an inhibitory effect on blastema progres-
sion (and cell proliferation) while inhibiting Tak1 activ-
ity had no effect on regeneration (Figure 2). This result
further indicates that Tgf-β is not needed or active once
the blastema is formed and it also highlights that other
signals are responsible for the activation of p38 & Jnk.
Taken together, these results have solidified the conclu-
sion
that
the
Tgf-β
pathways
(canonical
&
non-
canonical) are involved in the preparation phase of
limb regeneration and have a limited to no involvement
during redevelopment phase. A recent study from our
lab showed that Bmps via its canonical Smad1/5 path-
way is in turn limited to the redevelopment phase of
limb
regeneration.12
When
treating
animals
with
LDN193189 from the beginning of regeneration we
don't see any effect on phospho-Smad2 levels and the
blastema is able to form but eventually it will regress
(depending of the dose used).12
2.4
|
Tgf-β stored in the ECM
Tgf-β is known to be stored in the ECM in its latent form
in healthy tissues in mammals.116 It has been shown to
also be the case in axolotl.69 This allows the active form
to be released very quickly following an injury. In the
context of regeneration, it is not known how the stored
Tgf-β is restored in the ECM once the process is com-
plete. Tgf-β mRNA levels remain upregulated until EB
even though the active form of the Tgf-β protein is not
detected beyond 48 hours pa.30,68 We know Tgf-β signal-
ing is not required during the redevelopment phase.
Therefore, the expressed mRNA at EB stage could serve
to produce the next round of latent Tgf-β that is found in
the ECM. This could explain why the mRNA level of Tgf-
β expression is maintained even after the blastema has
started to form and after the active form of Smad2 is not
detected anymore. One cannot rule out the possibility
that immune cells like macrophages could also play a
role in restocking the Tgf-β to the ECM as they are an
integral part of the regenerative process.117 The presence
of Tgf-β in the ECM prior to the amputation allows for
the rapid release and initiation of its signaling as
observed when assessing EMTs after amputation.79 Bmp
signaling, on the other hand, takes more time to be put
in place and it is not detected during the preparation
phase. Bmp signaling only begins during the redevelop-
ment phase.12,88 Unfortunately, antibodies that cross-
reacted with axolotl Bmps were not found and it was not
possible to show whether there are any latent Bmp pro-
teins present in the ECM. Changes in ECM could poten-
tially play a role in Bmp signaling.118,119 There are
essential changes in the ECM during regeneration modu-
lated via Mmps.120-122 Being able to generate antibodies
that cross-react with axolotl Bmp proteins would provide
important tools to assess whether Bmps are stored in
ECM or whether changes in ECM during regeneration
affects their distribution and/or activity.
2.5
|
How to achieve restricted
expression/signaling for Tgf-β and Bmp
The question remains: how does the signaling between
Tgf-β
and
Bmp
occurs
in
such
a
distinctive
way
between the two regeneration phases? One could come
up with various hypotheses to explain these clear-cut dif-
ferences with various mechanisms. One of the hypothe-
ses is that there is a common regulator involved in
regulating both pathways. This protein could act as a
switch between the Tgf-β and Bmps at the end of the
preparation
phase
and
the
beginning
of
the
980
SADER AND ROY

redevelopment phase. Indeed, such regulator does exist:
SnoN. The protein SnoN is encoded by the gene c-ski and
has been studied in many contexts.123 Its expression is
known to be induced by Tgf-β signaling.124 This protein
can act as corepressor for Smad proteins and participate
in their degradation. In other words, SnoN is a target of
the Tgf-β signaling as well as being a repressor for the
pathway.125 In addition to its involvement in the Tgf-β
pathway, SnoN is also known to block the expression of
Bmps.124,126 Unpublished results from our lab established
the expression for SnoN mRNA levels during the regener-
ative process (Figure 3). The peak of expression is
observed around 6 hours pa and is maintained at least
until 48 hours pa. This corresponds with the peak of acti-
vation for Tgf-β signaling. As SnoN is involved in the reg-
ulation of both Bmp and Tgf-β signaling, it is an
interesting potential regulator that could be responsible
for mediating the distinctive pattern of both pathways.
The proposed model is that Tgf-β signaling induces the
expression of SnoN and SnoN would then block the
expression of Bmps and prevent any Bmp signaling dur-
ing the preparation phase. As the activity of SnoN
increases during the preparation phase, SnoN acts as a
negative feedback loop for the Tgf-β signaling and begins
to negatively affect the pathway leading to its down-
regulation.
This
reduction
in
Tgf-β/Smad
signaling
results in a reduction of SnoN expression. The reduction
of SnoN then allows Bmp expression to begin and leads
to the initiation of the redevelopment phase (Figure 3).
2.6
|
Comparing Tgf-β and Bmp in
development and regeneration
As limb regeneration and development share some simi-
larities, one could ask how the observations made of both
FIGURE 2
Effect on
regeneration of Tak1 inhibition vs
the combined inhibition of p38 and
JnK. Treatments were started 3 hours
post-amputation when wound is fully
closed. The left column, normal
regeneration, shows the limb for a
control animal treated with DMSO.
The regeneration proceeds normally.
At 35 days, the limb is fully
regenerated. Middle column, Tak1
inhibition, shows no effect on
regeneration and the results are
comparable to the control. At
35 days, the limb is fully regenerated.
Right column shows the combined
inhibition of p38 and JnK and results
in a lack of blastema progression. At
35 days, the blastema has the
appearance of a MB. Bottom row
shows the skeletal staining with
Victoria Blue of all three treatments
at 35 days pa
SADER AND ROY
981

Tgf-β and Bmp signaling during regeneration compare to
limb development. During regeneration, Tgf-β is mostly
involved in tissue repair, wound healing and migration
during the preparation phase of regeneration.20,30 Tgf-β
signaling does play a role during embryonic wound
healing and also during embryonic development.127
However, the involvement of Tgf-β signaling specifically
during limb development is quite limited. In chick limb
development, Tgf-β was shown to be involved in vascu-
larization early during the bud formation.128 In this
study, overexpression of Smad7 to block Tgf-β signal
leads to a deficiency in angiogenesis. Presently, it is not
known if Tgf-β plays such a role during limb regenera-
tion, it is a possibility that would be interesting to study.
In other studies, Tgf-β has been shown to play a role in
digit formation during development. Tgf-β works with
Bmp in digit morphogenesis and chondrogenesis.129,130
The role of Tgf-β in the process also extends to skeletal
condensation.131 As we have previously described in this
review, Tgf-β is neither present nor active in later stages
of regeneration when chondrogenesis and morphogenesis
occur. Therefore, when we compare these event in the
context of limb regeneration vs development, present
data would suggest that Tgf-β is not involved in these
processes during limb regeneration.
When looking at the role of Bmp during limb devel-
opment compared to limb regeneration there are more
similarities.
Bmp
signaling
shares
many
functions
between both phenomenon, such as digit patterning and
chondrogenesis.82,88 The comparison goes to the point
where some Bmp target genes such as Fgf8, Sox9, & Msx-
2 are the same in both regeneration and development.12
Although a parallel between the actors involved in limb
development and limb regeneration is observed, the sig-
naling patterns do sometime show some differences. For
instance, in the more classical model of Shh during digit
patterning, there is relationship between Bmp and Shh
signaling.132-134 During limb regeneration, both Bmp and
Shh are involved in digit formation, but their activities
are independent from one another.88 Interestingly, sev-
eral studies have shown that Gremlin (a Bmp antagonist)
is more involved with Shh function than Bmps them-
selves.94,132,135
Additionally,
the
work
from
Ban-
dyopadhyay et al in mice limb development seem to
agree with the independence between Bmp and Shh
observed during axolotl limb regeneration.82,88 The basic
role of Bmps seems to be conserved between regeneration
and development as it appears that in both situations it is
related to morphogenesis and chondrogenesis. Conse-
quently, limb development studies are a useful template
or starting points to help understand the role of Bmp dur-
ing limb regeneration.
3
|
CONCLUSION
The Tgf-β superfamily has proven to be important for
regeneration in axolotls, Xenopus and zebrafish. It
FIGURE 3
Model for the
transition between Tgf-β and Bmps
modulated via SnoN during
regeneration. A, SnoN gene
expression during the course of
regeneration. B to D, Model for SnoN
regulatory function during
regeneration. B, Tgf-β induces the
expression of SnoN which inhibits
the expression of Bmps. C, As
regeneration progresses, SnoN acts as
a negative feedback loop for Smad2
and Smad3 which results in the
beginning of its own inhibition. D,
Tgf-β is no longer active and
Smad2 & Smad3 are degraded with
the help of SnoN. With the inhibition
of SnoN, Bmp expression can
proceed. Bmp expression will then
activate Smad1/5
982
SADER AND ROY

represents a large family which together can modulate
almost every cellular processes required during regenera-
tion. Our work in axolotls has shown that the preparation
phase depends on Tgf-β and the redevelopment phase on
Bmps. It also demonstrated that Smad2 and Smad3 are
differentially regulated. How this is achieved is unknown
but could
be
crucial for preventing scarring from
inhibiting regeneration in axolotls. Based on our recent
work on the role of Bmps in limb regeneration, it seems
like the most likely pivot between the preparation and
redevelopment phases is around the EB stage since Tgf-β
is not active anymore (Figure 4) and multiple genes asso-
ciated with limb development start displaying an increase
in
expression.
Although
proper
innervation
is
still
required until the end of MB, it seems like the develop-
mental program is initiated at EB. One still has to be
careful not to oversimplify the process and much work is
still needed to fully understand this wonderful experi-
mental model. The two phase model puts emphasis on
the fact that salamanders have to prepare the stump to
allow redevelopment to occur. Obviously much work is
still
needed
to
understand
how
limb
regeneration
is achieved. Understanding the biology governing tissue
regeneration in animals like axolotls, Xenopus and
zebrafish is crucial in helping understand why humans
cannot regenerate and will hopefully lead to biomedical
applications in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by grants from CIHR and NSERC
to S.R.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Fadi Sader: Conceptualization; data curation; formal
analysis; methodology; validation; visualization; writing-
original draft; writing-review & editing. Stéphane Roy:
Conceptualization; formal analysis; funding acquisition;
investigation;
project
administration;
supervision;
writing-original draft; writing-review & editing.
ORCID
Stéphane Roy
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4504-0968
REFERENCES
1. Goss RJ. Principles of Regeneration. Vol 287. New York: Aca-
demic Press; 1969.
2. Spallanzani L. Prodromo sa un Opera da Imprimersi sopra le
Riproduzioni animali. Modena. 1768.
3. Dwaraka VB, Voss SR. Towards comparative analyses of sala-
mander limb regeneration. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2019;
336(2):129-144. https://doi.org/10.1002/jez.b.22902.
4. Brockes JP. Amphibian limb regeneration: rebuilding a com-
plex structure. Science. 1997;276(5309):81-87.
5. Yokoyama H. Initiation of limb regeneration: the critical steps
for regenerative capacity. Dev Growth Differ. 2008;50(1):13-22.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-169X.2007.00973.x.
6. Tank PW, Carlson BM, Connelly TG. A staging system for
forelimb regeneration in the axolotl, Ambystoma mexicanum
[research]. J Morph. 1976;150(1):117-128.
7. Gardiner DM, Carlson MR, Roy S. Towards a functional anal-
ysis of limb regeneration. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 1999;10(4):
385-393.
8. Roy S, Lévesque M. Limb regeneration in axolotl: is it super-
healing? [Review]. TSW Dev Embryol. 2006;6(S1):12-25.
9. Singer M. The nervous system and regeneration of the fore-
limb of adult Triturus. VII. The relation between number of
nerve fibers and surface area of amputation. J Exp Zool. 1947;
104:251-265.
10. Singer M. The influence of the nerve in regeneration of the
amphibian extremity. Q Rev Biol. 1952;27:169-200.
11. Farkas JE, Monaghan JR. A brief history of the study of nerve
dependent regeneration. Neurogenesis (Austin). 2017;4(1):
e1302216. https://doi.org/10.1080/23262133.2017.1302216.
12. Vincent E, Villiard E, Sader F, Dhakal S, Kwok B, Roy S. BMP
signaling is essential for sustaining proximo-distal progression
in regenerating axolotl limbs. Development. 2020;147(14):1-13.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1242/dev.170829.
FIGURE 4
Graphic representation of the expression levels and
duration of Tgf-β and Bmp pathway signal transducers during
regeneration. Expression of the different actors involved in the Tgf-
β canonical pathway: Smad2 and Smad3, Tgf-β non-canonical
pathway: JnK and p38; and Bmp pathway: Smad1/5. Top part of
panel shows expression levels for the preparation phase and bottom
part is for the redevelopment phase. Time course: 0, 2, 3, 6,
24, 48 hours pa, Early Bud (EB), Medium Bud (MB), Late Bud (LB),
Palette (Pal), Early Differentiation (ED) and fully regenerated
limb (Reg)
SADER AND ROY
983

13. Torok MA, Gardiner DM, Izpisua-Belmonte J-C, Bryant SV.
Sonic hedgehog (shh) expression in developing and reg-
enerating axolotl limbs. J Exp Zool. 1999;284:197-206.
14. Torok MA, Gardiner DM, Shubin NH, Bryant SV. Expression
of HoxD genes in developing and regenerating axolotl limbs.
Dev Biol. 1998;200:225-233.
15. Roensch K, Tazaki A, Chara O, Tanaka EM. Progressive speci-
fication rather than intercalation of segments during limb
regeneration. Science. 2013;342(6164):1375-1379. https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.1241796.
16. Mullen L, Torok MA, Bryant SV, Gardiner DM. Nerve depen-
dency of regeneration: role of Dlx and FGF signaling in amphib-
ian limb regeneration. Development. 1996;122(11):3487-3497.
17. Voss SR, Palumbo A, Nagarajan R, et al. Gene expression dur-
ing the first 28 days of axolotl limb regeneration I: experimen-
tal design and global analysis of gene expression. Regeneration
(Oxf). 2015;2(3):120-136. https://doi.org/10.1002/reg2.37.
18. Bryant DM, Johnson K, DiTommaso T, et al. A tissue-mapped
axolotl de novo transcriptome enables identification of limb
regeneration factors. Cell Rep. Jan 17 2017;18(3):762-776.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.12.063.
19. Gerber T, Murawala P, Knapp D, et al. Single-cell analysis
uncovers convergence of cell identities during axolotl limb
regeneration. Science. 2018;362(6413). https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.aaq0681.
20. Denis JF, Levesque M, Tran SD, Camarda AL, Roy S. Axolotl
as a model to study scarless wound healing in vertebrates: role
of the transforming growth factor beta signaling pathway. Adv
Wound
Care.
2013;2(5):250-260.
https://doi.org/10.1089/
wound.2012.0371.
21. Attisano L, Wrana JL. Signal transduction by the TGF-beta
superfamily. Science. 2002;296(5573):1646-1647.
22. Branton MH, Kopp JB. TGF-beta and fibrosis. Microbes Infect.
1999;1(15):1349-1365.
23. Gilbert RW, Vickaryous MK, Viloria-Petit AM. Characteriza-
tion of TGFbeta signaling during tail regeneration in the leop-
ard Gecko (Eublepharis macularius). Dev Dyn. 2013;242(7):
886-896. https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.23977.
24. Leask A, Abraham DJ. TGF-beta signaling and the fibrotic
response. FASEB J. 2004;18(7):816-827.
25. Massague J, Cheifetz S, Laiho M, Ralph DA, Weis FM,
Zentella A. Transforming growth factor-beta. Cancer Surv.
1992;12:81-103.
26. O'Kane S, Ferguson MW. Transforming growth factor beta s
and wound healing. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1997;29(1):63-78.
27. Roberts AB, Sporn MB, Assoian RK, et al. Transforming
growth factor type beta: rapid induction of fibrosis and angio-
genesis in vivo and stimulation of collagen formation in vitro.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1986;83(12):4167-4171.
28. Cheifetz S, Weatherbee JA, Tsang ML-S, et al. The trans-
forming growth factor-ß system, a complex pattern of cross-
reactive ligands and receptors. Cell. 1987;48:409-415.
29. Massague J. TGF-beta signal transduction. Annu Rev Biochem.
1998;67:753-791.
30. Levesque M, Gatien S, Finnson K, et al. Transforming growth
factor: beta signaling is essential for limb regeneration in axo-
lotls. PLoS One. 2007;2(11):e1227.
31. Wrana JL, Attisano L. The Smad pathway. Cytokine Growth
Factor Rev. 2000;11(1–2):5-13.
32. Roberts AB. Molecular and cell biology of TGF-beta. Miner
Electrolyte Metab. 1998;24(2–3):111-119.
33. Derynck
R,
Zhang
YE.
Smad-dependent
and
Smad-
independent pathways in TGF-beta family signalling. Nature.
2003;425(6958):577-584.
34. Massague J, Chen YG. Controlling TGF-beta signaling. Genes
Dev. 2000;14(6):627-644.
35. Chin GS, Liu W, Peled Z, et al. Differential expression of
transforming growth factor-beta receptors I and II and activa-
tion of Smad 3 in keloid fibroblasts. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2001;
108(2):423-429.
36. Flanders KC. Smad3 as a mediator of the fibrotic response. Int
J Exp Pathol. 2004;85(2):47-64.
37. Furukawa F, Matsuzaki K, Mori S, et al. p38 MAPK mediates
fibrogenic signal through Smad3 phosphorylation in rat myo-
fibroblasts. Hepatology. 2003;38(4):879-889.
38. Hao J, Ju H, Zhao S, Junaid A, Scammell-La Fleur T,
Dixon IM. Elevation of expression of Smads 2, 3, and
4, decorin and TGF-beta in the chronic phase of myocardial
infarct scar healing. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1999;31(3):667-678.
39. Datto MB, Frederick JP, Pan L, Borton AJ, Zhuang Y,
Wang XF. Targeted disruption of Smad3 reveals an essential
role in transforming growth factor beta-mediated signal trans-
duction. Mol Cell Biol. 1999;19(4):2495-2504.
40. Nomura M, Li E. Smad2 role in mesoderm formation, left-
right patterning and craniofacial development. Nature. 1998;
393(6687):786-790.
41. Sirard C, de la Pompa JL, Elia A, et al. The tumor suppressor
gene Smad4/Dpc4 is required for gastrulation and later for
anterior development of the mouse embryo. Genes Dev. 1998;
12(1):107-119.
42. Waldrip
WR,
Bikoff
EK,
Hoodless
PA,
Wrana
JL,
Robertson EJ. Smad2 signaling in extraembryonic tissues
determines anterior-posterior polarity of the early mouse
embryo. Cell. 1998;92(6):797-808.
43. Weinstein M, Yang X, Li C, Xu X, Gotay J, Deng CX. Failure
of egg cylinder elongation and mesoderm induction in mouse
embryos lacking the tumor suppressor smad2. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 1998;95(16):9378-9383.
44. Yang X, Letterio JJ, Lechleider RJ, et al. Targeted disruption of
SMAD3 results in impaired mucosal immunity and diminished
T cell responsiveness to TGF-beta. Embo J. 1999;18(5):1280-1291.
45. Zhu Y, Richardson JA, Parada LF, Graff JM. Smad3 mutant
mice develop metastatic colorectal cancer. Cell. 1998;94(6):
703-714.
46. Datto M, Wang XF. The Smads: transcriptional regulation
and mouse models. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2000;11(1–2):
37-48.
47. Piek E, Ju WJ, Heyer J, et al. Functional characterization of
transforming growth factor beta signaling in Smad2- and
Smad3-deficient fibroblasts. J Biol Chem. 2001;276(23):19945-
19953.
48. Ashcroft GS, Yang X, Glick AB, et al. Mice lacking Smad3
show accelerated wound healing and an impaired local
inflammatory response. Nat Cell Biol. 1999;1(5):260-266.
49. Falanga V, Schrayer D, Cha J, et al. Full-thickness wounding
of the mouse tail as a model for delayed wound healing: accel-
erated wound closure in Smad3 knock-out mice. Wound
Repair Regen. 2004;12(3):320-326.
984
SADER AND ROY

50. Flanders KC, Major CD, Arabshahi A, et al. Interference with
transforming growth factor-beta/ Smad3 signaling results in
accelerated healing of wounds in previously irradiated skin.
Am J Pathol. 2003;163(6):2247-2257.
51. Ashcroft GS, Roberts AB. Loss of Smad3 modulates wound
healing. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2000;11(1–2):125-131.
52. Han M, Yang X, Taylor G, Burdsal CA, Anderson RA,
Muneoka K. Limb regeneration in higher vertebrates: devel-
oping a roadmap. Anat Rec B New Anat. 2005;287(1):14-24.
53. Ziegels J. The melanocytes of the Axolotl. their modifications
during skin regeneration. Arch Biol. 1971;82(3):407-428.
54. Harty M, Neff AW, King MW, Mescher AL. Regeneration or
scarring: an immunologic perspective. Dev Dyn. 2003;226(2):
268-279.
55. Mescher AL, Neff AW. Regenerative capacity and the developing
immune system. Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol. 2005;93:39-66.
56. Mescher AL, Neff AW. Limb regeneration in amphibians:
immunological considerations. TSW Dev Embryol. 2006;1:
1-11.
57. Furuta Y, Piston DW, Hogan BL. Bone morphogenetic pro-
teins (BMPs) as regulators of dorsal forebrain development.
Development. 1997;124(11):2203-2212.
58. Luo G, Hofmann C, Bronckers AL, Sohocki M, Bradley A,
Karsenty G. BMP-7 is an inducer of nephrogenesis, and is also
required for eye development and skeletal patterning. Genes
Dev. 1995;9(22):2808-2820.
59. Zuzarte-Luis V, Montero JA, Rodriguez-Leon J, Merino R,
Rodriguez-Rey JC, Hurle JM. A new role for BMP5 during
limb development acting through the synergic activation of
Smad and MAPK pathways. Dev Biol. 2004;272(1):39-52.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.04.015.
60. Macias D, Ganan Y, Sampath TK, Piedra ME, Ros MA,
Hurle JM. Role of BMP-2 and OP-1 (BMP-7) in programmed
cell death and skeletogenesis during chick limb development.
Development. 1997;124(6):1109-1117.
61. Hamaratoglu F, Affolter M, Pyrowolakis G. Dpp/BMP signaling
in flies: from molecules to biology. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2014;32:
128-136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.04.036.
62. Salazar VS, Gamer LW, Rosen V. BMP signalling in skeletal
development, disease and repair. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2016;12
(4):203-221. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2016.12.
63. Geetha-Loganathan P, Nimmagadda S, Huang R, Scaal M,
Christ B. Expression pattern of BMPs during chick limb devel-
opment.
Anat
Embryol
(Berl).
2006;211(Suppl
1):87-93.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-006-0129-6.
64. Han M, Yang X, Farrington JE, Muneoka K. Digit regenera-
tion is regulated by Msx1 and BMP4 in fetal mice. Develop-
ment. 2003;130(21):5123-5132.
65. Yu L, Han M, Yan M, Lee E-C, Lee J, Muneoka K. BMP sig-
naling induces digit regeneration in neonatal mice. Dev Stem
Cells. 2010;137:551-559.
66. Inman GJ, Nicolas FJ, Callahan JF, et al. SB-431542 is a
potent and specific inhibitor of transforming growth factor-
beta superfamily type I activin receptor-like kinase (ALK)
receptors ALK4, ALK5, and ALK7. Mol Pharmacol. 2002;62
(1):65-74.
67. Brown KA, Pietenpol JA, Moses HL. A tale of two proteins:
differential roles and regulation of Smad2 and Smad3 in TGF-
beta signaling. J Cell Biochem. 2007;101(1):9-33.
68. Denis JF, Sader F, Gatien S, Villiard E, Philip A, Roy S. Acti-
vation of Smad2 but not Smad3 is required for mediating
TGF-beta signaling during limb regeneration in axolotls
[research]. Development. 2016;143:3481-3490. https://doi.org/
10.1242/dev.131466.
69. Levesque M, Villiard E, Roy S. Skin wound healing in axo-
lotls: a scarless process. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2010;314B:
684-697.
70. Seifert AW, Monaghan JR, Voss SR, Maden M. Skin regenera-
tion in adult axolotls: a blueprint for scar-free healing in ver-
tebrates. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e32875. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0032875.
71. Kretschmer
A,
Moepert
K,
Dames
S,
Sternberger
M,
Kaufmann J, Klippel A. Differential regulation of TGF-beta
signaling through Smad2, Smad3 and Smad4. Oncogene. 2003;
22(43):6748-6763.
72. Chablais F, Jazwinska A. The regenerative capacity of the
zebrafish heart is dependent on TGFbeta signaling. Develop-
ment.
2012;139(11):1921-1930.
https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.
078543.
73. Mescher AL. Effects on adult newt limb regeneration of par-
tial and complete skin flaps over the amputation surface.
J Exp Zool. 1976;195:117-128.
74. Tsai S. Inhibition of wound epidermis formation via full skin
flap surgery during axolotl limb regeneration. J Vis Exp. 2020;
(160). https://doi.org/10.3791/61522.
75. Overall CM, Wrana JL, Sodek J. Transcriptional and post-
transcriptional regulation of 72-kDa gelatinase/type IV colla-
genase by transforming growth factor-beta 1 in human fibro-
blasts. Comparisons with collagenase and tissue inhibitor of
matrix metalloproteinase gene expression. J Biol Chem. 1991;
266(21):14064-14071.
76. Sehgal I, Thompson TC. Novel regulation of type IV collage-
nase (matrix metalloproteinase-9 and -2) activities by trans-
forming growth factor-beta1 in human prostate cancer cell
lines. Mol Biol Cell. 1999;10(2):407-416.
77. Mu Y, Gudey SK, Landstrom M. Non-Smad signaling path-
ways. Cell Tissue Res. 2012;347(1):11-20. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00441-011-1201-y.
78. Zhang YE. Non-Smad pathways in TGF-beta signaling. Cell
Res. 2009;19(1):128-139. https://doi.org/10.1038/cr.2008.328.
79. Sader F, Denis J-F, Laref H, Roy S. Epithelial to mesenchymal
transition is mediated by both TGF-β canonical and non-
canonical signaling during axolotl limb regeneration. Sci Rep.
2019;9(1):1144. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-38171-5.
80. Kalluri
R,
Weinberg
RA.
The
basics
of
epithelial-
mesenchymal transition. J Clin Invest. 2009;119(6):1420-1428.
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI39104.
81. Xu J, Lamouille S, Derynck R. TGF-beta-induced epithelial to
mesenchymal transition. Cell Res. 2009;19(2):156-172. https://
doi.org/10.1038/cr.2009.5.
82. Bandyopadhyay A, Tsuji K, Cox K, Harfe BD, Rosen V,
Tabin CJ. Genetic analysis of the roles of BMP2, BMP4, and
BMP7 in limb patterning and skeletogenesis. PLoS Genet.
2006;2(12):e216.
83. Duprez D, Bell EJ, Richardson MK, et al. Overexpression of
BMP-2 and BMP-4 alters the size and shape of developing
skeletal elements in the chick limb. Mech Dev. 1996;57(2):
145-157.
SADER AND ROY
985

84. Duprez DM, Kostakopoulou K, Francis-West PH, Tickle C,
Brickell PM. Activation of Fgf-4 and HoxD gene expression by
BMP-2 expressing cells in the developing chick limb. Develop-
ment. 1996;122:1821-1828.
85. Hogan BL. Bone morphogenetic proteins in development.
Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1996;6(4):432-438.
86. Han M, Yang X, Lee J, Allan CH, Muneoka K. Development
and regeneration of the neonatal digit tip in mice. Dev Biol.
2008;315(1):125-135.
87. Beck CW, Christen B, Barker D, Slack JM. Temporal require-
ment for bone morphogenetic proteins in regeneration of the tail
and limb of Xenopus tadpoles. Mech Dev. 2006;123(9):674-688.
88. Guimond JC, Levesque M, Michaud PL, et al. BMP-2 func-
tions independently of SHH signaling and triggers cell con-
densation and apoptosis in regenerating axolotl limbs. BMC
Dev Biol. 2010;10(1):15.
89. Zeller R, Lopez-Rios J, Zuniga A. Vertebrate limb bud devel-
opment: moving towards integrative analysis of organogenesis
[Review]. Nat Rev Genet. 2009;10(12):845-858. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nrg2681.
90. Roy S, Gardiner DM. Cyclopamine induces digit loss in reg-
enerating axolotl limbs. J Exp Zool. 2002;293(2):186-190.
91. Roy S, Gardiner DM, Bryant SV. Vaccinia as a tool for func-
tional analysis in regenerating limbs: ectopic expression of
Shh. Dev Biol. 2000;218(2):199-205.
92. Stopper GF, Wagner GP. Inhibition of Sonic hedgehog signal-
ing leads to posterior digit loss in Ambystoma mexicanum:
parallels to natural digit reduction in urodeles [Research Sup-
port, Non-U.S. Gov't]. Dev Dyn. 2007;236(1):321-331. https://
doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.21025.
93. Purushothaman S, Elewa A, Seifert AW. Fgf-signaling is com-
partmentalized within the mesenchyme and controls prolifer-
ation during salamander limb development. Elife. 2019;8
(e48507). https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.48507.
94. Zuniga A, Haramis AP, McMahon AP, Zeller R. Signal relay
by BMP antagonism controls the SHH/FGF4 feedback loop in
vertebrate limb buds. Nature. 1999;401(6753):598-602. https://
doi.org/10.1038/44157.
95. Chiang C, Litingtung Y, Harris MP, et al. Manifestation of the
limb prepattern: limb development in the absence of sonic
hedgehog function. Dev Biol. 2001;236(2):421-435.
96. Kraus P, Fraidenraich D, Loomis CA. Some distal limb struc-
tures develop in mice lacking Sonic hedgehog signaling. Mech
Dev. 2001;100(1):45-58.
97. Nowoshilow S, Schloissnig S, Fei JF, et al. The axolotl genome
and the evolution of key tissue formation regulators. Nature.
2018;554(7690):50-55. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25458.
98. Lowery JW, Rosen V. The BMP Pathway and Its Inhibitors in
the Skeleton. Physiol Rev. 2018;98(4):2431-2452. https://doi.
org/10.1152/physrev.00028.2017.
99. Yu PB, Deng DY, Lai CS, et al. BMP type I receptor inhibition
reduces heterotopic [corrected] ossification. Nat Med. 2008;14
(12):1363-1369. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.1888.
100. Wallace H, Maden M. The cell cycle during amphibian limb
regeneration. J Cell Sci. 1976;20(3):539-547.
101. Ohuchi H, Nakagawa T, Yamamoto A, et al. The mesenchy-
mal factor, FGF10, initiates and maintains the outgrowth of
the chick limb bud through interaction with FGF8, an apical
ectodermal factor. Development. 1997;124(11):2235-2244.
102. Sturdee A, Connock M. The embryonic limb bud of the
Urodele: morphological studies of the apex. Differentiation.
1975;3(1–3):43-49. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1432-0436.1975.tb
00844.x.
103. Endo T, Bryant SV, Gardiner DM. A stepwise model system
for limb regeneration. Dev Biol. 2004;270(1):135-145.
104. Makanae A, Mitogawa K, Satoh A. Co-operative Bmp- and
Fgf-signaling inputs convert skin wound healing to limb for-
mation in urodele amphibians. Dev Biol. 2014;396(1):57-66.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.09.021.
105. Satoh A, Makanae A, Nishimoto Y, Mitogawa K. FGF and
BMP derived from dorsal root ganglia regulate blastema
induction in limb regeneration in Ambystoma mexicanum.
Dev Biol. 2016;417(1):114-125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.
2016.07.005.
106. Vieira WA, Wells KM, Raymond MJ, De Souza L, Garcia E,
McCusker CD. FGF, BMP, and RA signaling are sufficient for
the induction of complete limb regeneration from non-
regenerating wounds on Ambystoma mexicanum limbs. Dev
Biol. 2019;451(2):146-157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.201
9.04.008.
107. Egar MW. Accessory limb production by nerve-induced cell
proliferation. Anat Rec. 1988;221(1):550-564. https://doi.org/
10.1002/ar.1092210111.
108. Satoh A, Mitogawa K, Makanae A. Nerve roles in blastema
induction and pattern formation in limb regeneration. Int J
Dev Biol. 2018;62(9–10):605-612. https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.
180118as.
109. Wagner I, Wang H, Weissert PM, et al. Serum proteases
potentiate BMP-induced cell cycle re-entry of dedifferentiating
muscle cells during newt limb regeneration. Dev Cell. 2017;40
(6):608-617e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2017.03.002.
110. Wallace H. Vertebrate Limb Regeneration. Chichester: John
Wiley and Sons; 1981.
111. Odelberg SJ, Kollhoff A, Keating MT. Dedifferentiation of
mammalian myotubes induced by msx1. Cell. 2000;103(7):
1099-1109.
112. Simon HG, Nelson C, Goff D, Laufer E, Morgan BA, Tabin C.
Differential expression of myogenic regulatory genes and
Msx-1 during dedifferentiation and redifferentiation of reg-
enerating amphibian limbs. Dev Dyn. 1995;202:1-12.
113. Gardiner DM, Blumberg B, Komine Y, Bryant SV. Regulation
of HoxA expression in developing and regenerating axolotl
limbs. Development. 1995;121:1731-1741.
114. Ho DM, Whitman M. TGF-beta signaling is required for mul-
tiple processes during Xenopus tail regeneration. Dev Biol.
Mar 1 2008;315(1):203-16.
115. Hagemann C, Blank JL. The ups and downs of MEK kinase
interactions. Cell Signal. 2001;13(12):863-875. https://doi.org/
10.1016/s0898-6568(01)00220-0.
116. Dallas SL, Miyazono K, Skerry TM, Mundy GR, Bonewald LF.
Dual role for the latent transforming growth factor-beta bind-
ing protein in storage of latent TGF-beta in the extracellular
matrix and as a structural matrix protein. J Cell Biol. 1995;131
(2):539-549.
117. Godwin JW, Pinto AR, Rosenthal NA. Macrophages are
required for adult salamander limb regeneration. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2013;110(23):9415-9420. https://doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.1300290110.
986
SADER AND ROY

118. Nistala H, Lee-Arteaga S, Smaldone S, et al. Fibrillin-1 and -2
differentially modulate endogenous TGF-beta and BMP bio-
availability during bone formation. J Cell Biol. 2010;190(6):
1107-1121. https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201003089.
119. Umulis D, O'Connor MB, Blair SS. The extracellular regula-
tion of bone morphogenetic protein signaling. Development.
2009;136(22):3715-3728. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.031534.
120. Vinarsky V, Atkinson DL, Stevenson TJ, Keating MT,
Odelberg SJ. Normal newt limb regeneration requires matrix
metalloproteinase function. Dev Biol. 2005;279(1):86-98.
121. Yang EV, Bryant SV. Developmental regulation of a matrix
metalloproteinase during regeneration of axolotl appendages.
Dev Biol. 1994;166:696-703.
122. Yang EV, Gardiner DM, Carlson MR, Nugas CA, Bryant SV.
Expression of Mmp-9 and related matrix metalloproteinase
genes during axolotl limb regeneration. Dev Dyn. 1999;216(1):
2-9.
123. Jahchan NS, Luo K. SnoN in mammalian development, func-
tion and diseases. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2010;10(6):670-675.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coph.2010.08.006.
124. Ehnert S, Zhao J, Pscherer S, et al. Transforming growth fac-
tor beta1 inhibits bone morphogenic protein (BMP)-2 and
BMP-7 signaling via upregulation of Ski-related novel protein
N (SnoN): possible mechanism for the failure of BMP ther-
apy? BMC Med. 2012;10:101. https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-
7015-10-101.
125. Luo K. Ski and SnoN: negative regulators of TGF-beta signal-
ing. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2004;14(1):65-70. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.gde.2003.11.003.
126. Kawamura I, Maeda S, Imamura K, et al. SnoN suppresses
maturation of chondrocytes by mediating signal cross-talk
between transforming growth factor-beta and bone morpho-
genetic protein pathways. J Biol Chem. 2012;287(34):29101-
29113. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.349415.
127. Degen KE, Gourdie RG. Embryonic wound healing: a primer
for engineering novel therapies for tissue repair. Birth Defects
Res C Embryo Today. 2012;96(3):258-270. https://doi.org/10.
1002/bdrc.21019.
128. Vargesson
N.
Vascularization
of
the
developing
chick
limb bud: role of the TGFbeta signalling pathway. J Anat.
2003;202(1):93-103. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1469-7580.2003.
00133.x.
129. Merino R, Ganan Y, Macias D, Economides AN, Sampath KT,
Hurle JM. Morphogenesis of digits in the avian limb is con-
trolled by FGFs, TGFbetas, and noggin through BMP signal-
ing. Dev Biol. 1998;200(1):35-45.
130. Montero JA, Lorda-Diez CI, Ganan Y, Macias D, Hurle JM.
Activin/TGFbeta and BMP crosstalk determines digit cho-
ndrogenesis. Dev Biol. 2008;321(2):343-356. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ydbio.2008.06.022.
131. Leonard CM, Fuld HM, Frenz DA, Downie SA, Massague J,
Newman SA. Role of transforming growth factor-beta in
chondrogenic pattern formation in the embryonic limb: stim-
ulation of mesenchymal condensation and fibronectin gene
expression by exogenenous TGF-beta and evidence for endog-
enous TGF-beta-like activity. Dev Biol. 1991;145(1):99-109.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0012-1606(91)90216-p.
132. Khokha MK, Hsu D, Brunet LJ, Dionne MS, Harland RM.
Gremlin is the BMP antagonist required for maintenance of
Shh and Fgf signals during limb patterning. Nat Genet. 2003;
34(3):303-307. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1178.
133. Niswander L, Martin GR. FGF-4 and BMP-2 have opposite
effcets on limb growth. Nature. 1993;361:68-71.
134. Pizette S, Niswander L. BMPs negatively regulate structure
and function of the limb apical ectodermal ridge. Develop-
ment. 1999;126(5):883-894.
135. Benazet JD, Zeller R. Vertebrate limb development: moving
from
classical
morphogen
gradients
to
an
integrated
4-dimensional patterning system. Cold Spring Harb Perspect
Biol. 2009;1(4):a001339. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.
a001339.
How to cite this article: Sader F, Roy S. Tgf-β
superfamily and limb regeneration: Tgf-β to start
and Bmp to end. Developmental Dynamics. 2022;
251(6):973–987. https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.379
SADER AND ROY
987

===== Sagner2019_Development_ScNeuronalDiversity =====
REVIEW
Establishing neuronal diversity in the spinal cord: a time
and a place
Andreas Sagner* and James Briscoe*
ABSTRACT
The vertebrate spinal cord comprises multiple functionally distinct
neuronal cell types arranged in characteristic positions. During
development, these different types of neurons differentiate from
transcriptionally distinct neural progenitors that are arrayed in discrete
domains along the dorsal-ventral and anterior-posterior axes of the
embryonic spinal cord. This organization arises in response to
morphogen gradients acting upstream of a gene regulatory network,
the architecture of which determines the spatial and temporal pattern
of gene expression. In recent years, substantial progress has been
made in deciphering the regulatory network that underlies the
specification of distinct progenitor and neuronal cell identities. In
this Review, we outline how distinct neuronal cell identities are
established in response to spatial and temporal patterning systems,
and outline novel experimental approaches to study the emergence
and function of neuronal diversity in the spinal cord.
KEY WORDS: Gene regulatory network, Hedgehog, Neural tube,
Neurogenesis, Neuronal diversity, Patterning
Introduction
The spinal cord is crucial for how we perceive and interact with our
environment. Perception of sensory information from our skin,
muscles and internal organs depends on the activities of several
classes of neurons, the cell bodies of which reside predominantly
within the dorsal horns of the spinal cord. Conversely, our ability to
respond to these peripheral cues depends on neuronal circuits
located in the ventral spinal cord. These circuits convert motor
commands from the brain and sensory inputs into precise patterns of
motor activity and thus muscle contraction.
Functional characterization of the adult spinal cord, based
on
morphology,
neuronal
connectivity,
axonal
projections,
neurotransmitter types and molecular markers, has revealed a
modular organization with neurons performing specific tasks
occupying stereotypical positions. For example, neurons in the
dorsal horns are arranged in distinct laminae and each lamina
receives sensory input from neurons involved in the transmission of
distinct signals (reviewed by Lai et al., 2016). The outer laminae
(laminae I and II) are innervated by afferents transmitting noxious
stimuli, including pain, itch and thermosensation, whereas touch
afferents project towards the deeper laminae (laminae II-V) and
proprioceptive afferents project towards more ventral laminae or
directly onto motor neurons (MNs). In contrast to the laminar
structure of the dorsal horns, MNs within the ventral spinal cord are
organized into distinct clusters that occupy invariant positions. This
is most obvious at limb levels, where MNs are organized into ∼50
motor pools that innervate distinct limb muscles. The position of the
neuronal cell body in the spinal cord matches the projection pattern
of the MN, with proximally projecting neurons occupying more
ventral
positions,
and
distally
projecting
pools
located
in
progressively more dorsal positions. Although neuronal settling
position does not seem to be important for projecting to the right
target muscle, it is essential for establishing the correct neuronal
connections with sensory afferents (Balaskas et al., 2019; Demireva
et al., 2011; Sürmeli et al., 2011). Similarly, the position of distinct
subtypes of V1 neurons – inhibitory neurons that provide negative
feedback to MNs and that are crucial for the alternating motor input
to flexor and extensor muscles – seems to correlate with distinct
proprioceptive input onto these neurons (Bikoff et al., 2016). These
findings suggest that the spatial segregation of functionally distinct
cell types at stereotypic positions underlies the specificity of circuit
formation in the spinal cord.
This raises the question of how and when this organization arises
during development. Work during the last 30 years revealed that this
organization emerges early during development of the embryonic
neural tube. Here, the activities of multiple morphogens that
emanate from the dorsal and ventral poles of the spinal cord
pattern
the
dorsal-ventral
(DV)
axis.
These
morphogens
induce distinct basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and homeodomain
(HD) transcription factors (TFs) in spatially delimited and
combinatorially overlapping territories (Briscoe et al., 2000;
Jessell, 2000). The resulting TF code defines 11 molecularly
distinct types of neural progenitors (NPs), each of which gives rise
to one or more distinct neuronal subtype (Alaynick et al., 2011; Lai
et al., 2016; Lu et al., 2015). This exemplifies a recurring theme in
animal development: morphogen signalling induces distinct spatial
patterns of gene expression in progenitors, thereby specifying cell
fates and resulting in the ordered and balanced production of
terminally differentiated cell types (Rogers and Schier, 2011;
Sagner and Briscoe, 2017). In fact, owing to its experimental
accessibility, the vertebrate neural tube has come to serve as a
leading model for understanding morphogen-mediated patterning
and the principles of cell fate specification.
Recent technological advances have provided further insight into
the molecular mechanisms underlying patterning and cell fate
specification in this system. Several large-scale molecular profiling
studies revealed an unexpectedly large number of molecularly
distinct neuronal cell types. In particular, profiling of neuronal gene
expression heterogeneity in embryonic and adult spinal cords by
single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) suggested the existence
of at least several dozen molecularly distinct neuronal subtypes
(Delile et al., 2019; Häring et al., 2018; Hayashi et al., 2018;
Sathyamurthy et al., 2018). Furthermore, detailed characterization
The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 1AT, UK.
*Authors for correspondence (andreas.sagner@crick.ac.uk;
james.briscoe@crick.ac.uk)
A.S., 0000-0001-5698-8191; J.B., 0000-0002-1020-5240
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed.
1
© 2019. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2019) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/dev.182154
DEVELOPMENT

of V1 neuron heterogeneity at limb levels of the spinal cord has
suggested much further diversification and the existence of ∼50
distinct subtypes of one specific interneuron class (V1 neurons)
based on the combinatorial expression of 19 TFs (Bikoff et al.,
2016; Gabitto et al., 2016). Subsequent work suggested additional
diversification of V1 neurons along the anterior-posterior (AP) axis
of the spinal cord (Sweeney et al., 2018). Here, we review these
recent findings and discuss how neuronal diversity emerges from
the intersection of three orthogonal patterning systems that pattern
the spinal cord in space and time. Although we do not provide a
molecular mechanism for the formation of every neuronal subtype
described in the literature, we argue that the framework is now
established to achieve this goal. We also provide a brief overview of
emerging model systems and experimental approaches that may
help us decipher the molecular mechanisms that underlie neuronal
diversity and understand how this diversity contributes to the
formation of functional neuronal circuitry.
Opposing morphogen gradients pattern the spinal cord along
the DV axis
NPs acquire distinct identities along the DV axis of the neural tube
in response to opposing morphogen systems (Briscoe and Small,
2015; Jessell, 2000; Le Dréau and Martí, 2012) (Fig. 1A). Sonic
hedgehog (Shh), emanating first from the notochord and later from
the floor plate, induces distinct ventral identities (Marti et al., 1995;
Roelink et al., 1995), whereas ligands of the bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) and Wnt families, secreted from the roof plate,
promote dorsal progenitor identities (Lee et al., 2000; Liem et al.,
Nkx2.2
Olig2
Irx3
Pax6
FP
Time
Shh
dp1
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
p0
p1
p2
pMN
p3
dI1
dI2
dI3
dI4
dI5
dI6
 V0
 V1
 V2a
 V2b
 V3
MN
Nkx6.1
Nkx6.2
Pax3/7
Irx3/5
Pax6
Nkx2.9
Dbx2
Msx1
Nkx2.2
Dbx1
Olig2
Foxn4
Prdm12
Olig3
Gsx1
Lhx9
Nkx2.2
Isl1
Isl1
Gata3
Lmx1b
Pax2
Sox14
Lhx2
Lbx1
Evx1/2
En1
Vsx2
Gata2
Mnx1
Sim1
Pou4f1
Pou4f1
Pax2
Barhl1
Lhx3
Lhx3
Tal1
Tlx3
Tlx3
Lhx1/5
Lhx1/5
Lhx1/5
Barhl2
Isl2
Foxd3
Foxd3
Prrxl1
Prrxl1
Shh
BMP/Wnt
A
B
Irx3
Pax6
Nkx2.2
Olig2
Shh
Level of signalling
Protein level
Duration of signalling
Protein level
Duration of signalling
Level of signalling
Nkx2.2
Olig2
Pax6/Irx3
C
D
E
F
Fig. 1. Opposing morphogen gradients pattern the spinal cord along the DV axis. (A) Schematic cross-section of an embryonic spinal cord.
Opposing morphogen gradients delineate specific TF expression domains (pink boxes) along the DV axis. The co-expression of TFs defines 11 distinct neural
progenitor (NP) domains (dp1-dp6, p0-p2, pMN, p3) along the DV axis. Each of these NP domains gives rise to distinct neuronal subtypes (dI1-dI6, V0, V1, V2a,
V2b, MNs, V3), which are characterized by the expression of specific TFs (green boxes). (B) Sequential induction of progenitor markers in the ventral spinal
cord. At early stages of development, NPs throughout the DV axis express Pax6 and Irx3 (grey). As development progresses, increasing levels and duration of
Shh signalling result in the sequential induction of Olig2 (blue) and Nkx2.2 (green). FP, floor plate. (C) The GRN controlling spatial and temporal dynamics of gene
expression in the ventral spinal cord. (D) As a consequence of the dynamics of this GRN, different levels of Shh lead to the expression of different TFs; lower levels
and durations of Shh favour the expression of Olig2 (blue), whereas high levels of Shh signalling lead to expression of Nkx2.2 (green). (E) Dynamics of
gene expression upon exposure of NPs to high levels of Shh. Although the transcriptional circuit favours Nkx2.2 expression at steady state, the system transiently
produces Olig2 before Nkx2.2 induction. (F) Phase portrait depicting the relationship between levels and duration of Shh signalling for the induction of
Pax6/Irx3, Olig2 and Nkx2.2 in NPs.
2
REVIEW
Development (2019) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/dev.182154
DEVELOPMENT

1997; Muroyama et al., 2002; Timmer et al., 2002; Wine-Lee et al.,
2004). These morphogens induce the expression of HD and bHLH
TFs in discrete but overlapping domains along the DV axis of the
neural tube (Alaynick et al., 2011; Briscoe et al., 2000).
The combination of TFs expressed by a progenitor determines the
specific classes of neurons that it generates (Fig. 1A). Importantly,
the TFs extensively cross-regulate each other’s expression, forming
a gene regulatory network (GRN), the architecture of which
determines the spatial and temporal response to morphogen input.
At the molecular level, this cross-regulation is mediated through
modular enhancers that contain binding sites for multiple GRN
components, for the transcriptional effectors of morphogen
signalling pathways, and for broadly expressed TFs (Kutejova
et al., 2016; Nishi et al., 2015; Oosterveen et al., 2013; Peterson
et
al.,
2012).
This
allows
these
enhancers
to
integrate
simultaneously the current state of the GRN and the signalling
state of the cell. The dynamics of the GRN, which are determined by
its architecture, then convert levels and duration of morphogen
inputs into spatially delimited and partially overlapping domains of
TF expression. The resulting pattern defines six dorsal (dp1-dp6)
and five ventral (p0-p2, pMN, p3) NP domains (Fig. 1A). In
addition to these transcriptional mechanisms, post-transcriptional
regulation of mRNA and protein stability have also been implicated
in establishing the correct pattern of NP domains in the spinal cord
(Chen et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2018).
How morphogen input is converted into distinct progenitor
identities is best understood in the context of the ventral neural tube,
where
Shh
signalling
specifies
progenitor
identities
in
a
concentration- and duration-dependent manner (Balaskas et al.,
2012; Cohen et al., 2014; Dessaud et al., 2007) (Fig. 1B-F). Here,
the p3 domain is defined by Nkx2.2 expression, pMN by expression
of Olig2 and low levels of Pax6, and p2 progenitors express Irx3 and
high levels of Pax6. These four TFs are linked by cross-repressive
interactions, with Nkx2.2 and Olig2 repressing all other TFs, Irx3
repressing Olig2 and Nkx2.2, and Pax6 repressing Nkx2.2
(Fig. 1C). This transcriptional circuit determines both the spatial
and temporal dynamics of gene expression in response to
Shh signalling (Briscoe and Small, 2015; Cohen et al., 2013)
(Fig. 1B-F).
Although the role of Shh in promoting ventral cell identities is
well established, the roles of BMP and Wnt signalling in the dorsal
neural tube are not fully resolved. BMP and Wnt ligands are initially
expressed in the roof plate but at later stages are also expressed in
multiple dorsal NP populations (Andrews et al., 2017; Lee et al.,
2000; Liem et al., 1997; Megason and McMahon, 2002). Genetic
studies suggest that both signalling pathways are required for
inducing the most dorsal progenitor and neuronal identities.
Ablation of roof plate-derived BMPs and/or Wnts causes loss of
most dorsal dI1 and dI2 neurons, and the production of intermediate
positioned dI3 and dI4 neurons shifts to a more dorsal position (Lee
et al., 2000; Muroyama et al., 2002; Wine-Lee et al., 2004).
Furthermore, explant and in vitro cell culture assays have revealed
the ability of both BMPs and Wnts to induce dorsal cell types
(Andrews et al., 2017; Gupta et al., 2018; Liem et al., 1997;
Muroyama et al., 2002; Tozer et al., 2013). These results indicate
that both signalling pathways are required, but exposure of
progenitors to either signal is sufficient for establishing dorsal
progenitor identities. However, this interpretation is complicated by
the observation that abrogation of BMP signalling affects the
production of Wnt ligands (Lee et al., 2000; Wine-Lee et al., 2004),
and exposure of NPs to BMPs (e.g. in explant cultures) probably
induces the expression of Wnt ligands. Conversely, multiple dorsal
NP types express BMP ligands (Andrews et al., 2017). Thus,
dorsalization by Wnts may also induce expression of BMP ligands
in these cells.
Recent work has proposed that BMPs may not act as morphogens
in the spinal cord and that instead the identity of BMP ligands is the
main determinant for the generation of distinct interneuron types
(Andrews et al., 2017). However, the combined activity of BMP
ligands appears graded at early developmental stages, as assays for
phosphorylated SMADs (the intracellular effectors of BMP
signalling) reveal a dorsal-to-ventral gradient (Tozer et al., 2013;
Zagorski et al., 2017). These seemingly contradictory findings
could potentially be reconciled if the timing of exposure plays a role
in the interpretation of BMP signalling, as has been suggested by
Duval et al. (2019). In this view, the cell types generated further
from the dorsal midline of the neural tube would require earlier and
briefer exposure to BMP signalling than those arising closer to the
source of BMP signalling.
Taken together, these studies suggest that Wnt and BMP ligands
are required for the establishment of dorsal progenitor identities in
the spinal cord, but how these signals function to specify distinct
identities, and the epistasis between them, is still unclear.
Further work is required to discriminate between the molecular
mechanisms through which BMPs and Wnts induce dorsal
progenitor and neuronal identities. The recent development of
novel stem cell-based differentiation protocols that allow ectopic
manipulation of molecular signals and generation of large
quantities of cells for molecular profiling assays provides a new
avenue for tackling these questions (Duval et al., 2019; Gupta
et al., 2018).
Growth and patterning dynamics of the spinal cord
NPs in the mouse spinal cord generate neurons from approximately
embryonic day (E) 9.0 until ∼E13.5. During this time, the spinal
cord continues to grow substantially along its DV axis. This raises
the question of how the positions of gene expression boundaries and
progenitor domains remain stable as the spinal cord exceeds the size
that can be reliably patterned by morphogen signalling, and how
neurogenesis and spinal cord patterning are integrated to ensure the
generation of reproducible numbers of neurons. Recent work has
addressed these questions in the mouse and chick spinal cord,
revealing a two-phase model for growth and patterning (Kicheva
and Briscoe, 2015; Kicheva et al., 2014). In short, these studies
demonstrate that the pattern of NP domains is established at early
developmental stages, when the size of the tissue is small and
positions within morphogen gradients can be decoded with high
precision (Fig. 2A). Although single morphogen gradients
provide sufficient positional information to account for the
observed precision in patterning close to the poles, only the
combined ventral Shh and dorsal BMP signalling gradients appear
to give sufficient accuracy to explain the observed precision of
patterning along the entire DV length (Zagorski et al., 2017).
Then, as the tissue grows and the signalling outputs of morphogen
pathways become progressively refined to the poles (Balaskas
et al., 2012; Zagorski et al., 2017), the pattern of progenitor
domains is maintained by cross-repressive interactions between
GRN
components
and
relative
domain
sizes
are
mainly
determined by their differentiation dynamics (Kicheva et al.,
2014) (Fig. 2B,C).
The maintenance of progenitor domains does not mean that the
identities of NPs are inflexible. Indeed, evidence from lineage-
tracing studies suggests that cells can switch their identity, with
cells in adjacent progenitor domains being frequently labelled by
3
REVIEW
Development (2019) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/dev.182154
DEVELOPMENT

the lineage tracer in such experiments (Dessaud et al., 2007, 2010).
Furthermore, evidence in zebrafish and mouse has revealed
that MNs and oligodendrocytes, which are both specified from
Olig2-positive progenitors, seem to derive from different lineages
in these systems (Ravanelli and Appel, 2015; Wu et al., 2006),
suggesting that cells can switch their identities even at relatively
late stages. This, however, poses a problem for the GRN in NPs.
On the one hand, it has to be sufficiently flexible to permit
cell-state transitions in response to changing extracellular cues,
but on the other hand it has to be stable enough to prevent the
specification of mixed neuronal identities. Recent characterization
of the dynamics of gene expression during neurogenesis might
provide a solution to this problem (Delile et al., 2019; Sagner et al.,
2018).
By
reconstructing
the
gene
expression
dynamics
underlying neurogenesis in multiple domains using scRNA-seq
data, it was shown that domain-specific TFs (Olig3 in dp1-3, Dbx1
in p0, Olig2 in pMN and Nkx2.2 in p3 progenitors) undergo a
characteristic upregulation at the onset of neurogenesis (Fig. 2D).
Thus, lower levels of progenitor TFs in early non-neurogenic
progenitors could provide sensitivity to morphogen inputs by
facilitating progenitor-state transitions, whereas the increasing
expression levels associated with the onset of neurogenesis
consolidate progenitor identity and ensure robust differentiation
into a specific neuronal subtype (Fig. 2D).
The rate and timing of neuronal differentiation have been linked
to
dynamics
of
morphogen
signalling
and
the
regulatory
interactions downstream of patterning TFs in the spinal cord. This
is best understood for MN progenitors (pMN) in the ventral spinal
cord. The onset of neurogenesis in these cells seems to be directly
controlled by the dynamics of Shh signalling (Saade et al., 2013). At
early developmental stages, Shh signalling is high in pMN cells,
which promotes symmetric cell divisions that expand the progenitor
pool. Later, as levels of Shh signalling decrease, progenitors begin
to differentiate. At the molecular level, high levels of Shh signalling
maintain symmetric proliferative cell divisions by promoting the
expression of the docking protein pericentrin, which allows the
symmetric distribution of protein kinase A on both mother and
daughter centrosomes (Saade et al., 2017). Whether similar
principles apply to other NP domains and other morphogen
pathways
is
currently
unclear.
Furthermore,
although
this
mechanism explains the time of onset of neurogenesis in the
spinal cord, it does not provide a mechanism for why pMN cells
differentiate at a higher rate than progenitors in adjacent domains
(Ericson et al., 1992; Kicheva et al., 2014; Novitch et al., 2001)
(Fig. 2C). In this regard, the TF Olig2, which defines pMN identity,
appears to promote MN differentiation by directly repressing Hes
TFs, which are known antagonists of neurogenesis. Repression of
Hes TFs in turn favours expression of the proneural bHLH TF
pSMAD
Gli
Uncertainty
Uncertainty
BMP
Shh
TF1
TF2
TF3
DV position
Differentiation 
rate
pD (pd1-pd6)
pI (p0-p2)
pMN
DV position
Time
Olig2
Neurog2
Hes1/5
A  Early: morphogen gradients delineate gene
    expression domains with high precision
pSMAD
Gli
Uncertainty
Uncertainty
BMP
Shh
TF1
TF2
TF3
DV position
B  Late: morphogen gradients recede to the poles; cross-
    repression between TFs maintains progenitor domains
C  Domain sizes are determined by unequal
    differentiation rates
D  Upregulation of domain-specific progenitor markers
    prevents specification of mixed neuronal identites
Progenitor 
marker
Neuronal 
marker
Proneural 
bHLH
Pseudotime
Expression level
TF1
TF2
TF3
Signal
TF1
TF2
TF3
Progenitor
Neurogenesis
Neuron
TF1
TF2
TF3
Signal
TF1
TF2
TF3
Fig. 2. Dynamics of patterning and growth of the developing spinal cord. (A) At early developmental stages, the combined BMP and Shh activity
gradients provide sufficient positional information along the entire DV length of the spinal cord. (B) At later developmental stages, morphogen activity gradients
recede to the poles of the spinal cord, and domain boundaries are maintained by cross-repressive interactions between patterning TFs. (C) Relative domain
sizes in the spinal cord change over time (left plot). This is due to unequal rates of neuronal differentiation; for example, the terminal differentiation rate in MN
progenitors is much higher than that of adjacent progenitor domains, due to Olig2 repressing Hes1/5, which promotes Neurog2 expression (shown in the plot on
the right). (D) Scheme depicting gene expression dynamics along the neuronal differentiation trajectory. The upregulation of domain-specific progenitor
markers during neurogenesis represses alternative progenitor and neuronal gene expression programmes and thereby prevents the specification of mixed
neuronal identities.
4
REVIEW
Development (2019) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/dev.182154
DEVELOPMENT

Neurogenin2 (Neurog2) in these cells (Sagner et al., 2018)
(Fig. 2C). In summary, global signalling dynamics and domain-
specific transcriptional regulation downstream of GRN components
dictate the timing and rates of neuronal differentiation in the
developing spinal cord. Notably, similar to the Olig2-expressing
pMN domain, the Olig3-expressing domain in the dorsal spinal cord
shrinks in size between E9.5 and E11.5 in the mouse spinal cord
(Müller et al., 2002), raising the possibility that Olig3 may play a
similar role in these cells.
Taken together, opposing morphogen gradients pattern the spinal
cord along its DV axis. Only at early developmental stages do these
gradients provide sufficient accuracy to pattern the entire axis with
the observed precision. At later developmental stages, the gene
expression boundaries that delineate distinct progenitor domains are
maintained by cross-repressive interactions between domain-
specific TFs, whereas the size of the individual progenitor
domains is mainly determined by their differentiation rates. These
rates are, in turn, defined by the dynamics of morphogen signalling
and domain-specific interactions between components of the
patterning GRN and the neurogenic transcriptional programme.
Specificity of neuronal subtype identity is determined by
TF codes
The TF codes that define distinct progenitor identities specify
distinct types of neurons along the DV axis of the spinal cord.
Neurogenesis throughout the nervous system depends on a small set
of proneural bHLH TFs, in particular Ascl1 (also known as Mash1),
neurogenins (Neurog1, Neurog2, Neurog3) and Atonal homologues
(Atoh). In the embryonic spinal cord, these TFs are expressed in
specific domains, and distinct progenitor to neuron transitions
depend on the presence of different proneural bHLH TFs (Fig. 3A).
This is best exemplified in the dorsal spinal cord (Lai et al., 2016).
Here, the generation of dI1 neurons depends on Atoh1 whereas dI2
neuron generation depends on Neurog1. Furthermore, genetic
ablation of Atoh1 leads to a loss of dI1 neurons and the expansion of
dI2 neurons (Gowan et al., 2001). Similarly, the generation of
inhibitory dI4 and excitatory dI5 neurons requires Ptf1a and Ascl1,
respectively, and ablation of either TF results in the excess
generation of the other neuronal cell type (Borromeo et al., 2017;
Mizuguchi et al., 2006; Wildner et al., 2006). In the ventral spinal
cord, the specification of neuronal identities is also mediated by
Gata2
Atoh1
Ascl1
Neurog1
Neurog2
Neurog3
Ptf1a
Lhx3/4
Isl1
Lhx1/5
Lhx2/9
Lmx1b
dp1
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
p0
p1
p2
pMN
p3
dI1
dI2
dI3
dI4
dI5
dI6
 V0
 V1
 V2a
 V2b
 V3
MN
Motor neurons
E-box sequences (CAGATG/CATATG)
E-box
Lhx3, Mnx1, Slc18a3
Neurog2
E-protein
Dorsal excitatory neurons (dI3/dI5)
E-box sequences (CAGCTG/CAGGTG)
E-box
Lmx1b, Tlx3, Isl1
Ascl1
E-protein
Ptf1a
Ascl1
Neurog2
Dorsal inhibitory neurons (dI4)
E-box sequences (CAGCTG/CATCTG/CAGATG)
E-box
Lhx1, Lhx5, Pax2
TC-box
Rbpj
Ptf1a
E-protein
A
B
HeRE
MN genes
(e.g. Mnx1)
TeRE
V2a genes
(e.g. Vsx2)
V2b genes
(e.g. Gata3)
Gata
Gata
E-box
E-box
V2a
V2b
MN
E
dp1
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
p0
p1
p2
pMN
p3
Olig2 + Nkx6.1
dI1
dI2
dI3
dI4
dI5
dI6
V0
V1
V2
V3
+ Neurog2
+ Lhx3/Isl1
MN
dp1
dp2
dp3
dp4
dp5
dp6
p0
p1
p2
pMN
p3
dI1
dI2
dI3
dI4
dI5
dI6
V0
V1
V2
V3
MN
Nkx2.2 + Nkx6.1
+ Neurog3
C
D
2x NLI + 2x Isl1 + 2x Lhx3
2x NLI + 2x Lhx3
2x NLI + 2x Gata2 + 2x Lmo4 + 2x Tal1::E47
Fig. 3. Establishment of neuronal diversity in the spinal cord. (A) Schematic cross-section of an embryonic spinal cord. Patterned expression of
proneural bHLH (grey) and LIM HD (green) TFs underlies the establishment of the cardinal types of neurons in the spinal cord. Note that Gata2 is not a LIM HD
protein, but is depicted for completeness, as it is part of a LIM protein complex in differentiating V2b neurons. (B) These different proneural bHLH TFs show
sequence specificity for different E-box sites and induce distinct downstream transcriptional programmes. E-box sequences according to Borromeo et al. (2017)
and Aydin et al. (2019). (C,D) Widespread repression of alternative transcriptional programmes by Olig2/Nkx6.1 and Nkx2.2/Nkx6.1 provides competency
to NPs to differentiate into MNs (C) or V3 interneurons (D), respectively. (E) Different LIM protein complexes [consisting of NLI and Lhx3 in V2a; NLI, Gata2, Lmo4,
Tal1 and E47 (Tcf3) in V2b; and NLI, Lhx3 and Isl1 in MNs] bind to distinct enhancer elements and thereby induce the correct neuronal gene expression
programmes in V2a, V2b and MNs.
5
REVIEW
Development (2019) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/dev.182154
DEVELOPMENT

distinct TFs: V2a neurons depend on Ascl1, MNs on Neurog2, and
V3 neurons on Neurog3 (Carcagno et al., 2014; Parras et al., 2002;
Scardigli et al., 2001; Sommer et al., 1996). Furthermore,
replacement of the Ascl1 coding sequence with Neurog2 leads to
a specific depletion of V2a neurons, whereas replacement of the
Neurog2 coding sequence with Ascl1 leads to a ventral expansion of
V2a neurons (Parras et al., 2002). Taken together, these results
demonstrate that proneural bHLH TFs act redundantly to induce
neurogenesis, but have protein-specific functions for converting
specific progenitors into neuronal cell identities. In line with this
interpretation, different proneural bHLH TFs have been shown to
display distinct sequence preferences and bind to distinct sites in the
genome (Aydin et al., 2019; Borromeo et al., 2017) (Fig. 3B). These
distinct binding patterns result in the activation of distinct neuronal
expression programmes, including the direct activation of numerous
TFs involved in neuronal subtype specification. Thus, proneural
bHLH TFs have the intrinsic ability to activate distinct neuronal
gene expression programmes and controlling the pattern of their
expression is an important mechanism by which the TF code that
defines progenitor domains determines which types of neurons can
be formed from these domains.
Each proneural bHLH protein specifies neuronal cell identities at
multiple places and times throughout animal development. Thus,
additional molecular mechanisms must exist to ensure the context-
dependent activation of the correct gene expression programmes. In
this regard, techniques such as ChIP-seq have begun to uncover
broader programmes of transcriptional regulation by the TFs that
define progenitor identity in the spinal cord. For example, the TFs
Nkx6.1, Nkx2.2 and Olig2, which are essential for establishing
the most ventral progenitor identities, repress not only the
transcriptional programmes of adjacent progenitors and neuronal
subtypes (Fig. 3C,D) but also the programmes associated with all
alternative progenitor and neuron fates (Kutejova et al., 2016; Nishi
et al., 2015). Similarly, activity of the TF Prdm13 in the dorsal spinal
cord is required for inhibiting the expression of ventral cell fate
specification markers downstream of Ptf1a (Mona et al., 2017). This
leads to a model in which proneural bHLH proteins have the ability to
induce genes associated with a range of neuronal subtypes. This
specificity is refined by the TF code that determines NP identity,
which ensures the repression of genes associated with inappropriate
progenitor and neuronal subtypes in each domain (Fig. 3C,D). The
combined activity results in the initiation of domain-specific neuronal
gene expression programmes that subsequently elaborate and
consolidate the respective neuronal fates.
How this is achieved is arguably best understood for MNs and
adjacent V2 neurons (Fig. 3E). Establishment of MN identity
depends on a hexameric complex of NLI (nuclear LIM interactor;
LDB1), Islet 1 (Isl1) and Lhx3, whereas adjacent V2a neurons lack
the expression of Isl1, and form a tetrameric complex consisting of
NLI and Lhx3 (Thaler et al., 2002) (Fig. 3E). These complexes
activate the expression of distinct downstream target genes by
binding to enhancers that are specific for the hexameric or tetrameric
complexes (Lee et al., 2008; Thaler et al., 2002) (Fig. 3E). These
targets include those encoding further TFs, such as Mnx1 in MNs
and Vsx2 (also known as Chx10) in V2a neurons, that subsequently
consolidate the respective neuronal identities (Arber et al., 1999;
Clovis et al., 2016; Thaler et al., 1999). Neurog2 has been
demonstrated
to
interact
with
LIM-HD
complexes
in
a
phosphorylation-dependent manner (Ma et al., 2008), but the sites
bound by these LIM protein complexes appear to be distinct from
those bound by pro-neural bHLH TFs. A comparison of Neurog2-
and Lhx3/Isl1-bound regions during reprogramming of embryonic
stem cells (ESCs) to MNs revealed that Lhx3/Isl1 co-occupied sites
specific for MN generation, whereas Neurog2 controls genes more
generally associated with neuronal differentiation (Velasco et al.,
2017). Similar LIM protein complexes have been identified in
multiple other neuron types, e.g. V2b or visceral motor neurons
(Joshi et al., 2009; Mazzoni et al., 2013b), and most neuronal
domains in the spinal cord express LIM HD TFs, suggesting this
may be a common principle (Fig. 3A,E). Thus, the patterned
induction of distinct transcriptional activator complexes results in
the activation of distinct gene expression programmes in different
neuronal domains.
The picture emerging from these analyses suggests that the TF
code that specifies distinct progenitor identities promotes fidelity in
the specification of neuronal identities by different mechanisms: via
induction of domain-specific transcriptional activator complexes
that activate domain-specific transcriptional programmes, and via the
concomitant repression of alternative transcriptional programmes by
the TFs that determine progenitor identity.
Further diversification of neuronal identity
The mechanisms guiding NP differentiation into post-mitotic
neurons explain how the different cardinal types of neurons are
formed, but these subsequently diversify further into multiple
molecularly and functionally distinct subtypes. Recent studies
suggest that a number of signalling pathways are involved in this
diversification. Cell-cell interactions mediated by Notch signalling,
for example, mediate the subdivision of V2 neurons into excitatory
V2a and inhibitory V2b neurons. V2a neurons express the Notch
ligand delta-like 4 (Dll4), and V2b neurons express Notch receptors
and require Notch signalling for their specification (Peng et al.,
2007; Skaggs et al., 2011). Recent evidence in zebrafish has
revealed that V2s neurons, which, similar to mammalian V2c
neurons, express Sox1 orthologues, require Notch signalling for
their generation from a combined postmitotic V2b/s precursor
(Gerber et al., 2019). Thus, Notch-dependent cell-cell interactions
sequentially subdivide the V2 lineage. Similarly, Notch signalling
has been implicated in regulating the fate of excitatory and inhibitory
neurons in the dorsal spinal cord at later developmental stages
(Mizuguchi et al., 2006), the columnar identity of MNs (Tan et al.,
2016), and V1 interneuron subtype formation (Hoang et al., 2018).
Diffusible signals have also been demonstrated to be important
for the diversification of neuronal identities. For example, retinoic
acid (RA) produced by early-born aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family
member A2 (Aldh1a2)-expressing lateral motor column (LMC)
neurons
recruits
later-born
MNs
into
the
LMC,
inducing
downregulation of Isl1 and induction of Lhx1 in these neurons,
dividing
LMC
neurons
into
medial
and
lateral
identities
(Sockanathan and Jessell, 1998). Thus, both cell-cell interactions
and diffusible signals expand neuronal diversity in the spinal cord.
However, these mechanisms have only been demonstrated to
control the establishment of major subtypes in the spinal cord, and
are probably not sufficient to account for the large number of
molecularly and functionally distinct neuronal subtypes observed in
recent studies. In the following sections, we describe how neuronal
diversity in the spinal cord is increased by patterning systems that
subdivide spinal cord neurons along two orthogonal axes: the AP
axis and in time.
Hox genes pattern the spinal cord along the AP axis
NPs in the spinal cord acquire distinct identities along the AP axis.
These identities are conferred by Hox genes, which subdivide
progenitors and neurons in the spinal cord into three broad domains:
6
REVIEW
Development (2019) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/dev.182154
DEVELOPMENT

Hox4-7 genes define cervical, Hox9 genes thoracic and Hox10-11
genes lumbar cell identities (Philippidou and Dasen, 2013)
(Fig. 4A,B). These identities are established in response to
transient signals present in the early embryo, most notably Wnt,
RA, fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) and growth differentiation
factor 11 (Gdf11) (Bel-Vialar et al., 2002; Dasen et al., 2003; Ensini
et al., 1998; Liu et al., 2001). Later, similar to the delineation of
progenitor domains along the DV axis, they are maintained by
cross-repressive interactions between these genes. Below, we focus
on recent studies that have provided insights into how Hox genes
function in MNs, in which Hox genes are essential for the
acquisition of distinct columnar identities and for MN pool
organization (Dasen et al., 2003, 2005). Although most other
progenitor and neuronal populations in the spinal cord express
distinct sets of Hox genes along the AP axis (Dasen et al., 2005), it is
currently unclear to what extent similar mechanisms function in
these
cells.
Notably,
however,
several
recent
studies
have
demonstrated that Hox genes also control the acquisition of
distinct V1 and spinocerebellar tract subtype identities (Baek
et al., 2019; Coughlan et al., 2019preprint; Sweeney et al., 2018),
suggesting that similar principles may apply to most neuronal
populations in the spinal cord.
RA promotes cervical cell identities by inducing Hox4-7 genes,
whereas FGF promotes posteriorization by inducing thoracic Hox
genes (Dasen et al., 2003). Lastly, the activity of both FGFs and
Gdf11 is required for establishing the most posterior cell identities
(Liu et al., 2001). How do these signals act? RA induces ‘anterior’
Hox genes by recruiting retinoic acid receptors (RARs) to genomic
sites located in the 3′ end of Hox clusters (Mahony et al., 2011), and
promotes rapid removal of the repressive chromatin mark histone 3
lysine27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and removal of polycomb
repressive complex (PRC) 1 and PRC2 (Mazzoni et al., 2013a).
Further posteriorization depends on FGF and Wnt signalling, most
probably at a state before cells acquire a neural identity (Gouti et al.,
2014; Lippmann et al., 2015; Mazzoni et al., 2013a; Metzis et al.,
2018). However, ectopic activation of FGF signalling in NPs
induces an anterior shift in the expression of ‘posterior’ Hox genes,
suggesting that axial identity is, at least to some degree, plastic in
neural cells (Bel-Vialar et al., 2002; Dasen et al., 2003). At the
molecular level, these signals lead to the expression of Cdx TFs that,
together with FGF signalling, lead to the removal of H3K27me3
from posterior Hox gene loci (Mazzoni et al., 2013a).
The transient nature of the posteriorizing signals raises the
question of how axial identity is maintained at later stages. Distinct
mechanisms have been described. Cross-repressive interactions
between pairs of Hox genes delineate specific expression domains
along the AP axis (Dasen et al., 2005). For different Hox gene pairs,
the boundaries between these domains occur at distinct positions
along the AP axis (Fig. 4B). Thus, similar to the delineation of
specific progenitor identities by partially overlapping TF expression
domains along the DV axis, Hox genes establish a combinatorial
code in which AP position is defined by the co-expression of specific
sets of Hox genes. These patterns of gene expression define distinct
motor columns and pools that innervate specific muscles (Dasen and
Jessell, 2009; Philippidou and Dasen, 2013) (Fig. 4B). These include
the phrenic motor column (PMC), which depends on Hox5 genes at
anterior cervical levels and innervates the diaphragm (Philippidou
et al., 2012), the LMC at posterior cervical and lumbar levels, which
innervates limb muscles and is characterized by the expression of
Hox6 and Hox10/11 genes, respectively (Lacombe et al., 2013; Lin
and Carpenter, 2003; Wu et al., 2007), and the preganglionic and
hypaxial motor columns that innervate sympathetic ganglia and
hypaxial muscles, which depend on Hoxc9 expression at thoracic
levels (Jung et al., 2010). These columns can be further subdivided
into specific pools. Co-expression of Hoxc6 and Hoxc8 in posterior
cervical LMC neurons defines, for example, the Etv4 (also known as
Pea3)-positive motor pool that innervates specific muscles in the
appendages (Lacombe et al., 2013; Livet et al., 2002; Vermot, 2005).
Similarly, co-expression of Hoxc8 and Hoxc9 in the most posterior
cervical LMC neurons defines digit-innervating MNs (Mendelsohn
et
al.,
2017).
Besides
these
cross-repressive
interactions,
maintenance of these boundaries depends on PRC1, but not PRC2
(Golden and Dasen, 2012). Depletion of the PRC1 component Bmi1
leads to the ectopic expression of Hoxc9 and the conversion of
cervical LMC neurons to thoracic preganglionic motor column
(PGC) neurons, whereas elevating Bmi1 levels extinguishes Hoxc9
expression at thoracic levels and converts PGC neurons to LMC
neurons.
In summary, transient signals in the early embryo pattern the
spinal cord by inducing Hox gene expression domains along its AP
axis. Hox cross-repression and PRC1 activity subsequently refine
and maintain the borders between these expression domains. The
resulting combinatorial patterns of Hox gene co-expression define
specific positions along the AP axis and lead to the sorting of MNs
into distinct columns and pools, and confer distinct targeting
specificities to them. Future experiments are needed to investigate
whether similar principles apply to other neuronal populations in the
spinal cord.
Thoracic
Lumbar
RA
FGF
Gdf11
MMC
LMC
PMC
LMC
PGC and HMC
Hox5
Hoxc9
Hox10
Hoxc8
Hoxc6
V1thoracic
V1lumbar
Hoxa
Hoxc
Hoxb
Hoxd
Hox1
Hox2
Hox3
Hox4
Hox5
Hox6
Hox7
Hox8
Hox9
Hox10
Hox11
Hox12
Hox13
Early /
anterior
Late /
posterior
A
B
Cervical
Fig. 4. Hox genes pattern the spinal cord along the AP axis.
(A) Scheme depicting the four Hox gene clusters and 13 paralogous groups.
Colour-coding represents involvement of Hox genes in establishing distinct
neuronal cell fates along the AP axis of the spinal cord. Green, red and orange
boxes indicate Hox genes expressed at cervical, thoracic and lumbar regions
of the spinal cord, respectively. (B) Opposing morphogen gradients induce
distinct patterns of Hox gene expression along the AP axis of the spinal cord.
Cross-repression between pairs of Hox genes delineates specific expression
domains and defines distinct neuronal subtypes along the AP axis. HMC,
hypaxial motor column; MMC, medial motor column.
7
REVIEW
Development (2019) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/dev.182154
DEVELOPMENT

Temporal mechanisms contribute to the generation of
neuronal diversity
Temporal mechanisms underlie the diversification of neuronal
subtypes in multiple systems throughout the animal kingdom
(Holguera and Desplan, 2018). Furthermore, in multiple systems,
the birth order of neurons has been demonstrated to underlie
specificity in neuronal connectivity and circuit formation (Deguchi
et al., 2011; Imamura et al., 2011; Tripodi et al., 2011). Thus,
temporal mechanisms not only contribute to the generation of
neuronal diversity, but also provide a means for the ordered
establishment of neuronal circuitry.
Temporal mechanisms also play a key role in establishing distinct
cell identities in the spinal cord. In general, the timing of
developmental events varies along the AP axis of the spinal cord,
with developmental events typically occurring at progressively later
developmental stages in more posterior regions of the spinal cord.
Furthermore, similar to other regions of the CNS, NPs in the spinal
cord first give rise to neurons and later to glia. This temporal switch
depends on the sequential induction of SoxE and NFI family
members (Deneen et al., 2006; Kang et al., 2012; Stolt et al., 2003,
2005), and is regulated by multiple signalling pathways, most
notably Notch (Sugimori et al., 2007; Taylor et al., 2007), FGF
(Gaber et al., 2013; Guillemot and Zimmer, 2011) and TGFβ
signalling (Dias et al., 2014). Temporal stratification of neuronal
subtypes has also been documented in multiple neuronal domains,
e.g. in MNs (Hollyday and Hamburger, 1977; Sockanathan and
Jessell, 1998), V1 neurons (Benito-Gonzalez and Alvarez, 2012;
Stam et al., 2012), dorsal excitatory and inhibitory neurons (Müller
et al., 2002), and premotor interneurons that synapse onto MNs
innervating flexor and extensor muscles (Tripodi et al., 2011). Only
in a few cases have the signals and molecular markers that subdivide
these temporal populations been described. These include the
expression of Onecut and Foxp family members in V1 neurons,
which subdivide this population into Renshaw and non-Renshaw
cells (Stam et al., 2012), the RA-mediated induction of Lhx1 in
lateral LMC neurons (Sockanathan and Jessell, 1998), and the
induction of Gbx1 in late-born inhibitory neurons in the dorsal
spinal cord (John et al., 2005).
Using single cell transcriptional profiling, cohorts of co-regulated
TFs that appear to provide a temporal code that subdivides neurons
throughout the DV axis were recently identified (Delile et al., 2019)
(Fig. 5A,B). Early-born neurons (before E10 at cervical levels) from
most domains express Onecut family TFs, whereas neurons born
between E10 and E11 express Pou2f2 and Zfhx2-4. In contrast, late-
born neurons, generated after E11.5, express Nfia, Nfib, Neurod2
and Neurod6 (Fig. 5A). Notably, many of these TFs have previously
been shown to label subpopulations of neurons that occupy specific
positions in the spinal cord. Furthermore, in a few cases, phenotypes
following their mutation have been described. For instance, Onecut
TFs have been shown to label neuronal subsets in most domains in
the spinal cord, and distinct functions for them in several neuronal
classes have been described (Francius et al., 2013; Harris et al.,
2019; Kabayiza et al., 2017; Roy et al., 2012; Stam et al., 2012).
Onecut TFs are also required for the generation of Renshaw cells
(Stam et al., 2012), to maintain Isl1 expression in medial LMC
neurons at limb levels, and to control the ratio of somatic and
visceral MNs at thoracic levels of the spinal cord (Roy et al., 2012).
Similarly, Zfhx3 and Nfib have been demonstrated to divide V2a
neurons into lateral and medial populations (Hayashi et al., 2018),
and Pou2f2 has been implicated in controlling the lateral migration
of these neurons (Harris et al., 2019). Finally, Neurod2 and Neurod6
control the expression of neuropeptides in dorsal horn neurons
(Bröhl et al., 2008). Taken together, these findings suggest that the
temporal TF code is functionally important. Future studies will need
to test how the TFs involved in this transcriptional code are linked
to each other and how their activities are integrated with the
transcriptional programmes that pattern the spinal cord along
the DV and AP axes.
Sox2+ NP
Onecut2+ 
Zfhx3+ 
Nfib+ 
B
E9.5
E10.5 E11.5 E12.5 E13.5
Sox9
Sox2
Nfia
Nfib
Hopx
Aldh1a1
Onecut2
Pou2f2
Zfhx3
Zfhx4
Nfib
Neurod2
A
Signal 1 
Signal 2 
Signal 3 
C
D
Fig. 5. Temporal stratification of neuronal subtypes. (A) Scheme depicting the sequential induction of the gliogenic programme in NPs (top; grey shading) and
the temporal expression of TFs in neurons (bottom). The timings are based on the cervical portion of the spinal cord. (B) The temporal expression of TFs
subdivides neurons in the spinal cord, independent of their DV domain of origin, based on their time point of birth. For instance, Onecut2 labels neurons born
before ∼E10, Zfhx3 labels neurons born between E10 and E11.5, and Nfib labels neurons born after E11.5. (C,D) Different models for the generation of neuronal
diversity by temporal mechanisms. Different extracellular cues acting at distinct time points can induce the differentiation of an uncommitted NP into different
neuronal cell types (C). Alternatively, NPs may progressively change their competence to give rise to specific neuronal subtypes over time (D).
8
REVIEW
Development (2019) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/dev.182154
DEVELOPMENT

These findings raise the question of how the temporal TF code is
established. One possibility is that a temporal sequence of external
signalling molecules could bias the differentiation of uncommitted
NPs towards distinct neuronal cell identities (Fig. 5C). Such a model
has been proposed for TGFβ-mediated induction of the serotonergic
programme in p3 progenitors in the vertebrate hindbrain (Dias et al.,
2014). Indeed, multiple signalling pathways show transient
activation throughout the neurogenic period in the spinal cord,
and thus might contribute to the generation of distinct neuronal
subtypes over time. For example, the RA-synthesizing enzyme
Aldh1a2 is downregulated in somites around E10 (Niederreither
et al., 1997), which temporally coincides with the point at which
neurons switch from expressing Onecut family members to
expressing Pou2f2 and Zfhx2-4. Consistent with this idea, RA has
been shown to promote Renshaw cell identity over other V1 fates
and LMC identity in MNs (Hoang et al., 2018; Sockanathan and
Jessell, 1998), and both Renshaw neurons and LMC neurons are
neuronal subtypes that specifically depend on Onecut TFs for their
generation (Roy et al., 2012; Stam et al., 2012). Conversely, later
neuronal identities may be favoured by signalling pathways that are
involved in progenitor maintenance and promote gliogenesis
(outlined above).
Alternatively, the gene expression profile of NPs could change
over time, which could lead to a succession of competence
states (Fig. 5D). Such a mechanism would resemble that observed
in neuroblast lineages in the Drosophila embryo (Doe, 2017).
Potential candidate mechanisms for mediating such a ‘competence
cascade’ in NPs could involve the sequential activation of the
gliogenic programme by Sox9 and Nfia/b. Sox9 starts to be
expressed in NPs in the mouse neural tube between E9.5 and E10.5
(Stolt et al., 2003) and thus could be a good candidate for mediating
the switch from Onecut- to Pou2f2-expressing neuronal subtypes
(Fig. 5A). Similarly, onset of Nfia/b expression in NPs occurs
between E10.5 and E11.5 (Deneen et al., 2006), and may terminate
the phase during which Zfhx TFs are expressed in neurons and
instead favour the generation of Nfib-positive neurons (Fig. 5A).
Furthermore, because these TFs are involved in specifying glial
cells and late neuronal subtypes, signalling pathways that promote
gliogenesis may also favour the generation of Nfib-positive
neurons, although it is currently unclear whether Nfib-expressing
NPs generate Nfib-expressing neurons or whether additional signals
are involved.
Overall, it appears that a wide range of signals and mechanisms
may control the temporal progression of neuronal subtypes in the
spinal cord. Future work will be required to investigate how these
signalling molecules function and to determine the structure of the
downstream GRN that controls the temporal progression of neuronal
subtypes. Comparison with other temporal patterning systems may
help to understand general design principles of this system and
reveal the extent to which it is conserved in other regions of
the CNS. In this respect, it is noteworthy that early-born neurons in
the retina depend on Onecut TFs (Sapkota et al., 2014), whereas the
latest-born neurons depend on Nfia/b for their generation (Clark
et al., 2019). This raises the possibility that parts of this temporal
patterning programme also apply to other regions of the CNS.
Novel techniques to study the emergence and function of
neuronal diversity in the spinal cord
The emergence of novel sequencing methods that allow the
profiling of transcriptomes and chromatin states from thousands
of individual cells is revolutionizing cell and developmental
biology. These techniques have enabled the generation of high-
resolution atlases of adult and developing tissues (Clark et al., 2019;
Cusanovich et al., 2018; Muñoz-Manchado et al., 2018; Rosenberg
et al., 2018; Saunders et al., 2018; Shekhar et al., 2016), and even
entire developing embryos (Cao et al., 2019; Pijuan-Sala et al.,
2019). Furthermore, the collection of time-course data has enabled
the reconstruction of gene expression dynamics underlying cell state
transitions and along differentiation trajectories with unprecedented
resolution (Kester et al., 2018; La Manno et al., 2018; Trapnell et al.,
2014; Wagner et al., 2016). Several large-scale molecular profiling
studies have already revealed a much greater molecular diversity of
cell types than previously anticipated in the spinal cord (Delile et al.,
2019; Häring et al., 2018; Hayashi et al., 2018; Rosenberg et al.,
2018; Sathyamurthy et al., 2018; Zeisel et al., 2018). Similarly,
several studies have resolved the gene expression dynamics that
underlie neurogenesis of in vitro differentiated MNs at much greater
resolution than previous embryological assays (Briggs et al., 2017;
Rizvi et al., 2017; Sagner et al., 2018). Remarkably, these studies
revealed that neurogenesis of in vitro generated MNs accurately
recapitulates the known transcriptional changes that occur in vivo and
even identified several previously overlooked features. Together, these
studies have provided insight into the spatial and temporal patterns of
gene expression in spinal cord cells, thereby establishing a framework
for the analysis of perturbations that affect gene expression and
function in these cells. These studies have also identified previously
unknown neuronal subtypes, provided novel molecular markers for
them, and implicated specific TFs in their specification, thereby
identifying genetic handles with which to investigate their function.
Novel in vitro differentiation and reprogramming approaches
have also greatly expanded our understanding of cell fate
specification and neuronal circuit formation in the spinal cord.
Stem cell-based in vitro differentiation and reprogramming assays
have started to reveal the binding sites of TFs, how they affect
chromatin dynamics, and how they specify cell fates (Aydin et al.,
2019; Kutejova et al., 2016; Lai et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2008;
Mazzoni et al., 2013b; Metzis et al., 2018; Nishi et al., 2015; Rhee
et al., 2016; Velasco et al., 2017). Furthermore, protocols for the
in vitro differentiation of neurons from most spinal cord domains
have been established (Butts et al., 2017; Gouti et al., 2014; Gupta
et al., 2018; Hoang et al., 2018; Sternfeld et al., 2017; Wichterle
et al., 2002; Xu and Sakiyama-Elbert, 2015). These now provide the
means to further elucidate how morphogen signalling dynamics and
the binding patterns of morphogen effectors and patterning TFs
specify distinct progenitor and neuronal cell identities. Furthermore,
two recent studies that generated artificial locomotory circuits by
mixing MNs with different spinal interneuron populations have
revealed design principles that underlie the formation of spinal
locomotory circuits and the function of different interneuron types
within them (Hoang et al., 2018; Sternfeld et al., 2017). In the long
run, differentiation and reprogramming protocols that generate cells
that closely mimic their in vivo counterparts are likely to contribute
to the development of novel in vitro disease models, e.g. for drug
testing or to uncover the molecular basis of movement disorders
such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and may even enable
novel therapeutic approaches.
In recent years, ‘organogenesis in a dish’ approaches that rely on
the ability of stem cells to self-organize into three-dimensional
structures resembling developing organs have further enabled the
discovery of developmental design principles. These approaches
also allow investigation of the molecular and cellular basis of
complex pathologies, including microcephaly, autism spectrum
disorders and schizophrenia (Di Lullo and Kriegstein, 2017;
Fatehullah et al., 2016; Lancaster and Knoblich, 2014). Spinal
9
REVIEW
Development (2019) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/dev.182154
DEVELOPMENT

organoids have been described in the recent literature (Duval et al.,
2019; Hor et al., 2018; Ogura et al., 2018), but so far do not appear
to recapitulate the generation of the entire DV axis. Similarly, neural
cysts have been described that spontaneously break symmetry by
inducing Shh expression. These cysts generate a wide range of
progenitor types along the DV axis (Meinhardt et al., 2014; Ranga
et al., 2017); however, to what extent these produce the neuronal
circuitry typical of the spinal cord is unclear. Finally, recently
described ‘gastruloids’ have been shown to contain dorsal and
ventral neural and mesodermal cell types, although these cells are
not organized within structures that resemble the neural tube or
somites (Beccari et al., 2018). Strikingly, gastruloids elongate and
display colinear Hox gene expression in vitro, suggesting that these
structures partially mimic the trunk of developing mammalian
embryos. Future studies will undoubtedly reveal whether these
structures are capable of forming functional neuronal networks or
axonal projections from MNs to muscles. If they do, they will be
promising candidates to study how neuronal circuitry is established
during development and for in vitro modelling of the spinal cord.
Conclusions
The developing spinal cord has served as a leading model system to
understand
the
molecular
mechanisms
underlying
cell
fate
specification and the establishment and function of neuronal
circuits. Ground-breaking work by multiple groups has revealed
how neuronal cell identities are established by GRNs that delineate
NP identities along the DV and AP axes of the embryonic spinal
cord by integrating the levels, duration and dynamics of multiple
signalling pathways. Neurons further diversify in response to cell-
cell interactions, diffusible signals and along a temporal axis. These
mechanisms provide a general framework for understanding
neuronal subtype diversification, but they are probably just the tip
of the iceberg and other mechanisms likely exist that drive further
neuronal diversification. Molecular classification of V1 diversity
has revealed the existence of ∼50 distinct subtypes at lumbar and
∼38 distinct subtypes at thoracic levels, with only a few V1 subtypes
present at both axial levels (Bikoff et al., 2016; Gabitto et al., 2016;
Sweeney et al., 2018). Similarly, characterization of neuronal
diversity in the dorsal horns by scRNA-seq has revealed the
existence of 15 distinct subtypes of inhibitory and excitatory
neurons each (Häring et al., 2018). The precise position of neurons
in the spinal cord serves as an important determinant for subtype
specification, and the proximity of multiple neuronal subtypes may
generate local signalling environments in which neurons experience
a combination of signals that expands their diversity. In this view,
the distribution of neuronal subtypes in the spinal cord is a
consequence of an interplay between spatial and temporal patterns
of neurogenesis that progressively constructs the spinal cord.
Finally, the formation of synaptic contacts with specific types of
neurons, and thus the formation of neuronal circuitry itself, could
serve as a mechanism to establish distinct subtype identities. Further
exploration of the molecular mechanisms underlying the formation
of neuronal subtypes and characterization of their function within
spinal neuronal networks may lay the foundation for the
development of novel therapies for the treatment of movement
disorders, spinal injuries and chronic pain conditions.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Katherine Exelby and Teresa Rayon for providing feedback on the
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Funding
This work was supported by the Francis Crick Institute, which receives its core
funding from Cancer Research UK, the UK Medical Research Council and Wellcome
Trust (all under FC001051), and the European Research Council under the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant number
742138). A.S. receives funding from a Human Frontier Science Program
postdoctoral fellowship (LTF000401/2014-L).
References
Alaynick, W. A., Jessell, T. M. and Pfaff, S. L. (2011). SnapShot: spinal cord
development. Cell 146, 178.e1. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.06.038
Andrews, M. G., del, Castillo, L. M., Ochoa-Bolton, E., Yamauchi, K.,
Smogorzewski, J. and Butler, S. J. (2017). BMPs direct sensory interneuron
identity in the developing spinal cord using signal-specific not morphogenic
activities. eLife 6, e30647. doi:10.7554/eLife.30647
Arber, S., Han, B., Mendelsohn, M., Smith, M., Jessell, T. M. and Sockanathan,
S. (1999). Requirement for the homeobox gene Hb9 in the consolidation of motor
neuron identity. Neuron 23, 659-674. doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(01)80026-X
Aydin, B., Kakumanu, A., Rossillo, M., Moreno-Estellés, M., Garipler, G.,
Ringstad, N., Flames, N., Mahony, S. and Mazzoni, E. O. (2019). Proneural
factors Ascl1 and Neurog2 contribute to neuronal subtype identities by
establishing distinct chromatin landscapes. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 897-908. doi:10.
1038/s41593-019-0399-y
Baek, M., Menon, V., Jessell, T. M., Hantman, A. W. and Dasen, J. S. (2019).
Molecular logic of spinocerebellar tract neuron diversity and connectivity. Cell
Rep. 27, 2620-2635.e4. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2019.04.113
Balaskas, N., Ribeiro, A., Panovska, J., Dessaud, E., Sasai, N., Page, K. M.,
Briscoe, J. and Ribes, V. (2012). Gene regulatory logic for reading the Sonic
Hedgehog signaling gradient in the vertebrate neural tube. Cell 148, 273-284.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.10.047
Balaskas, N., Abbott, L. F., Jessell, T. M. and Ng, D. (2019). Positional strategies
for connection specificity and synaptic organization in spinal sensory-motor
circuits. Neuron 102, 1143-1156. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2019.04.008
Beccari, L., Moris, N., Girgin, M., Turner, D. A., Baillie-Johnson, P., Cossy,
A.-C., Lutolf, M. P., Duboule, D. and Arias, A. M. (2018). Multi-axial self-
organization properties of mouse embryonic stem cells into gastruloids. Nature
562, 272-276. doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0578-0
Bel-Vialar, S., Itasaki, N. and Krumlauf, R. (2002). Initiating Hox gene expression:
in the early chick neural tube differential sensitivity to FGF and RA signaling
subdivides the HoxB genes in two distinct groups. Development 129, 5103-5115.
Benito-Gonzalez, A. and Alvarez, F. J. (2012). Renshaw cells and Ia inhibitory
interneurons are generated at different times from p1 progenitors and differentiate
shortly after exiting the cell cycle. J. Neurosci. 32, 1156-1170. doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.3630-12.2012
Bikoff, J. B., Gabitto, M. I., Rivard, A. F., Drobac, E., Machado, T. A., Miri, A.,
Brenner-Morton, S., Famojure, E., Diaz, C., Alvarez, F. J. et al. (2016). Spinal
inhibitory interneuron diversity delineates variant motor microcircuits. Cell 165,
207-219. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.027
Borromeo, M. D., Meredith, D. M., Castro, D. S., Chang, J. C., Tung, K.-C.,
Guillemot, F. and Johnson, J. E. (2017). Correction: a transcription factor
network specifying inhibitory versus excitatory neurons in the dorsal spinal cord.
Development 144, 2539-2539. doi:10.1242/dev.155986
Briggs, J. A., Li, V. C., Lee, S., Woolf, C. J., Klein, A. and Kirschner, M. W. (2017).
Mouse embryonic stem cells can differentiate via multiple paths to the same state.
eLife 6, e26945. doi:10.7554/eLife.26945
Briscoe, J. and Small, S. (2015). Morphogen rules: design principles of gradient-
mediated embryo patterning. Development 142, 3996-4009. doi:10.1242/dev.
129452
Briscoe, J., Pierani, A., Jessell, T. M. and Ericson, J. (2000). A homeodomain
protein code specifies progenitor cell identity and neuronal fate in the ventral
neural tube. Cell 101, 435-445. doi:10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80853-3
Brö hl, D., Strehle, M., Wende, H., Hori, K., Bormuth, I., Nave, K.-A., Mü ller, T.
and Birchmeier, C. (2008). A transcriptional network coordinately determines
transmitter and peptidergic fate in the dorsal spinal cord. Dev. Biol. 322, 381-393.
doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.08.002
Butts, J. C., McCreedy, D. A., Martinez-Vargas, J. A., Mendoza-Camacho, F. N.,
Hookway, T. A., Gifford, C. A., Taneja, P., Noble-Haeusslein, L. and McDevitt,
T. C. (2017). Differentiation of V2a interneurons from human pluripotent stem
cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.USA 114, 4969-4974. doi:10.1073/pnas.1608254114
Cao, J., Spielmann, M., Qiu, X., Huang, X., Ibrahim, D. M., Hill, A. J., Zhang, F.,
Mundlos, S., Christiansen, L., Steemers, F. J. et al. (2019). The single-cell
transcriptional landscape of mammalian organogenesis. Nature 566, 496-502.
doi:10.1038/s41586-019-0969-x
Carcagno, A. L., Di Bella, D. J., Goulding, M., Guillemot, F. and Lanuza, G. M.
(2014). Neurogenin3 restricts serotonergic neuron differentiation to the hindbrain.
J. Neurosci. 34, 15223-15233. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3403-14.2014
Chen, J.-A., Huang, Y.-P., Mazzoni, E. O., Tan, G. C., Zavadil, J. and Wichterle,
H. (2011). Mir-17-3p controls spinal neural progenitor patterning by regulating
10
REVIEW
Development (2019) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/dev.182154
DEVELOPMENT

Olig2/Irx3 cross-repressive loop. Neuron 69, 721-735. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2011.
01.014
Clark, B. S., Stein-O’Brien, G. L., Shiau, F., Cannon, G. H., Davis-Marcisak, E.,
Sherman, T., Santiago, C. P., Hoang, T. V., Rajaii, F., James-Esposito, R. E.
et al. (2019). Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of retinal development identifies nfi
factors as regulating mitotic exit and late-born cell specification. Neuron 102,
1111-1126. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2019.04.010
Clovis, Y. M., Seo, S. Y., Kwon, J.-S., Rhee, J. C., Yeo, S., Lee, J. W., Lee, S. and
Lee, S.-K. (2016). Chx10 consolidates V2a interneuron identity through two
distinct gene repression modes. Cell Rep. 16, 1642-1652. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.
2016.06.100
Cohen, M., Briscoe, J. and Blassberg, R. (2013). Morphogen interpretation: the
transcriptional logic of neural tube patterning. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 23,
423-428. doi:10.1016/j.gde.2013.04.003
Cohen, M., Page, K. M., Perez-Carrasco, R., Barnes, C. P. and Briscoe, J. (2014).
A theoretical framework for the regulation of Shh morphogen-controlled gene
expression. Development 141, 3868-3878. doi:10.1242/dev.112573
Coughlan, E., Garside, V., Wong, S. F. L., Liang, H., Kraus, D., Karmakar, K.,
Maheshwari, U., Rijli, F. M., Bourne, J. and McGlinn, E. (2019). A Hox code
defines spinocerebellar neuron subtype regionalisation. bioRxiv. doi:10.1101/
640243
Cusanovich, D. A., Hill, A. J., Aghamirzaie, D., Daza, R. M., Pliner, H. A.,
Berletch, J. B., Filippova, G. N., Huang, X., Christiansen, L., DeWitt, W. S.
et al. (2018). A single-cell atlas of in vivo mammalian chromatin accessibility. Cell
174, 1309-1324.e18. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.06.052
Dasen, J. S. and Jessell, T. M. (2009). Hox networks and the origins of motor neuron
diversity. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 88, 169-200. doi:10.1016/S0070-2153(09)88006-X
Dasen, J. S., Liu, J.-P. and Jessell, T. M. (2003). Motor neuron columnar fate
imposed by sequential phases of Hox-c activity. Nature 425, 926-933. doi:10.
1038/nature02051
Dasen, J. S., Tice, B. C., Brenner-Morton, S. and Jessell, T. M. (2005). A hox
regulatory network establishes motor neuron pool identity and target-muscle
connectivity. Cell 123, 477-491. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2005.09.009
Deguchi, Y., Donato, F., Galimberti, I., Cabuy, E. and Caroni, P. (2011).
Temporally matched subpopulations of selectively interconnected principal
neurons in the hippocampus. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 495-504. doi:10.1038/nn.2768
Delile, J., Rayon, T., Melchionda, M., Edwards, A., Briscoe, J. and Sagner, A.
(2019). Single cell transcriptomics reveals spatial and temporal dynamics of gene
expression in the developing mouse spinal cord. Development 146, dev173807.
doi:10.1242/dev.173807
Demireva, E. Y., Shapiro, L. S., Jessell, T. M. and Zampieri, N. (2011). Motor
neuron position and topographic order imposed by β- And γ-catenin activities. Cell
147, 641-652. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.09.037
Deneen, B., Ho, R., Lukaszewicz, A., Hochstim, C. J., Gronostajski, R. M. and
Anderson, D. J. (2006). The transcription factor NFIA controls the onset of
gliogenesis in the developing spinal cord. Neuron 52, 953-968. doi:10.1016/j.
neuron.2006.11.019
Dessaud, E., Yang, L. L., Hill, K., Cox, B., Ulloa, F., Ribeiro, A., Mynett, A.,
Novitch, B. G. and Briscoe, J. (2007). Interpretation of the sonic hedgehog
morphogen gradient by a temporal adaptation mechanism. Nature 450, 717-720.
doi:10.1038/nature06347
Dessaud, E., Ribes, V., Balaskas, N., Yang, L. L., Pierani, A., Kicheva, A.,
Novitch, B. G., Briscoe, J. and Sasai, N. (2010). Dynamic assignment and
maintenance of positional identity in the ventral neural tube by the morphogen
sonic hedgehog. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000382. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000382
Di Lullo, E. and Kriegstein, A. R. (2017). The use of brain organoids to investigate
neural development and disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 573-584. doi:10.1038/
nrn.2017.107
Dias, J. M., Alekseenko, Z., Applequist, J. M. and Ericson, J. (2014). Tgfβ
signaling regulates temporal neurogenesis and potency of neural stem cells in the
CNS. Neuron 84, 927-939. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2014.10.033
Doe, C. Q. (2017). Temporal patterning in the Drosophila CNS. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev.
Biol. 33, 219-240. doi:10.1146/annurev-cellbio-111315-125210
Duval, N., Vaslin, C., Barata, T. C., Frarma, Y., Contremoulins, V., Baudin, X.,
Nedelec, S. and Ribes, V. C. (2019). BMP4 patterns Smad activity and generates
stereotyped cell fate organization in spinal organoids. Development 146,
dev175430. doi:10.1242/dev.175430
Ensini, M., Tsuchida, T. N., Belting, H.-G. and Jessell, T. M. (1998). The control of
rostrocaudal pattern in the developing spinal cord: specification of motor neuron
subtype identity is initiated by signals from paraxial mesoderm. Development 125,
969-982.
Ericson, J., Thor, S., Edlund, T., Jessell, T. M. and Yamada, T. (1992). Early
stages of motor neuron differentiation revealed by expression of homeobox gene
Islet-1. Science 256, 1555-1560. doi:10.1126/science.1350865
Fatehullah, A., Tan, S. H. and Barker, N. (2016). Organoids as an in vitro model of
human development and disease. Nat. Cell Biol. 18, 246-254. doi:10.1038/
ncb3312
Francius, C., Harris, A., Rucchin, V., Hendricks, T. J., Stam, F. J., Barber, M.,
Kurek, D., Grosveld, F. G., Pierani, A., Goulding, M. et al. (2013). Identification
of multiple subsets of ventral interneurons and differential distribution along the
rostrocaudal axis of the developing spinal cord. PLoS ONE 8, e70325. doi:10.
1371/journal.pone.0070325
Gaber, Z. B., Butler, S. J. and Novitch, B. G. (2013). PLZF regulates fibroblast
growth factor responsiveness and maintenance of neural progenitors. PLoS Biol.
11, e1001676. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001676
Gabitto, M. I., Pakman, A., Bikoff, J. B., Abbott, L. F., Jessell, T. M. and Paninski,
L. (2016). Bayesian sparse regression analysis documents the diversity of spinal
inhibitory interneurons. Cell 165, 220-233. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.026
Gerber, V., Yang, L., Takamiya, M., Ribes, V., Gourain, V., Peravali, R.,
Stegmaier, J., Mikut, R., Reischl, M., Ferg, M. et al. (2019). The HMG box
transcription factors Sox1a and Sox1b specify a new class of glycinergic
interneuron in the spinal cord of zebrafish embryos. Development 146,
dev172510. doi:10.1242/dev.172510
Golden, M. G. and Dasen, J. S. (2012). Polycomb repressive complex 1 activities
determine the columnar organization of motor neurons. Genes Dev. 26,
2236-2250. doi:10.1101/gad.199133.112
Gouti, M., Tsakiridis, A., Wymeersch, F. J., Huang, Y., Kleinjung, J., Wilson, V.
and Briscoe, J. (2014). In vitro generation of neuromesodermal progenitors
reveals distinct roles for wnt signalling in the specification of spinal cord and
paraxial mesoderm identity. PLoS Biol. 12, e1001937. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.
1001937
Gowan, K., Helms, A. W., Hunsaker, T. L., Collisson, T., Ebert, P. J., Odom, R.
and Johnson, J. E. (2001). Crossinhibitory activities of Ngn1 and Math1 allow
specification of distinct dorsal interneurons. Neuron 31, 219-232. doi:10.1016/
S0896-6273(01)00367-1
Guillemot, F. and Zimmer, C. (2011). From cradle to grave: the multiple roles of
fibroblast growth factors in neural development. Neuron 71, 574-588. doi:10.1016/
j.neuron.2011.08.002
Gupta, S., Sivalingam, D., Hain, S., Makkar, C., Sosa, E., Clark, A. and Butler,
S. J. (2018). Deriving dorsal spinal sensory interneurons from human pluripotent
stem cells. Stem Cell Rep. 10, 390-405. doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2017.12.012
Hä ring, M., Zeisel, A., Hochgerner, H., Rinwa, P., Jakobsson, J. E. T.,
Lö nnerberg, P., La Manno, G., Sharma, N., Borgius, L., Kiehn, O. et al.
(2018). Neuronal atlas of the dorsal horn defines its architecture and links sensory
input to transcriptional cell types. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 869-880. doi:10.1038/
s41593-018-0141-1
Harris, A., Masgutova, G., Collin, A., Toch, M., Hidalgo-Figueroa, M., Jacob, B.,
Corcoran, L. M., Francius, C. and Clotman, F. (2019). Onecut factors and
Pou2f2 regulate the distribution of V2 interneurons in the mouse developing spinal
cord. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 13, 184. doi:10.3389/fncel.2019.00184
Hayashi, M., Hinckley, C. A., Driscoll, S. P., Moore, N. J., Levine, A. J., Hilde,
K. L., Sharma, K. and Pfaff, S. L. (2018). Graded arrays of spinal and supraspinal
V2a interneuron subtypes underlie forelimb and hindlimb motor control. Neuron
97, 869-884. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2018.01.023
Hoang, P. T., Chalif, J. I., Bikoff, J. B., Jessell, T. M., Mentis, G. Z. and Wichterle,
H. (2018). Subtype diversification and synaptic specificity of stem cell-derived
spinal interneurons. Neuron 100, 135-149.e7. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2018.09.016
Holguera, I. and Desplan, C. (2018). Neuronal specification in space and time.
Science 362, 176-180. doi:10.1126/science.aas9435
Hollyday, M. and Hamburger, V. (1977). An autoradiographic study of the formation
of the lateral motor column in the chick embryo. Brain Res. 132, 197-208. doi:10.
1016/0006-8993(77)90416-4
Hor, J. H., Soh, E. S.-Y., Tan, L. Y., Lim, V. J. W., Santosa, M. M., Winanto, Ho,
B. X., Fan, Y., Soh, B.-S. and Ng, S.-Y. (2018). Cell cycle inhibitors protect motor
neurons in an organoid model of spinal muscular atrophy. Cell Death Dis. 9, 1100.
doi:10.1038/s41419-018-1081-0
Imamura, F., Ayoub, A. E., Rakic, P. and Greer, C. A. (2011). Timing of
neurogenesis is a determinant of olfactory circuitry. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 331-337.
doi:10.1038/nn.2754
Jessell, T. M. (2000). Neuronal specification in the spinal cord: inductive signals and
transcriptional codes. Nat. Rev. Genet. 1, 20-29. doi:10.1038/35049541
John, A., Wildner, H. and Britsch, S. (2005). The homeodomain transcription
factor Gbx1 identifies a subpopulation of late-born GABAergic interneurons in the
developing dorsal spinal cord. Dev. Dyn. 234, 767-771. doi:10.1002/dvdy.20568
Joshi, K., Lee, S., Lee, B., Lee, J. W. and Lee, S.-K. (2009). LMO4 controls the
balance between excitatory and inhibitory spinal V2 interneurons. Neuron 61,
839-851. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2009.02.011
Jung, H., Lacombe, J., Mazzoni, E. O., Liem, K. F., Grinstein, J., Mahony, S.,
Mukhopadhyay, D., Gifford, D. K., Young, R. A., Anderson, K. V. et al. (2010).
Global control of motor neuron topography mediated by the repressive actions of a
single hox gene. Neuron 67, 781-796. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2010.08.008
Kabayiza, K. U., Masgutova, G., Harris, A., Rucchin, V., Jacob, B. and Clotman,
F. (2017). The onecut transcription factors regulate differentiation and distribution
of dorsal interneurons during spinal cord development. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 10,
157. doi:10.3389/fnmol.2017.00157
Kang, P., Lee, H. K., Glasgow, S. M., Finley, M., Donti, T., Gaber, Z. B., Graham,
B. H., Foster, A. E., Novitch, B. G., Gronostajski, R. M. et al. (2012). Sox9 and
NFIA coordinate a transcriptional regulatory cascade during the initiation of
gliogenesis. Neuron 74, 79-94. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2012.01.024
11
REVIEW
Development (2019) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/dev.182154
DEVELOPMENT

Kester, L., Van Oudenaarden, A. (2018). Single-cell transcriptomics meets lineage
tracing. Cell Stem Cell 23, 166-179. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2018.04.014
Kicheva, A. and Briscoe, J. (2015). Developmental pattern formation in phases.
Trends Cell Biol. 25, 579-591. doi:10.1016/j.tcb.2015.07.006
Kicheva, A., Bollenbach, T., Ribeiro, A., Valle, H. P., Lovell-Badge, R.,
Episkopou, V. and Briscoe, J. (2014). Coordination of progenitor specification
and growth in mouse and chick spinal cord. Science 345, 1254927. doi:10.1126/
science.1254927
Kim, J., Choi, T.-I., Park, S., Kim, M. H., Kim, C.-H. and Lee, S. (2018). Rnf220
cooperates with Zc4h2 to specify spinal progenitor domains. Development 145,
dev165340. doi:10.1242/dev.165340
Kutejova, E., Sasai, N., Shah, A., Gouti, M. and Briscoe, J. (2016). Neural
progenitors adopt specific identities by directly repressing all alternative progenitor
transcriptional programs. Dev. Cell 36, 639-653. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2016.02.013
La Manno, G., Soldatov, R., Zeisel, A., Braun, E., Hochgerner, H., Petukhov, V.,
Lidschreiber, K., Kastriti, M. E., Lö nnerberg, P., Furlan, A. et al. (2018). RNA
velocity of single cells. Nature 560, 494-498. doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0414-6
Lacombe, J., Hanley, O., Jung, H., Philippidou, P., Surmeli, G., Grinstein, J. and
Dasen, J. S. (2013). Genetic and functional modularity of hox activities in the
specification of limb-innervating motor neurons. PLoS Genet. 9, e1003184.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1003184
Lai, H. C., Klisch, T. J., Roberts, R., Zoghbi, H. Y. and Johnson, J. E. (2011).
In vivo neuronal subtype-specific targets of Atoh1 (Math1) in dorsal spinal cord.
J. Neurosci. 31, 10859-10871. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0445-11.2011
Lai, H. C., Seal, R. P. and Johnson, J. E. (2016). Making sense out of spinal cord
somatosensory development. Development 143, 3434-3448. doi:10.1242/dev.
139592
Lancaster, M. A. and Knoblich, J. A. (2014). Organogenesisin a dish: modeling
development and disease using organoid technologies. Science 345, 1247125.
doi:10.1126/science.1247125
Le Dréau, G. and Martı́, E. (2012). Dorsal-ventral patterning of the neural tube: a
tale of three signals. Dev. Neurobiol. 72, 1471-1481. doi:10.1002/dneu.22015
Lee, K. J., Dietrich, P. and Jessell, T. M. (2000). Genetic ablation reveals that the
roof plate is essential for dorsal interneuron specification. Nature 403, 734-740.
doi:10.1038/35001507
Lee, S., Lee, B., Joshi, K., Pfaff, S. L., Lee, J. W. and Lee, S.-K. (2008). A
regulatory network to segregate the identity of neuronal subtypes. Dev. Cell 14,
877-889. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2008.03.021
Liem, K. F., Tremml, G. and Jessell, T. M. (1997). A role for the roof plate and its
resident TGFβ-related proteins in neuronal patterning in the dorsal spinal cord.
Cell 91, 127-138. doi:10.1016/S0092-8674(01)80015-5
Lin, A. W. and Carpenter, E. M. (2003). Hoxa10 and Hoxd10 coordinately regulate
lumbar motor neuron patterning. J. Neurobiol. 56, 328-337. doi:10.1002/neu.
10239
Lippmann, E. S., Williams, C. E., Ruhl, D. A., Estevez-Silva, M. C., Chapman,
E. R., Coon, J. J. and Ashton, R. S. (2015). Deterministic HOX patterning in
human pluripotent stem cell-derived neuroectoderm. Stem Cell Rep. 4, 632-644.
doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.02.018
Liu, J.-P., Laufer, E. and Jessell, T. M. (2001). Assigning the positional identity of
spinal motor neurons. Neuron 32, 997-1012. doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(01)00544-X
Livet, J., Sigrist, M., Stroebel, S., De Paola, V., Price, S. R., Henderson, C. E.,
Jessell, T. M. and Arber, S. (2002). ETS gene Pea3 controls the central position
and terminal arborization of specific motor neuron pools. Neuron 35, 877-892.
doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00863-2
Lu, D. C., Niu, T. and Alaynick, W. A. (2015). Molecular and cellular development of
spinal cord locomotor circuitry. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 8, 25. doi:10.3389/fnmol.
2015.00025
Ma, Y.-C., Song, M.-R., Park, J. P., Henry Ho, H.-Y., Hu, L., Kurtev, M. V., Zieg, J.,
Ma, Q., Pfaff, S. L. and Greenberg, M. E. (2008). Regulation of motor neuron
specification by phosphorylation of neurogenin 2. Neuron 58, 65-77. doi:10.1016/
j.neuron.2008.01.037
Mahony, S., Mazzoni, E. O., McCuine, S., Young, R. A., Wichterle, H. and
Gifford, D. K. (2011). Ligand-dependent dynamics of retinoic acid receptor
binding during early neurogenesis. Genome Biol. 12, R2. doi:10.1186/gb-2011-
12-1-r2
Marti, E., Bumcrot, D. A., Takada, R. and McMahon, A. P. (1995). Requirement of
19K form of sonic hedgehog for induction of distinct ventral cell types in CNS
explants. Nature 375, 322-325. doi:10.1038/375322a0
Mazzoni, E. O., Mahony, S., Peljto, M., Patel, T., Thornton, S. R., McCuine, S.,
Reeder, C., Boyer, L. A., Young, R. A., Gifford, D. K. et al. (2013a). Saltatory
remodeling of Hox chromatin in response to rostrocaudal patterning signals. Nat.
Neurosci. 16, 1191-1198. doi:10.1038/nn.3490
Mazzoni, E. O., Mahony, S., Closser, M., Morrison, C. A., Nedelec, S., Williams,
D. J., An, D., Gifford, D. K. and Wichterle, H. (2013b). Synergistic binding of
transcription factors to cell-specific enhancers programs motor neuron identity.
Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1219-1227. doi:10.1038/nn.3467
Megason, S. G. and McMahon, A. P. (2002). A mitogen gradient of dorsal midline
Wnts organizes growth in the CNS. Development 129, 2087-2098.
Meinhardt, A., Eberle, D., Tazaki, A., Ranga, A., Niesche, M., Wilsch-
Brä uninger, M., Stec, A., Schackert, G., Lutolf, M. and Tanaka, E. M. (2014).
3D reconstitution of the patterned neural tube from embryonic stem cells. Stem
Cell Rep. 3, 987-999. doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.09.020
Mendelsohn, A. I., Dasen, J. S. and Jessell, T. M. (2017). Divergent Hox coding
and evasion of retinoid signaling specifies motor neurons innervating digit
muscles. Neuron 93, 792-805.e4. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2017.01.017
Metzis, V., Steinhauser, S., Pakanavicius, E., Gouti, M., Stamataki, D., Ivanovitch,
K., Watson, T., Rayon, T., Mousavy Gharavy, S. N., Lovell-Badge, R. et al.
(2018). Nervous system regionalization entails axial allocation before neural
differentiation. Cell 175, 1105-1118.e17. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.040
Mizuguchi, R., Kriks, S., Cordes, R., Gossler, A., Ma, Q. and Goulding, M.
(2006). Ascl1 and Gsh1/2 control inhibitory and excitatory cell fate in spinal
sensory interneurons. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 770-778. doi:10.1038/nn1706
Mona, B., Uruena, A., Kollipara, R. K., Ma, Z., Borromeo, M. D., Chang, J. C. and
Johnson, J. E. (2017). Repression by PRDM13 is critical for generating precision
in neuronal identity. eLife 6, e25787. doi:10.7554/eLife.25787
Mü ller, T., Brohmann, H., Pierani, A., Heppenstall, P. A., Lewin, G. R., Jessell,
T. M. and Birchmeier, C. (2002). The homeodomain factor Lbx1 distinguishes
two major programs of neuronal differentiation in the dorsal spinal cord. Neuron
34, 551-562. doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00689-X
Muñoz-Manchado, A. B., Gonzales, C. B., Zeisel, A., Munguba, H., Bekkouche,
B., Skene, N. G., Lö nnerberg, P., Ryge, J., Harris, K. D., Linnarsson, S. et al.
(2018). Diversity of interneurons in the dorsal striatum revealed by single-cell RNA
sequencing and patchseq. Cell Rep. 24, 2179-2190.e7. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.
2018.07.053
Muroyama, Y., Fujihara, M., Ikeya, M., Kondoh, H. and Takada, S. (2002). Wnt
signaling plays an essential role in neuronal specification of the dorsal spinal cord.
Genes Dev. 16, 548-553. doi:10.1101/gad.937102
Niederreither, K., McCaffery, P., Drä ger, U. C., Chambon, P. and Dollé, P. (1997).
Restricted
expression
and
retinoic
acid-induced
downregulation
of
the
retinaldehyde
dehydrogenase
type
2
(RALDH-2)
gene
during
mouse
development. Mech. Dev. 62, 67-78. doi:10.1016/S0925-4773(96)00653-3
Nishi, Y., Zhang, X., Jeong, J., Peterson, K. A., Vedenko, A., Bulyk, M. L., Hide,
W. A. and McMahon, A. P. (2015). A direct fate exclusion mechanism by Sonic
hedgehog-regulated transcriptional repressors. Development 142, 3286-3293.
doi:10.1242/dev.124636
Novitch, B. G., Chen, A. I. and Jessell, T. M. (2001). Coordinate regulation of motor
neuron subtype identity and pan-neuronal properties by the bHLH repressor
Olig2. Neuron 31, 773-789. doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(01)00407-X
Ogura, T., Sakaguchi, H., Miyamoto, S. and Takahashi, J. (2018). Three-
dimensional induction of dorsal, intermediate and ventral spinal cord tissues from
human pluripotent stem cells. Development 145, dev162214. doi:10.1242/dev.
162214
Oosterveen, T., Kurdija, S., Ensterö , M., Uhde, C. W., Bergsland, M., Sandberg,
M., Sandberg, R., Muhr, J. and Ericson, J. (2013). SoxB1-driven transcriptional
network underlies neural-specific interpretation of morphogen signals. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 110, 7330-7335. doi:10.1073/pnas.1220010110
Parras, C. M., Schuurmans, C., Scardigli, R., Kim, J., Anderson, D. J. and
Guillemot, F. (2002). Divergent functions of the proneural genes Mash1 and
Ngn2 in the specification of neuronal subtype identity. Genes Dev. 16, 324-338.
doi:10.1101/gad.940902
Peng, C.-Y., Yajima, H., Burns, C. E., Zon, L. I., Sisodia, S. S., Pfaff, S. L. and
Sharma, K. (2007). Notch and MAML signaling drives Scl-dependent interneuron
diversity in the spinal cord. Neuron 53, 813-827. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2007.02.019
Peterson, K. A., Nishi, Y., Ma, W., Vedenko, A., Shokri, L., Zhang, X., McFarlane,
M., Baizabal, J.-M., Junker, J. P., van Oudenaarden, A. et al. (2012). Neural-
specific Sox2 input and differential Gli-binding affinity provide context and
positional information in Shh-directed neural patterning. Genes Dev. 26,
2802-2816. doi:10.1101/gad.207142.112
Philippidou, P. and Dasen, J. S. (2013). Hox Genes: choreographers in neural
development, architects of circuit organization. Neuron 80, 12-34. doi:10.1016/j.
neuron.2013.09.020
Philippidou, P., Walsh, C. M., Aubin, J., Jeannotte, L. and Dasen, J. S. (2012).
Sustained
Hox5
gene
activity
is
required
for
respiratory
motor
neuron
development. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 1636-1644. doi:10.1038/nn.3242
Pijuan-Sala, B., Griffiths, J. A., Guibentif, C., Hiscock, T. W., Jawaid, W., Calero-
Nieto, F. J., Mulas, C., Ibarra-Soria, X., Tyser, R. C. V., Ho, D. L. L. et al. (2019).
A single-cell molecular map of mouse gastrulation and early organogenesis.
Nature 566, 490-495. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-0933-9
Ranga, A., Girgin, M., Eberle, D., Caiazzo, M., Tanaka, E. M., Ranga, A., Girgin,
M., Meinhardt, A., Eberle, D., Caiazzo, M. et al. (2017). Correction for Ranga
et al., neural tube morphogenesis in synthetic 3D microenvironments. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci.USA 114, E3163-E3163. doi:10.1073/pnas.1703993114
Ravanelli, A. M. and Appel, B. (2015). Motor neurons and oligodendrocytes arise
from distinct cell lineages by progenitor recruitment. Genes Dev. 29, 2504-2515.
doi:10.1101/gad.271312.115
Rhee, H. S., Closser, M., Guo, Y., Bashkirova, E. V., Tan, G. C., Gifford, D. K. and
Wichterle, H. (2016). Expression of terminal effector genes in mammalian
neurons is maintained by a dynamic relay of transient enhancers. Neuron 92,
1252-1265. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2016.11.037
12
REVIEW
Development (2019) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/dev.182154
DEVELOPMENT

Rizvi, A. H., Camara, P. G., Kandror, E. K., Roberts, T. J., Schieren, I., Maniatis,
T. and Rabadan, R. (2017). Single-cell topological RNA-seq analysis reveals
insights into cellular differentiation and development. Nat. Biotechnol. 35,
551-560. doi:10.1038/nbt.3854
Roelink, H., Porter, J. A., Chiang, C., Tanabe, Y., Chang, D. T., Beachy, P. A. and
Jessell, T. M. (1995). Floor plate and motor neuron induction by different
concentrations of the amino-terminal cleavage product of sonic hedgehog
autoproteolysis. Cell 81, 445-455. doi:10.1016/0092-8674(95)90397-6
Rogers, K. W. and Schier, A. F. (2011). Morphogen gradients: from generation to
interpretation. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 27, 377-407. doi:10.1146/annurev-
cellbio-092910-154148
Rosenberg, A. B., Roco, C. M., Muscat, R. A., Kuchina, A., Sample, P., Yao, Z.,
Graybuck, L. T., Peeler, D. J., Mukherjee, S., Chen, W. et al. (2018). Single-cell
profiling of the developing mouse brain and spinal cord with split-pool barcoding.
Science 360, 176-182. doi:10.1126/science.aam8999
Roy, A., Francius, C., Rousso, D. L., Seuntjens, E., Debruyn, J., Luxenhofer, G.,
Huber, A. B., Huylebroeck, D., Novitch, B. G. and Clotman, F. (2012). Onecut
transcription factors act upstream of Isl1 to regulate spinal motoneuron
diversification. Development 139, 3109-3119. doi:10.1242/dev.078501
Saade, M., Gutiérrez-Vallejo, I., Le Dréau, G., Rabadán, M. A., Miguez, D. G.,
Buceta, J. and Martı́, E. (2013). Sonic hedgehog signaling switches the mode of
division in the developing nervous system. Cell Rep. 4, 492-503. doi:10.1016/j.
celrep.2013.06.038
Saade, M., Gonzalez-Gobartt, E., Escalona, R., Usieto, S. and Martı́, E. (2017).
Shh-mediated centrosomal recruitment of PKA promotes symmetric proliferative
neuroepithelial cell division. Nat. Cell Biol. 19, 493-503. doi:10.1038/ncb3512
Sagner, A. and Briscoe, J. (2017). Morphogen interpretation: concentration, time,
competence, and signaling dynamics. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Dev. Biol. 6, e271.
doi:10.1002/wdev.271
Sagner, A., Gaber, Z. B., Delile, J., Kong, J. H., Rousso, D. L., Pearson, C. A.,
Weicksel, S. E., Melchionda, M., Mousavy Gharavy, S. N., Briscoe, J. et al.
(2018). Olig2 and Hes regulatory dynamics during motor neuron differentiation
revealed by single cell transcriptomics. PLoS Biol. 16, e2003127. doi:10.1371/
journal.pbio.2003127
Sapkota, D., Chintala, H., Wu, F., Fliesler, S. J., Hu, Z. and Mu, X. (2014). Onecut1
and Onecut2 redundantly regulate early retinal cell fates during development.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, E4086-E4095. doi:10.1073/pnas.1405354111
Sathyamurthy, A., Johnson, K. R., Matson, K. J. E., Dobrott, C. I., Li, L., Ryba,
A. R., Bergman, T. B., Kelly, M. C., Kelley, M. W. and Levine, A. J. (2018).
Massively parallel single nucleus transcriptional profiling defines spinal cord
neurons and their activity during behavior. Cell Rep. 22, 2216-2225. doi:10.1016/j.
celrep.2018.02.003
Saunders, A., Macosko, E. Z., Wysoker, A., Goldman, M., Krienen, F. M., de
Rivera, H., Bien, E., Baum, M., Bortolin, L., Wang, S. et al. (2018). Molecular
diversity and specializations among the cells of the adult mouse brain. Cell 174,
1015-1030.e16. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.07.028
Scardigli, R., Schuurmans, C., Gradwohl, G. and Guillemot, F. (2001).
Crossregulation between Neurogenin2 and pathways specifying neuronal
identity
in
the
spinal
cord.
Neuron
31,
203-217.
doi:10.1016/S0896-
6273(01)00358-0
Shekhar, K., Lapan, S. W., Whitney, I. E., Tran, N. M., Macosko, E. Z., Kowalczyk,
M., Adiconis, X., Levin, J. Z., Nemesh, J., Goldman, M. et al. (2016).
Comprehensive
classification
of
retinal
bipolar
neurons
by
single-cell
transcriptomics. Cell 166, 1308-1323.e30. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.054
Skaggs, K., Martin, D. M. and Novitch, B. G. (2011). Regulation of spinal
interneuron development by the Olig-related protein Bhlhb5 and Notch signaling.
Development 138, 3199-3211. doi:10.1242/dev.057281
Sockanathan, S. and Jessell, T. M. (1998). Motor neuron-derived retinoid signaling
specifies the subtype identity of spinal motor neurons. Cell 94, 503-514. doi:10.
1016/S0092-8674(00)81591-3
Sommer, L., Ma, Q. and Anderson, D. J. (1996). Neurogenins, a novel family of
atonal-related bHLH transcription factors, are putative mammalian neuronal
determination genes that reveal progenitor cell heterogeneity in the developing
CNS and PNS. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 8, 221-241. doi:10.1006/mcne.1996.0060
Stam, F. J., Hendricks, T. J., Zhang, J., Geiman, E. J., Francius, C., Labosky,
P. A., Clotman, F. and Goulding, M. (2012). Renshaw cell interneuron
specialization is controlled by a temporally restricted transcription factor
program. Development 139, 179-190. doi:10.1242/dev.071134
Sternfeld, M. J., Hinckley, C. A., Moore, N. J., Pankratz, M. T., Hilde, K. L.,
Driscoll, S. P., Hayashi, M., Amin, N. D., Bonanomi, D., Gifford, W. D. et al.
(2017).
Speed
and
segmentation
control
mechanisms
characterized
in
rhythmically-active
circuits
created
from
spinal
neurons
produced
from
genetically-tagged embryonic stem cells. eLife 6, e21540. doi:10.7554/eLife.
21540
Stolt, C. C., Lommes, P., Sock, E., Chaboissier, M.-C., Schedl, A. and Wegner,
M. (2003). The Sox9 transcription factor determines glial fate choice in the
developing spinal cord. Genes Dev. 17, 1677-1689. doi:10.1101/gad.259003
Stolt, C. C., Schmitt, S., Lommes, P., Sock, E. and Wegner, M. (2005). Impact of
transcription factor Sox8 on oligodendrocyte specification in the mouse embryonic
spinal cord. Dev. Biol. 281, 309-317. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.03.010
Sugimori, M., Nagao, M., Bertrand, N., Parras, C. M., Guillemot, F. and
Nakafuku, M. (2007). Combinatorial actions of patterning and HLH transcription
factors in the spatiotemporal control of neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the
developing spinal cord. Development 134, 1617-1629. doi:10.1242/dev.001255
Sü rmeli, G., Akay, T., Ippolito, G. C., Tucker, P. W. and Jessell, T. M. (2011).
Patterns of spinal sensory-motor connectivity prescribed by a dorsoventral
positional template. Cell 147, 653-665. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.10.012
Sweeney, L. B., Bikoff, J. B., Gabitto, M. I., Brenner-Morton, S., Baek, M., Yang,
J. H., Tabak, E. G., Dasen, J. S., Kintner, C. R. and Jessell, T. M. (2018). Origin
and segmental diversity of spinal inhibitory interneurons. Neuron 97, 341-355.e3.
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2017.12.029
Tan, G. C., Mazzoni, E. O. and Wichterle, H. (2016). Iterative role of notch signaling
in spinal motor neuron diversification. Cell Rep. 16, 907-916. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.
2016.06.067
Taylor, M. K., Yeager, K. and Morrison, S. J. (2007). Physiological notch signaling
promotes gliogenesis in the developing peripheral and central nervous systems.
Development 134, 2435-2447. doi:10.1242/dev.005520
Thaler, J., Harrison, K., Sharma, K., Lettieri, K., Kehrl, J. and Pfaff, S. L. (1999).
Active suppression of interneuron programs within developing motor neurons
revealed by analysis of homeodomain factor HB9. Neuron 23, 675-687. doi:10.
1016/S0896-6273(01)80027-1
Thaler, J. P., Lee, S.-K., Jurata, L. W., Gill, G. N. and Pfaff, S. L. (2002). LIM factor
Lhx3 contributes to the specification of motor neuron and interneuron identity
through cell-type-specific protein-protein interactions. Cell 110, 237-249. doi:10.
1016/S0092-8674(02)00823-1
Timmer, J. R., Wang, C. and Niswander, L. (2002). BMP signaling patterns the
dorsal and intermediate neural tube via regulation of homeobox and helix-loop-
helix transcription factors. Development 129, 2459-2472.
Tozer, S., Le Dreau, G., Marti, E. and Briscoe, J. (2013). Temporal control of BMP
signalling determines neuronal subtype identity in the dorsal neural tube.
Development 140, 1467-1474. doi:10.1242/dev.090118
Trapnell, C., Cacchiarelli, D., Grimsby, J., Pokharel, P., Li, S., Morse, M.,
Lennon, N. J., Livak, K. J., Mikkelsen, T. S. and Rinn, J. L. (2014). The
dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed by pseudotemporal
ordering of single cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 381-386. doi:10.1038/nbt.2859
Tripodi, M., Stepien, A. E. and Arber, S. (2011). Motor antagonism exposed by
spatial segregation and timing of neurogenesis. Nature 479, 61-66. doi:10.1038/
nature10538
Velasco, S., Ibrahim, M. M., Kakumanu, A., Ohler, U., Mahony, S., Mazzoni,
E. O., Garipler, G., Aydin, B., Al-Sayegh, M. A., Hirsekorn, A. et al. (2017). A
multi-step transcriptional and chromatin state cascade underlies motor neuron
programming from embryonic stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 20, 205-217.e8. doi:10.
1016/j.stem.2016.11.006
Vermot, J. (2005). Retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2 and Hoxc8 are required in the
murine brachial spinal cord for the specification of Lim1+ motoneurons and the
correct distribution of Islet1+ motoneurons. Development 132, 1611-1621. doi:10.
1242/dev.01718
Wagner, A., Regev, A. and Yosef, N. (2016). Revealing the vectors of cellular
identity with single-cell genomics. Nat. Biotechnol. 34, 1145-1160. doi:10.1038/
nbt.3711
Wichterle, H., Lieberam, I., Porter, J. A. and Jessell, T. M. (2002). Directed
differentiation of embryonic stem cells into motor neurons. Cell 110, 385-397.
doi:10.1016/S0092-8674(02)00835-8
Wildner, H., Mü ller, T., Cho, S.-H., Brö hl, D., Cepko, C. L., Guillemot, F. and
Birchmeier, C. (2006). dILA neurons in the dorsal spinal cord are the product of
terminal and non-terminal asymmetric progenitor cell divisions, and require Mash1
for their development. Development 133, 2105-2113. doi:10.1242/dev.02345
Wine-Lee, L., Ahn, K. J., Richardson, R. D., Mishina, Y., Lyons, K. M. and
Crenshaw, E. B.III. (2004). Signaling through BMP type 1 receptors is required for
development of interneuron cell types in the dorsal spinal cord. Development 131,
5393-5403. doi:10.1242/dev.01379
Wu, S., Wu, Y. and Capecchi, M. R. (2006). Motoneurons and oligodendrocytes are
sequentially generated from neural stem cells but do not appear to share common
lineage-restricted progenitors in vivo. Development 133, 581-590. doi:10.1242/
dev.02236
Wu, Y., Wang, G., Scott, S. A. and Capecchi, M. R. (2007). Hoxc10 and Hoxd10
regulate mouse columnar, divisional and motor pool identity of lumbar
motoneurons. Development 135, 171-182. doi:10.1242/dev.009225
Xu, H. and Sakiyama-Elbert, S. E. (2015). Directed differentiation of V3
interneurons
from
mouse
embryonic
stem
cells.
Stem
Cells
Dev.
24,
2723-2732. doi:10.1089/scd.2015.0122
Zagorski, M., Tabata, Y., Brandenberg, N., Lutolf, M. P., Tkač ik, G., Bollenbach,
T., Briscoe, J. and Kicheva, A. (2017). Decoding of position in the developing
neural tube from antiparallel morphogen gradients. Science 356, 1379-1383.
doi:10.1126/science.aam5887
Zeisel, A., Hochgerner, H., Lö nnerberg, P., Johnsson, A., Memic, F., van der
Zwan, J., Hä ring, M., Braun, E., Borm, L. E., La Manno, G. et al. (2018).
Molecular architecture of the mouse nervous system. Cell 174, 999-1014.e22.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.06.021
13
REVIEW
Development (2019) 146, dev182154. doi:10.1242/dev.182154
DEVELOPMENT

===== Sankowski2019_NatNeuro_HumanMicroglia =====
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-019-0532-y
1Institute of Neuropathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. 2Berta-Ottenstein-Programme for Clinician Scientists, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. 3Department of Neuropsychiatry and Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry, Charité—
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 4Max-Planck-Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany. 5AC Immune, Lausanne, 
Switzerland. 6Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. 7Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, 
University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany. 8DZNE and BIH, Berlin, Germany. 9University of Edinburgh and UK DRI, Edinburgh, UK. 10Center for 
Basics in NeuroModulation (NeuroModulBasics), Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany. 11These authors contributed 
equally: Roman Sankowski, Chotima Böttcher, Dominic Grün, Josef Priller, Marco Prinz. *e-mail: gruen@ie-freiburg.mpg.de; josef.priller@charite.de;  
marco.prinz@uniklinik-freiburg.de
T
he CNS hosts a heterogeneous population of myeloid cells, 
including parenchymal microglia and non-parenchymal peri-
vascular, meningeal and choroid plexus macrophages referred 
to as CNS-associated macrophages (CAMs)1–3. While CAMs consti-
tute an immunological barrier at CNS interfaces, microglia fulfill 
context-dependent functions during development, adulthood and 
aging4. In the healthy brain, microglia are involved in the surveil-
lance and maintenance of the microenvironment, the modula-
tion of synaptic plasticity and the removal of dying cells5,6. In the 
diseased brain, microglia have immunological functions, such as 
immune cell recruitment and cell debris removal1–3, but not anti-
gen presentation to encephalitic T cells7. Moreover, genome-wide 
association studies of patients with neurodegenerative disorders or 
neuroinflammatory conditions have revealed that many of the risk-
associated single nucleotide polymorphisms are linked to microglia, 
which suggests that there is an important role for innate immune 
cells in CNS diseases.
It is conceivable that the distinct and highly diverse functions of 
microglia are performed by specialized microglia subsets. However, 
evidence for the existence of such microglia subsets in vivo is scarce. 
In fact, the most salient questions regarding the single-cell compo-
sition of microglia states in the human brain, such as regional and 
functional heterogeneity, remain unanswered to date. Traditional 
approaches for profiling microglia were limited in their ability to 
resolve microglia heterogeneity due to a narrow set of examined fea-
tures or the need to pool large cell numbers8–10. Recent studies using 
laboratory mice have utilized single-cell-based immune phenotyp-
ing by time-of-flight mass cytometry (CyTOF) and single-cell RNA-
sequencing (scRNA-seq) to profile the heterogeneity of microglia 
and other CAMs in the mouse. CyTOF revealed novel microglia 
markers in mouse models of aging, demyelination and inflamma-
tion11,12. scRNA-seq was instrumental in enabling the profiling of 
murine CNS cells, including microglia13–15, across different sexes 
and developmental stages16–20. Additionally, neurodegeneration-
associated microglia phenotypes were recently characterized in the 
mouse using this methodology21,22. Due to obvious difficulties in 
obtaining healthy human brain samples, few datasets at the single-cell 
level are currently available for transcriptomic23,24 and pheno-
typic25 signatures of healthy developing and adult human microglia. 
However, an overall comparison between results obtained using 
scRNA-seq and CyTOF, to our knowledge, has never been per-
formed for the CNS. While several studies have profiled human 
gliomas26–30, as well as neuroinflammatory18,31,32, neurodevelopmen-
tal33 and neurodegenerative diseases34, conclusions about microglia 
diversity cannot readily be drawn from these datasets due to the 
limited numbers of cases or the lack of controls.
Here, we profiled 4,396 microglial cells from control brain 
regions of 15 adults that underwent surgery for epilepsy or tumors. 
We utilized the 3′-end-based mCEL-Seq2 protocol35,36 followed by 
the RaceID algorithm, which is designed to identify rare cell popu-
lations. Notably, one-third of all cells displayed an enrichment for 
the microglial core signature reported in bulk RNA-seq studies9,10. 
Mapping microglia states in the human brain 
through the integration of high-dimensional 
techniques
Roman Sankowski   1,2,11, Chotima Böttcher   3,11, Takahiro Masuda   1, Laufey Geirsdottir1, Sagar4,  
Elena Sindram1, Tamara Seredenina5, Andreas Muhs5, Christian Scheiwe6, Mukesch Johannes Shah   6,  
Dieter Henrik Heiland   6, Oliver Schnell6, Dominic Grün   4,7,11*, Josef Priller   3,8,9,11* and 
Marco Prinz   1,7,10,11*
Microglia are tissue-resident macrophages of the CNS that orchestrate local immune responses and contribute to several 
neurological and psychiatric diseases. Little is known about human microglia and how they orchestrate their highly plastic, 
context-specific adaptive responses during pathology. Here we combined two high-dimensional technologies, single-cell RNA-
sequencing and time-of-flight mass cytometry, to identify microglia states in the human brain during homeostasis and disease. 
This approach enabled us to identify and characterize a previously unappreciated spectrum of transcriptional states in human 
microglia. These transcriptional states are determined by their spatial distribution, and they further change with aging and 
brain tumor pathology. This description of multiple microglia phenotypes in the human CNS may open promising new avenues 
for subset-specific therapeutic interventions.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 22 | December 2019 | 2098–2110 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
2098

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
The remaining cells showed distinct age-dependent and region-
dependent transcriptional profiles. Furthermore, glioma-associated 
microglia (GAMs) from four individuals with primary glioblastoma 
multiforme (GBM) acquired a disease-associated signature, with 
downregulation of the microglia core signature and concomitant 
upregulation of inflammatory, metabolic and hypoxia-associated 
molecules. Using CyTOF, we identified a unique glioma-associated 
cluster that expresses proteins encoded by the top differentially 
expressed genes in GAMs. Our data provide a profiling of control 
and glioma-associated human microglia and a resource for the 
development of therapies targeting specific microglia states.
Results
scRNA-seq reveals a spectrum of transcriptional states in human 
microglia. To profile human microglia, we prospectively col-
lected CNS specimens representing non-diseased access tissue 
from patients undergoing brain surgery for the removal of epi-
leptic foci (n = 10), malignant glioma (n = 4) or metastases (n = 1) 
(Supplementary Table 1). After thorough neuropathological exami-
nation by two board-certified neuropathologists and exclusion of 
apparent brain pathologies such as neuroinflammation, neurode-
generation, demyelination or neoplasia, tissue samples from 15 sub-
jects (7 females, 8 males, aged 14–74 years) were dissociated and 
sorted using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) for cells 
positive for CD45 and negative for 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole 
(DAPI) staining (CD45+DAPI−), which were then transferred into 
384-well microtiter plates (Fig. 1a; Extended Data Figs. 1 and 2). 
scRNA-seq using mCEL-Seq2 yielded 4,564 human cells that 
included microglia, monocytes, T cells and oligodendrocytes, from 
which 4,396 microglial cells passed the cut-off of 1,500 transcripts 
per cell (Fig. 1b). Microglia were defined by the presence of the 
typical core signature that was distinct from other CD45+ cells and 
oligodendrocytes (Extended Data Fig. 3a). Unsupervised cluster-
ing using RaceID3 assigned single microglia within the microglia 
cloud to nine major clusters, designated as clusters C1–C9, and five 
minor clusters that contained fewer than 1% of all cells and were 
subsequently excluded from analysis (Fig. 1c,d,e–h; Supplementary 
Table 2). The fact that all identified microglia clusters are grouped 
into one diffuse microglia cloud that is clearly distinct from other 
cell types, such as monocytes or oligodendrocytes, suggests that 
there is a wide spectrum of gradual transcriptional states in human 
microglia. Additionally, after careful inspection of all clusters, C4 
was removed due to the upregulation of mitochondrial genes (for 
example, MTRNR2L8), which is indicative of low-quality cells 
according to recent mouse scRNA-seq experiments37,38 (Extended 
Data Fig. 3b). The remaining clusters ranged in size between 119 
cells (2.8% of all cells) in C8 and 1,327 cells (32.2% of all cells) in C2. 
Hierarchical clustering based on the top 20 differentially expressed 
genes per cluster revealed differences across the transcriptional 
spectrum of microglia (Fig. 1c; see Supplementary Table 3 for 
cluster-enriched differentially expressed genes). Notably, all sam-
ples from the 15 subjects contributed to the homeostatic clusters C2 
and C3 (Fig. 1d; Supplementary Table 2). T-distributed stochastic 
neighbor embedding (t-SNE) and pie chart representation showed 
the position of the clusters on the t-SNE map and their relative and 
absolute sizes (Fig. 1e,f). C3 was characterized by high expression of 
microglia core genes39,40, including CX3CR1 and TMEM119 (Fig. 1e,h; 
Extended Data Fig. 4). The neighboring C2 was characterized 
by the strong expression of major histocompatibility complex II 
(MHC-II) and antiviral immunity genes, such as HLA-DRA, CD74 
and IFI44L. C6 and C7 were characterized by low expression of 
CX3CR1 and high expression of integrin-receptor-binding protein 
and metabolism genes, including SPP1, APOE and LPL (Fig. 1e,h; 
Extended Data Fig. 4). Finally, the smaller clusters C1, C5, C8 and 
C9 were characterized by the expression of chemokine and cyto-
kine genes, including CCL2 and IL1B (Fig. 1e,h). To validate and 
test the reproducibility of our findings, we used our dataset to train 
a classifier for estimating the assignment for microglia from inde-
pendent datasets to the clusters described above. The classifier was 
trained on a randomly sampled 70% of all cells (n = 2,737 cells), 
while the remaining 1,174 cells were used after training to evalu-
ate the predictive accuracy of the classifier (Extended Data Fig. 5a). 
The accuracy on the training and test datasets was 0.940 and 0.726, 
respectively (Extended Data Fig. 5b). The training and test data-
set assignments are shown as reference (Fig. 1g). The Masuda et al. 
dataset18 (n = 1,180 cells) contained 35.6% cells assigned to C3, 30% 
to C2, 7.6% to C5, 7.1% to C7, 7.3% to C8, 5.9% to C6, 4.6% to C1 
and 1.9% to C9 (Fig. 1g). Microglia (n = 1,822 cells) from Velmeshev 
et al.33 contained 82.9% cells assigned to C2, 4.7% to C9, 4.1% to 
C7, 3.7% to C5, 2.5% to C8, 1.1% to C6 and less than 1% to C3 and 
C1 (Fig. 1g). The Schirmer et al. study32 (n = 136 control microglia) 
contained 59.6% of cells assigned to C3, 21.3% to C2, 10.3% to C5 
and 8.8% to C1. In the data from Jäkel et al.31 (n = 67 control microg-
lia), 49.3% of the microglia were assigned to C3, 19% to C5, 19.4% 
to C2 and 11.9% to C2. Finally, the Mathys et al. dataset34 (n = 297 
control microglia) consisted of 33.7% cells assigned to C6, 28.9% 
to C8, 9.4% to C5, 8.4% to C7, 8.1% to C2, 7.4% to C3, 3.3% to C9 
and 1.7% to C1. Apart from Mathys et al.34, each dataset contained 
more than 50% of microglia assigned to C2 and C3. The differences 
in percentages might be due to technical aspects, such as differences 
in single-cell protocols (nuc-seq compared to mCEL-Seq2), or to 
the different ages of the patients (the mean ages were 44 years for 
Masuda et al.18, 13 years for Velmeshev et al.33, 53 years for Schirmer 
et al.32, 58 years for Jäkel et al.31 and 87 years for Mathys et al.34). 
Interestingly, in the pediatric cohort of Velemshev et  al.33, most 
cells were assigned to C2, whereas microglia were predominately 
assigned to C3 in the adult datasets. Finally, in the geriatric popula-
tion examined by Mathys et al.34, C6 represented the single largest 
cluster. The absence of certain clusters in the Schirmer et al.32 and 
Jäkel et al.31 datasets is likely due to the relatively low cell numbers. 
Fig. 1 | Identification of microglia transcriptional clusters in the healthy human brain by scRNA-seq. a, Schematic depicting the workflow for the isolation 
of single CD45+DAPI− cells from the temporal lobe of healthy human subjects for scRNA-seq. A total of 4,564 CD45+ cells from 15 individuals were 
analyzed. b, t-SNE representation of all cells, including microglia, monocytes, oligodendrocyte precursor cells and T cells, from which 4,396 microglia 
cells were selected for further analysis. c, Heatmap of the 20 most differentially upregulated genes per cluster (adjusted P value of <0.05 based on the 
negative binomial distribution) with C3 showing differential expression of genes such as CX3CR1, C2 of genes encoding MHC-II molecules such as HLA-
DRA, C6 and C7 of SPP1 and C1, C5, C8 and C9 of CCL2 and CD83. The scale bar represents the color-coded z-scores. n = 4,396 cells from 15 samples were 
analyzed. Differentially expressed genes were assessed based on a negative binomial distribution. d, Stacked bar plot (Marimekko chart) of the abundance 
of cells from individual patients per cluster. Note that clusters of all subjects contribute to C2 and C3. The color scale underneath indicates colors 
representing individual patients. Ordering of the patients is based on their age. e, t-SNE representation of the cells with color-coded clusters. Color-coding 
of the clusters is indicated underneath. f, Pie chart showing the relative size of each cluster and the respective number of cells per cluster. Color-coding is 
consistent with e. g, Comparative analysis of the present dataset with published microglia datasets using a neural-network-based classifier. Depicted is 
a Marimekko chart with the training dataset as reference on the left followed by classifier-based and color-coded cluster assignments of the test dataset 
and published datasets18,31–34. The cell numbers of each dataset are provided above the chart. h, t-SNE map color-coded for transcript counts (left) and the 
corresponding single-cell bar plots (right) of genes enriched in subsets of microglia. Color-coding is consistent with d.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 22 | December 2019 | 2098–2110 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
2099

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
f
c
g
h
d
e
b
a
Patient:
1
2
3 4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Cell count
Cluster
Cluster
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
Proportion
1
2
3
5 6
7
8 9
159
1,327
581
1,176
217
124 119
413
5
8
1
9
6
3
2
7
0
0.5
1
Proportion
Masuda et al
Test set
Training set
Velmeshev et al
Jäkel et al
Schirmer et al
Mathys et al
n = 2,737
1,174 1,180
1,822
136
67297
0
25
0
30
0
Transcript
count
30
0
40
−2
−1
0
1
2
z-score
Cluster
CCL2
0
10
20
30
5
6
3
2
7
1 9
8
Biopsy
FACS
of CD45+Dapi–
cells into 384-well
plates
Sequencing, unbiased
clustering and identification
of subsets
Protein validation:
immunohischemistry
CyTOF
C5
C8
C1
C9
C6
C7
C2
C3
C2orf68
LCLAT1
AC007743.1
ADGRG1
C1QB
GIMAP1
TMEM119
LMOD3
TCTN1
TBCK
CCDC168
XIRP1
ATXN3
TPTEP1
GIMAP7
PSAP
C1QA
IGKC
HTRA1
CD300E
C3
CST3
OPHN1
CX3CR1
SELPLG
C1QC
FOLR2
GAL3ST4
MARCKS
ITM2C
MARCH1
HAMP
MAF
IER3
CCL2
TNF
NR4A2
CCL8
IER2
CH25H
IL1B
BTG2
IL1RN
IL1A
B3GNT5
EGR1
EGR3
EGR2
OTUD1
SRGN
MCL1
DBI
CD83
CCL3L3
CDKN1A
SGK1
KLF6
CCL4
EDN1
SAT1
NR4A3
GADD45B
CCL4L2
PTGS2
FCER1A
DDX3Y
IER5
NEDD9
CXCL8
HLA-DQB1
HLA-DQA1
HLA-DRA
HLA-DPB1
HLA-DPA1
VEGFA
PIWIL1
SERPINE1
MAFB
FGL2
IFI44L
H3F3A
ADAM10
SAMHD1
VIM
HLA-DRB1
CD74
HLA−DMA
BHLHE40
LIPA
PADI2
SLC11A1
LPL
CEBPD
HLA-B
HLA-C
HLA-A
B2M
TMSB10
FKBP5
FTL
SLC44A2
APOE
GLDN
ASAH1
CD44
CTSD
LGALS9
LCP1
VSIG4
CACNA1A
LHFPL2
PDK4
SPP1
ID2
T cells
Oligodendro-
cytes
Monocytes
Microglia
HLA-DRA
0
10
20
30
5
6
3
2
7
1 9
8
SPP1
0
20
40
5
6
3
2
7
1 9
8
CX3CR1
0
10
20
Gene expression
Gene expression
Gene expression
Gene expression
5
6
3
2
7
1 9
8
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 22 | December 2019 | 2098–2110 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
2100

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
Consistent with our dataset, all datasets contained substantial per-
centages of cells assigned to the proinflammatory clusters C1, C5, 
C8 and C9, which suggests that there is a potential in vivo relevance 
of these clusters.
Gene set enrichment analysis suggests diverse functional states 
of human microglia. To assess the functional states of the identi-
fied microglia clusters, we performed gene ontology (GO) enrich-
ment analysis based on cluster-enriched gene sets (Fig. 2a,b; 
a
b
c
0
150
GO:0048002—Antigen processing
and presentation of peptide antigen
GO:0050921—Positive regulation
of chemotaxis 
0
100
Homeostatic signature
0
50
−log10(q value)
Gene count
Aggregated
transcript
counts
Aggregated
transcript
counts
Aggregated
transcript
counts
5
10
15
4
6
8
10
12
14
Antigen processing and presentation of
peptide/polysaccharide antigen via MHC class II
(Regulation of) complement activation
Antigen processing and presentation of peptide antigen
Negative regulation of cytokine production
Positive regulation of chemotaxis
G1/S transition of mitotic cell cycle
Regulation of G1/S transition of mitotic cell cycle
(Positive) regulation of vasculature development
Positive regulation of nitric oxide biosynthetic process
Positive regulation of macrophage migration
(Regulation of leukocyte) chemotaxis
(Positive) regulation of inflammatory response
Positive regulation of cytokine production
Positive regulation of mitotic nuclear division
(Positive) regulation of cytokine secretion
Cell migration
Positive regulation of cell cycle
(Cellular) response to interferon-gamma
Response to reactive oxygen species
(Regulation of) leukocyte cell−cell adhesion
Phagocytosis
Response to oxidative stress
Positive regulation of MAPK cascade
Reactive oxygen species metabolic process
Positive regulation of reactive oxygen
species metabolic process
Acute inflammatory response
Cellular response to interleukin-1
8
1
9
5
6
3
2
7
Cluster
Fig. 2 | GO term enrichment analysis of microglia states in the healthy human brain. a, GO analysis. Differentially expressed genes with an adjusted 
P < 0.05 and log2-fold change > 1 were analyzed using the clusterProfiler R-package51. Selected terms are represented in a dot plot, with the size of the dot 
corresponding to the number of genes per term and the color of the dots corresponding to the q value of enrichment after –log10 transformation. n = 4,396 
cells from 15 subjects were analyzed. Differentially expressed genes were assessed based on a negative binomial distribution. Hypergeometric testing 
was conducted for enrichment analysis. q values were calculated to control for multiple testing. b, t-SNE expression plots color-coded for the aggregated 
transcript counts of genes summarized by representative GO terms enriched in a given cluster are presented. c, t-SNE expression and line plot of the 
microglial homeostatic gene signature consisting of CX3CR1, TMEM119, CSF1R, P2RY12, P2RY13, SELPLG and MARCKS. Note that the homeostatic gene 
signature is prominent in the clusters C2 and C3.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 22 | December 2019 | 2098–2110 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
2101

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
Supplementary Table 4a,b; Extended Data Fig. 6). Clusters C2, C6 and 
C7 were characterized by a high MHC-II-associated gene signature 
corresponding to the GO term “antigen processing and presentation 
of peptide antigen”. Clusters C1, C5, C8 and C9 showed GO term 
enrichment for “positive regulation of chemotaxis” and “positive 
regulation of MAPK cascade”. Previously published microglial 
core signature genes39,40, including CX3CR1, TMEM119, CSF1R, 
P2RY12, P2RY13, SELPLG and MARCKS, were expressed by all 
clusters, with the highest expression levels for clusters C2 and C3 
(Fig. 2c; Extended Data Fig. 6).
Region-dependent and age-dependent microglial heterogeneity 
in the human CNS. Next, we sought to examine variables under-
lying the microglia heterogeneity. Previous microarray studies of 
bulk RNA have shown age-dependent and brain-region-dependent 
microglia heterogeneity in mice10,41. We were able to obtain two dis-
tinct anatomical locations from the human CNS, namely temporal 
lobe gray and white matter from 11 out of 15 individuals. To ana-
lyze the effects of different brain regions on microglial phenotypes, 
we compared the expression of different microglial immune mark-
ers between gray and white matter (Fig. 3a; Extended Data Fig. 1; 
Supplementary Table 5a,b). A quantitative analysis of brain sections 
showed a consistently higher expression of immune markers in white 
matter compared with gray matter microglia (Fig. 3b). After normal-
izing for IBA1+ cell counts, expression of HLA-DR and CD68 was 
significantly higher in white matter microglia (Fig. 3c). Color-coding 
the origin of the single-cell transcriptomes revealed a good match 
with the immunohistochemical in situ results (Fig. 3d). Gray mat-
ter microglia were enriched in the MHC-IIlow clusters C3 and C8 
(Fig. 3e). Conversely, white matter microglia were overrepresented 
in the MHC-IIhigh clusters C2 and C5–C7 (Fig. 3e). Furthermore, high 
expression of the lysosomal marker CD68 in white matter microglia 
suggests an involvement of these microglia in oligodendrocyte main-
tenance, as previously reported42,43. To further validate these findings 
on the protein level, we conducted CyTOF analysis of five gray matter 
and four white matter samples (Fig. 3f,g). The CyTOF antibody panel 
consisted of relevant myeloid cell protein markers for which antibod-
ies were available25 (Supplementary Tables 6 and 7). This analysis 
revealed two distinct microglia clusters (Fig. 3f). Consistent with 
the scRNA-seq results, higher expression levels of HLA-DR, APOE, 
CD68 and EMR1 were detected by CyTOF in white matter microglia 
compared with gray matter microglia (Fig. 3g).
We next assessed the influence of age on microglia pheno-
types. To this end, we divided the patients into three age bins 
(<30 years, 30–50 years and >50 years) and analyzed the cluster 
composition within these age bins (Fig. 3h,i; Supplementary Table 1). 
Interestingly, age bin <30 years (four individuals) was enriched in 
cluster C3 as were C1, C5, C8 and C9, whereas clusters C6 and C7 
were almost absent (Fig. 3i). In contrast, the age bin >50 years (three 
individuals) was enriched in clusters C6 and C7 (Fig. 3i). The age bin 
30–50 years (three individuals) was enriched in cluster C2 (Fig. 3i). 
As shown above, the SPP1 gene showed higher expression in clus-
ters C6 and C7 (Fig. 1c,h) and enrichment in the age bin >50 years. 
SPP1 encodes for a proinflammatory cytokine (osteopontin) that 
plays a pivotal role in neuroinflammation44. An immunohisto-
chemical analysis of ten brain samples without pathology revealed a 
region-dependent and age-dependent increase of SPP1+IBA1+ cells, 
with higher percentages in white matter compared with gray matter 
(paired two-sided t-test P = 0.043; Fig. 3j) and enrichment in the age 
bin >50 years (gray matter: Spearman’s R2 = 0.73, P = 0.002; white 
matter: Spearman’s R2 = 0.54, P = 0.16; Fig. 3j, Extended Data Fig. 7), 
which is consistent with the scRNA-seq data.
Taken together, using scRNA-seq along with immunohistochem-
istry and CyTOF analyses of protein expression, we found three 
distinct region-dependent microglia phenotypes in the human tem-
poral lobe with region-dependent and age-dependent variations of 
immune regulatory genes.×
Existence of disease-associated microglia clusters in human glio-
mas. Gliomas are diffusely growing brain tumors derived from astro-
glial or oligodendroglial precursor cells that typically show robust 
innate immune infiltration consisting of myeloid cells of diverse 
entities45. While a number of studies have profiled malignant gli-
oma cells26–30, detailed assessments of glioma-associated changes in 
human microglia were not possible due to a lack of healthy control 
tissue in these studies. We hence profiled microglia from four iso-
citrate dehydrogenase (IDH) wild-type primary glioblastomas and 
compared them with microglia from four age-matched controls 
(Extended Data Fig. 8; Supplementary Table 8a,b). Unsupervised 
clustering revealed 1,853 cells, including microglia, monocytes, 
T  cells and oligodendrocytes (Fig. 4a; Extended Data Fig. 9). An 
analysis of 1,701 microglia yielded 14 distinguishable clusters span-
ning a continuum from control-enriched clusters (C9, C11 and 
C12) to mixed clusters (C3–C7 and C10) and clusters that were 
Fig. 3 | Spatial and temporal expression of microglia clusters in the non-diseased human brain. a, Representative microscopy images of 
immunoreactivities for the proteins expressed by microglia that were examined in this study. Experiments were repeated on 15 independent control 
samples. b, Quantification and statistical analysis using one-sided paired t-tests showed a consistent upregulation of proteins expressed by microglia 
in the white matter (WM) compared with the gray matter (GM). Data of n = 11 to n = 15 samples are provided; each circle represents an independent 
sample. Significant P values are provided for one-sided paired t-test followed by Benjamini–Hochberg correction for multiple testing. c, Normalization 
of the quantification showed that HLA-DR+ and CD68+ cells were enriched in the white matter compared with the gray matter. Data of n = 11 to n = 15 
samples are provided; each circle represents an independent sample. Significant P values are provided for one-sided paired t-test followed by Benjamini–
Hochberg correction for multiple testing. The boxplots span the 25th to 75th percentiles and the whiskers represent 1.5 times the interquartile range. The 
bold lines indicate the median. d, t-SNE representation with color-coding of the region from which the cells were isolated. Cells from samples in which 
separation of gray and white matter tissue was not possible are not shown. e, Marimekko chart showing the cluster-wise distribution of cells color-coded 
for the region from which they were isolated. n = 11 independent samples were analyzed. P values are provided for significantly enriched regions per 
cluster, based on hypergeometric tests. Benjamini–Hochberg correction was applied to correct for multiple testing. f, CyTOF analysis of five samples from 
control gray matter and four samples from control white matter reveals region-specific clustering as shown by the viSNE plot with color-coding for the 
region from which the sample was obtained. g, Representative t-SNE plots of CyTOF data with color-coded expression of the respective protein markers 
and quantitative analysis of the sample-wise mean expression values reveal higher expression of APOE, HLA-DR, EMR1 and CD68 in white-matter-
derived microglia. P values <0.05 are provided for one-sided unpaired t-tests followed by Sidak–Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. Data from five 
samples from control gray matter and four samples from control white matter are provided; each circle represents an independent sample. h, t-SNE plot 
color-coded for patient age suggests enrichment of samples from >30-year-old subjects in the clusters C6 and C7. i, Marimekko chart showing the age 
distribution across clusters. n = 15 independent samples were analyzed. P values are provided for significantly enriched age bins per cluster, based on 
hypergeometric tests. Benjamini–Hochberg correction was applied to correct for multiple testing. j, Dot-bar plots showing increased age-dependent and 
region-dependent positivity based on immunohistochemistry for SPP1 protein in microglia. n = 10 independent samples were analyzed. The bar plots depict 
sample means and the error bars represent standard errors of the mean.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 22 | December 2019 | 2098–2110 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
2102

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
a
b
h
d
j
c
i
f
g
Region
GM
WM
20 40 60
Age (years)
Region
GM
WM
<30 years
30–49 years
50–80 years
Cell count
Cluster
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
Proportion
1
2
3
5 6
7
8 9
WM
GM
Mean expression
High
Low
P2RY12
0
300
600
Mean expression
HLA-DR
0
30
90
P = 0.003
EMR1
0
20
10
P = 0.02
CX3CR1
0
10
20
P = 0.04
CD68
0
20
40
P = 0.01
APOE
0
20
40
P = 0.007
P > 0.05
CD68
HLA-DR
EMR1
P2RY12
CX3CR1
APOE
P = 2 × 10
–16
P = 2 × 10
–12
P = 2 × 10
–16
P = 0.002
P = 0.002
P = 3 × 10
–11
P = 3 × 10
–12
P = 1 × 10
–14
IBA1
P2RY12
TMEM119
HLA-DR
CD68
CD74
50 µm
Gray
matter
White
matter
SPP1+ cells (%)
0
5
10
15
Gray
matter
White
matter
Age bin
<30 years
30–50 years
>50 years
IBA1
P2RY12
TMEM119
HLA–DR
CD68
CD74
GM
WM
GM
WM
GM
WM
GM
WM
GM
WM
GM
WM
0
50
100
150
Cells per mm2
P = 2 × 10–6
P = 2 × 10–7
P = 3 x 10–7
P = 6 × 10–6
P = 5 × 10–6
P = 2 × 10–5
IBA1
P2RY12
TMEM119
HLA–DR
CD68
CD74
GM
WM
GM
WM
GM
WM
GM
WM
GM
WM
GM
WM
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Normalized cell density
P = 0.006
P = 0.007
e
Cell count
Cluster
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
Proportion
1
2
3
5 6
7
8 9
P = 4 × 10–5
P = 4 × 10–5
P = 0.03
P = 5 × 10–9
P = 2 × 10–16
P = 0.0007
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 22 | December 2019 | 2098–2110 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
2103

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
almost exclusively composed of GAMs (C13 and C14; Fig. 4b,c). 
Differential gene expression analysis of the glioma-associated clus-
ters C13 and C14 revealed low expression of microglia core genes, 
including CX3CR1 and SELPLG, whereas metabolic, inflammatory 
and interferon-associated genes, such as CD163, APOE, LPL, IFI27 
and IFITM3, were more highly expressed compared with cells from 
adjacent clusters (Fig. 4d,g; Extended Data Fig. 10; Supplementary 
Table 9). Some cells showed high expression of hypoxia-associated 
genes, such as HIF1A and VEGFA (Fig. 4d,g; Extended Data Fig. 10). 
GAMs were enriched in clusters C3–C7 and C10, with substantial 
contributions from controls (Fig. 4c,e–g). These cells showed simi-
lar expression of SPP1 compared with C13, and higher levels than 
the control-enriched clusters C9, C11 and C12 (Fig. 4d–f). Marked 
differences in the contribution of individual samples to the clusters 
C13 and C14 are likely due to the pronounced regional heteroge-
neity of GBMs, which are a patchwork of solid tumor, hemorrhages 
and tumor necroses reflected in the tumor-specific term ‘multi-
forme’. We found low expression of microglia core signature genes 
(for example, CX3CR1) in the clusters C13 and C14, high expression 
of the hypoxia-associated gene VEGFA in C10 and higher expres-
sion levels of the interferon gene IFI44 in C13 compared with the 
adjacent clusters C3–C7 (Fig. 4g; Supplementary Fig. 1). A GO term 
analysis of the differentially expressed genes revealed an enrich-
ment of the term “positive regulation of vasculature development” 
in C14 and C10 (Fig. 4g; Supplementary Fig. 2; Supplementary 
Table 10a,b). The remaining GAM-associated clusters showed an 
enrichment of the GO term “antigen processing via MHC class I” 
(Fig. 4h; Supplementary Fig. 2). We then validated and tested the 
reproducibility of our findings by comparing our data with an 
independent dataset from Darmanis et al.26, which used a different 
scRNA-seq protocol. We implemented a deep neural network classi-
fier on our dataset that consisted of GAMs and control cells and used 
the workflow described above (Extended Data Fig. 5a). The accuracy 
of the resulting classifier was 0.91 on the training set and 0.55 for 
the test set (Supplementary Fig. 3a). Next, we used the classifier on 
the Darmanis et al. dataset26. The training and test sets are shown as 
reference (Supplementary Fig. 3b). Microglia from Darmanis et al.26 
(n = 380) were devoid of cells assigned to C3, C11 and C13. The major-
ity of this dataset was assigned to C5, C1 and C14 (37.6%, 27.9% and 
13.7% of the cells, respectively). Furthermore, 8.9% of the cells were 
assigned to C4, 3.2% to C8, 2.1% to C2 and C10, 1.3% to C12 and 
less than 1% to C6 and C9 (Supplementary Fig. 3b). Taken together, 
the classifier assigned 64.9% of the Darmanis et al. dataset26 to the 
GAM-enriched clusters C3–C7, C10 and C14. The de-enrichment 
of the homeostatic-enriched clusters C11 and C12 can be explained 
by the lack of control cells in that study. Notably, both datasets con-
tained cells assigned to C14. The lack of cells (such as C13) may be 
due to technical factors, such as differences in the scRNA-seq proto-
col, the low number of sampled cells or tumor heterogeneity. Taken 
together, GAMs show transcriptomic changes with respect to control 
cells that were confirmed in an independent dataset26.
In situ characterization of glioma-associated microglia. To fur-
ther explore the differences between GAMs and control microglia 
in situ, we studied the expression of immune molecules on human 
microglia by immunohistochemistry (Fig. 5a–c; Supplementary 
Fig. 4). We found higher numbers of cells expressing immune 
markers in GBM samples (Fig. 5b). Normalization for the number 
of IBA1+ cells revealed no change of expression of the bona fide 
microglial markers P2RY12 and TMEM119, and higher expression 
of HLA-DR (Fig. 5c). It should be kept in mind that IBA1 (encoded 
by AIF1) is a pan-myeloid cell marker that is also expressed on infil-
trating myeloid cells. t-SNE plots of color-coded genes encoding 
the above-mentioned proteins revealed expression across all clus-
ters (Fig. 5d). Given that GAMs are enriched in the single-cell clus-
ters C3–C7, which have a considerable contribution from control 
samples (Fig. 4f–g), we considered that GAMs may resemble aging-
associated microglia. As SPP1 was differentially expressed in aging-
associated microglia (Fig. 3j), we evaluated the protein expression 
of SPP1 in GBM samples with respect to control white matter from 
four age-matched subjects >50 years of age (Fig. 5e–g). Indeed, 
the percentage of IBA1+SPP1+ cells was more than double in GBM 
samples compared with controls (Fig. 5f). This was consistent with 
SPP1 gene expression in the GAM clusters (Fig. 4d). Overall, GAMs 
showed a context-specific phenotype that was transcriptionally 
related to aging-associated microglia.
Characterization of glioma-associated microglia using pseu-
dotime analysis and CyTOF. So far, we have identified a tran-
scriptional continuum consisting of GAMs co-clustering with 
aging-associated microglia (clusters C6 and C7 in Fig. 4f), which 
in turn share similarities with MHC-IIhigh homeostatic microg-
lia (Fig. 2a,b), but with the additional expression of inflammatory 
and metabolism genes such as SPP1 and APOE (Figs. 1c and 5g). 
To quantitatively assess the gradual gene expression changes in this 
transcriptional continuum, we applied the StemID2 algorithm37. 
This algorithm analyzes gradual transcriptional changes by placing 
single-cell transcriptomes on a pseudotemporal trajectory whereby 
neighboring cells are transcriptionally similar, but the overall trajec-
tory is directed from one cell state over transitional states toward a 
final state. In an unsupervised manner, StemID2 suggested a trajec-
tory of C11→C12→C3→C6→C5→C13, leading from the homeo-
static via aging-associated to the GAM clusters (Supplementary 
Fig. 5). The resulting heatmap showed a gradual downregulation 
of microglial homeostatic genes (including CX3CR1 and CSF1R) 
and a concomitant upregulation of inflammatory and metabolism 
genes (including TREM2 and APOE) with enrichment of the associ-
ated GO terms (Fig. 6a; Supplementary Table 11). Importantly, we 
obtained a similar result using the independent pseudotime analysis 
tool Monocle46 (Supplementary Fig. 6).
Next, we used CyTOF to determine whether the transcriptional 
changes are also found on the protein level (Fig. 6b–g). To exclude 
contamination by infiltrating peripheral cells, we gated the analyzed 
cells on the bona fide microglia markers P2RY12 and TMEM119 
(Supplementary Fig. 7). Notably, GAMs clustered distinctly from 
control microglia (Fig. 6b). While fewer cells from the control sam-
ples were found in the GAM cluster, some GBM samples contrib-
uted substantially to the control cluster (Fig. 6c), which may reflect 
aging-related control microglia subsets within the GBM samples. 
Overall, the transcriptomic pattern of GAMs was reproduced on the 
Fig. 4 | Identification of human GAMs by scRNA-seq. a, t-SNE representation of the full dataset, including microglia, monocytes, oligodendrocyte 
precursor cells and T cells, consisting of 1,853 cells with color-coded clusters. b, t-SNE representation of the selected microglia population with n = 1,701 
cells. c, t-SNE-based comparison between control and GAMs. d, Heatmap presenting the 20 most differentially expressed genes per cluster (adjusted 
P value <0.05 based on the negative binomial distribution). n = 1,701 cells from 8 samples were analyzed. Differentially expressed genes were assessed 
based on a negative binomial distribution. e, Marimekko chart representing the contribution of each subject to the individual clusters. Ctrl, control.  
f, Marimekko chart with color-coding of the cells (as per c) in each cluster. n = 8 independent samples were analyzed. P values are provided for significantly 
enriched diagnosis per cluster based on hypergeometric tests. Benjamini–Hochberg correction was applied to correct for multiple testing. g, t-SNE plots 
color-coded for transcript counts (left) of selected genes for the glioma-associated clusters and the corresponding bar plot (right) representation for the 
transcript counts of these genes. h, t-SNE-based expression for selected GO terms enriched in GAMs. Color bars indicate aggregated transcript counts.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 22 | December 2019 | 2098–2110 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
2104

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
f
e
d
a
b
c
g
h
0
35
GO:0010573—Vascular endothelial
growth factor production
0
35
GO:0002480—Antigen processing and presentation 
of exogenous peptide antigen via MHC class I, 
TAP-independent
C14
C13
C10
C7
C1
C4
C3
C6
C2
C5
C11
C12
C8
C9
LYVE1
MRC1
ITPR2
IPCEF1
MARCKS
P2RY13
IL6ST
ACY3
LPAR5
GATM
P2RY12
ITM2C
CX3CR1
SELPLG
DHRS9
A2M
HTRA1
BIN1
IDH2
PTAFR
ALDH2
HLA−DRB5
CYFIP1
TXNIP
IFI27
MX1
SCIN
FKBP5
CPM
IFITM3
IFI6
EIF2AK2
IFI44L
IFI44
IFIT3
PLAC8
CLEC5A
LDHA
PADI2
SLC11A1
MSR1
CEBPD
CXCR4
ACSL1
CD163
FCGBP
MAFB
APOE
APOC1
WIPF3
CPVL
NAP1L1
VSIG4
GLDN
DDIT4
SPP1
CACNA1A
SERPINE1
FTL
LPL
GPNMB
TPT1
HIF1A
NAMPT
ELL2
VEGFA
MT2A
C5AR1
PLAUR
HBEGF
TFRC
IL1RN
MCL1
SGK1
CD83
NR4A2
SRGN
NR4A3
PDK4
CDKN1A
OTUD1
B3GNT5
CH25H
IER3
CCL2
TNF
CCL8
PTGS2
EGR1
BTG2
IL1B
EGR3
EGR2
IL1A
CCL4L2
CCL3L3
CCL4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
z-score
GAM
Control
Cluster
8
9
10
1
14
2
5
7
4
13
3
6
11
12
Ctrl 1
Ctrl 3
Ctrl 2
Ctrl 4
GBM1
GBM3
GBM2
GBM4
0
400
800
1,200
1,600
Cell count
Cluster
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Proportion
10
11
12
13
14
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
89
T cells
Monocytes
Microglia
Oligodendro-
cytes
Cluster
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
Proportion
1.00
0
400
800
1,200
1,600
Cell count
10
11
12
13
14
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
89
P = 2 × 10–16
P = 5 × 10–15
P = 0.0005
P = 0.02
P = 2 × 10–16
P = 4 × 10–14
P = 0.03
P = 0.04
P = 0.0003
P = 0.002
P = 0.02
P = 0.03
CX3CR1
0
5
10
15
Gene expression
10
11
12
13
14
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
89
VEGFA
10
11
12
13
14
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
89
0
2
4
6
Gene expression
IFI44
Cluster
10
11
12
13
14
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
89
0
1
2
3
Gene expression
0
20
0
6
0
Transcript
count
20
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 22 | December 2019 | 2098–2110 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
2105

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
protein level (Fig. 6d–f). Specifically, we found higher expression 
of HLA-DR, TREM2, APOE, GPR56 (also known as ADGRG1) 
and a number of other proteins such as GLUT5 and CD64 
(Fig. 6f,g; Supplementary Fig. 8; Supplementary Table 12). Conversely, 
genes with lower expression on the transcriptomic level (CX3CR1, 
CSF1R and FCGR1A) were unchanged or even showed higher 
expression on the protein level (Fig. 6g), which may be related to dif-
ferent protein turnover and post-transcriptional regulatory mecha-
nisms. Overall, CyTOF reliably confirmed the major differences 
between control microglia and GAMs, for example, between the 
homeostatic microglia clusters C11 and C12 and the GAM clusters 
C3–C7 and C13 (Fig. 4f). Our findings provide, to our knowledge, 
the first combined assessment of gene and protein expression using 
scRNA-seq plus CyTOF in human microglia from control brains 
and brain tumors.
Discussion
By combining unsupervised scRNA-seq and CyTOF analyses, we 
studied the complexity of the microglia landscape in the human 
brain at the single-cell level. Our data reveal compartment-, age- 
and disease-specific microglia states with high plasticity emerging 
in gliomas.
In this study, we addressed unresolved questions in the field. The 
known diverse context-dependent functions of microglia under 
neuropathological conditions have long suggested the existence of 
specialized microglia states. Here, we applied two high-throughput 
single-cell techniques to conduct a census of human microglia. 
Our results suggest a spectrum of microglia phenotypes in health 
and disease. Recent studies that profiled brain tumors have pro-
vided valuable insights into tumor biology, but failed to character-
ize disease-associated microglia subsets26,28–30. Our study makes an 
important step toward filling these gaps and provides integrated 
single-cell transcriptomic and protein expression profiles of GAMs.
We show here that during homeostasis, microglia are posi-
tioned on a transcriptional spectrum between high expression 
levels of the previously published core signature consisting of 
CX3CR1, TMEM119, CSF1R, P2RY12, P2RY13, SELPLG and 
MARCKS genes39,40 and lower expression of this signature with 
increased expression of MHC-II and lipid-metabolism-related 
genes. Microglia located in the gray matter tended toward the for-
mer end of the spectrum, while white matter microglia were posi-
tioned on the latter end of it. Furthermore, approximately one-tenth 
of the human microglia expressed chemotactic and proinflamma-
tory genes, such as CCL2, CCL4 and IL1B. It is tempting to specu-
late that these microglia phenotypes may be involved in cross-talk 
with the peripheral immune system during CNS damage, while 
the remaining microglia subsets may support brain maintenance. 
Comparison with independent datasets confirmed the changes that 
microglia acquire during aging and disease. A majority of the clus-
ters identified in this study were present in different independent 
datasets. The distinction of white and gray matter human microg-
lia detected by scRNA-seq was confirmed on the protein level by 
CyTOF. Notably, white matter microglia expressed higher levels 
of HLA-DR, CD68, APOE and EMR1 than gray matter microglia. 
Recent evidence of involvement of microglia in oligodendrocyte 
maintenance in developing42,43 and aging rodent brains47 supports 
the notion of functional differences between white and gray matter 
microglia. In this scenario, blockade of microglia-mediated phago-
cytosis through inhibition of Rab7 resulted in enhanced accumula-
tion of myelin products in microglial endosomes. In line with these 
results obtained in rodents, several human microgliopathies display 
severe white matter changes3. These include sclerosing leukoen-
cephalopathy in Nasu–Hakola disease48 and diffuse leukoencepha-
lopathy in hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids49.
In addition to the transcriptional continuum of microglia in 
the healthy CNS, we detected heterogeneity of GAMs. The role of 
microglia in glioma biology remains controversial, ranging from a 
mere bystander to a crucial promoter function of microglia for gli-
oma growth45. We found that GAMs progressed further away from 
the homeostatic end of the transcriptional continuum, displaying 
lower expression of the microglial core signature and higher expres-
sion of proinflammatory and metabolic genes, including SPP1, 
and several type I interferon genes, including APOE and CD163. 
The GAM signature was substantially different from homeostatic 
microglia and was replicated in an independent scRNA-seq data-
set26. Notably, CyTOF analysis confirmed the protein expression 
of the highly expressed genes found in the scRNA-seq analysis of 
GAMs, including HLA-DR, TREM2, APOE, CD163 and GPR56. 
Additionally, mass cytometry revealed significant expression of 
proteins with low transcript abundance that could not be properly 
assessed in the current scRNA-seq analysis (for example, CD68, 
CD44, CD116 and IL-6), making the case for the synergy of both 
techniques. Interestingly, proteins encoded by genes with low tran-
scriptome levels (for example, CX3CR1, CSF1R and FCGR1A) were 
unchanged in the CyTOF analysis. Future studies using larger sam-
ple sizes will elucidate the interplay of gene and protein expression 
in the context of GBM.
A crucial issue for translational research is the similarity between 
human and murine microglia. We and others have recently con-
ducted in-depth transcriptional analyses of murine microglia7,16–22 
and a few human microglia18,31–34. We found broad similarities of 
these cells with homeostatic and disease-associated human microg-
lia, particularly with respect to gradual disease-associated transcrip-
tional changes in both species. However, we also detected subtle 
differences. Notably, the HEXB gene appears to be less prominently 
expressed in homeostatic human microglia compared to Hexb in 
murine microglia (data not shown). In neurodegenerative and neu-
roinflammatory disease models, murine microglia show upregu-
lation of metabolism and inflammatory genes, such as Spp1 and 
Apoe7,18–20. We also found that these genes were upregulated in 
Fig. 5 | In situ validation of protein expression in GAMs. a, Representative microscopy images of immunohistochemical stainings for immune molecules 
expressed by microglia in control white matter and GBM. Experiments were replicated on n = 15 control and n = 7 GBM samples. b, Quantification and 
statistical analysis of the immunohistochemical stainings using one-sided unpaired t-tests revealed increased expression of immune molecules in GAMs 
compared with controls (Ctrl). Data of n = 15 control and n = 7 GBM samples is provided; each circle represents an independent sample. Significant  
P values are provided for one-sided unpaired t-test followed by Benjamini–Hochberg correction for multiple testing. The boxplots span the 25th to 75th 
percentiles and the whiskers represent 1.5 times the interquartile range. The bold lines indicate the median. c, Normalization of the immunohistochemical 
signals to the IBA1+ cell numbers and expression as relative to controls. Data of n = 15 control and n = 7 GBM samples are provided; each circle represents 
an independent sample. Significant P values are provided for one-sided unpaired t-test followed by Benjamini–Hochberg correction for multiple testing. 
The boxplots span the 25th to 75th percentiles and the whiskers represent 1.5 times the interquartile range. The bold lines indicate the median. d, t-SNE 
representation of the cells color-coded for the expression of genes encoding the immune molecules presented in a–c. e, Representative microscopy images 
and quantification revealing increased numbers of SPP1+ microglia in GBMs compared to age-matched control white matter (white arrowheads indicate 
IBA1+SPP1– cells; yellow arrowheads indicate IBA1+SPP1+ cells). f, Quantification of IBA1+SPP1+ cells in control white matter (n = 4) versus GBM samples 
(n = 7). The provided P value is for a one-sided unpaired t-test. The boxplot spans the 25th to 75th percentiles and the whiskers represent 1.5 times the 
interquartile range. The bold line indicates the median. g, t-SNE map color-coded for SPP1 transcript counts.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 22 | December 2019 | 2098–2110 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
2106

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
GAMs and in aging-associated microglia. However, GAMs also 
showed context-dependent upregulation of other genes, including 
CD163 and VEGFA. Finally, a consistent proinflammatory signa-
ture has been described across different murine microglia single-
cell and bulk RNA-seq studies. Notably, some microglia states 
expressed higher levels of cytokines and chemokines such as Ccl2 
and Tnf50. We observed that approximately 10% of human control 
microglia and GAMs shared this proinflammatory gene signa-
ture with murine microglia, but the biological significance of this 
remains unclear.
a
b
e
d
f
c
g
IBA1
P2RY12
TMEM119
HLA-DR
CD68
CD74
Control
GBM
50 µm
Control
GBM
0
Transcription
count
Transcription
count
Transcription
count
Transcription
count
Transcription
count
Transcription
count
Transcription
count
8
AIF1
0
5
TMEM119
0
15
HLA-DRA
IBA1
IBA1 SPP1 DAPI
SPP1
50 µm
SPP1
IBA1
IBA1 SPP1 DAPI
CD68
0
1
CD74
0
70
0
140
SPP1
40
20
0
SPP1+ cells (%)
Ctrl
GBM
P = 0.0005
IBA1
P2RY12
TMEM119
HLA–DR
CD68
CD74
Control
GBM
Control
GBM
Control
GBM
Control
GBM
Control
GBM
Control
GBM
0
250
500
750
1,000
Cells per mm2
P = 0.02
P = 0.009
P = 0.009
P = 0.009
IBA1
P2RY12
TMEM119
HLA–DR
CD68
CD74
Control
GBM
Control
GBM
Control
GBM
Control
GBM
Control
GBM
Control
GBM
0
2
4
6
Normalized cell density
0
4
P2RY12
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 22 | December 2019 | 2098–2110 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
2107

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
While providing novel findings on adult human microglia, our 
study leaves some open questions. Although we controlled for batch 
effects in our experimental design and used RaceID functional-
ity, we cannot exclude these effects on our data. The brain regions 
available for analysis were restricted by the availability of good-
quality surgery tissue. A comparison with other brain regions, 
such as the hippocampus, the striatum or the cerebellum, will be 
informative in future studies. As our dataset represents a snapshot 
a
b
g
c
d
e
f
TREM2
Cell chemotaxis
SPP1
HLA-A/B/C
APOE
APOC1
TYROBP
SGK1
IFI44L
CD86
ADGRG1
IL18
CTSD
CST3
OLFML3
ERK1 and ERK2 cascade
Myeloid leukocyte cytokine production
TLR2
IFI16
FCGR1A
P2RY12
CSF1R
CX3CR1
SELPLG
SLC2A5
Response to virus
Antigen processing and presentation 
of exogenous peptide antigen via 
MHC class I, TAP-independent
TMEM119
CD53
FCGRT
B2M
FCER1G
CLEC7A
FCGR3A
GPR34
MHC class II protein complex binding
ISG15
IFITM3
CTSH
CLEC5A
HLA-DRA
Response to reactive oxygen species
HLA-DRB1
Response to interferon-gamma
IFNGR1
MARCKS
antigen processing and presentation of
peptide antigen via MHC class II
 1
100
0
Cellular composition
of sample (%) 
Control
GAM
Shared
2 3
Control samples
 4 5 6  7 8 9 10 11
 1 2 3  4 5 6  7 8 9 10111213
GBM samples
Control
GAM
Expression
High
Low
CD68
HLA-DR
CD44
EMR1
P2RY12
GPR56
CX3CR1
ApoE
CD11b
P = 1 × 10–6 
0
200
400
CD64 (FCGR1A)
0
20
40
60
P = 7 × 10–5
GPR56 (ADGRG1)
0
50
100
150
IRF8
P = 0.19
CX3CR1
0
20
40
P = 0.27
0
20
40
60
80
CD115 (CSF1R)
P = 0.26
TMEM119
0
100
200
300
P = 0.84
P2RY12
0
200
400
P = 0.34
HLA-DR
0
200
400
P = 7 × 10–8
ApoE
0
50
100
150
P = 1 × 10–5 
0
10
20
TREM2
P = 0.005
0
2
4
CD86
P = 0.034
CD141
CD32
CD14
CyclinB1
CD86
CD101
CD54
CD135
CD206
CD16
CCR7
CD64
EMR1
GLUT5
GM−CSF
CD11c
CD116
CD44
HLA-DR
IRF4
CD91
CD68
CD18
CD33
CD45
Ki67
CD95
APOE
IL−6
CD163
CD47
CD274
GPR56
TREM2
GAM
Control
–4
–2
0
Protein expression
Mean expression
Mean expression
Mean expression
Mean expression
2
4
Transcriptionally similar gene modules
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
14
15
16
11
Homeostasis
Aging
GAM
−4
0
z-score
4
11
12
3
6
513
13
12
Cluster
0
5
10
15
CD16 (FCGR3A)
P = 0.037
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 22 | December 2019 | 2098–2110 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
2108

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
of microglia, we were not able to distinguish whether the subsets 
represent cell states or cell types. The former notion would enable 
a given cell to shift between states when necessary, while the lat-
ter would signify a commitment to a particular cell type. This issue 
could be addressed with longitudinal cell tracking methods, which 
are difficult to implement in humans without disturbing the system. 
The isolation of microglia performed in our study is associated with 
loss of spatial information. Novel multiplexed hybridization meth-
ods may help overcome this limitation in the future.
In conclusion, we believe that the identification of microglia 
heterogeneity in the human brain improves our understanding of 
microglia biology and may facilitate the development of new com-
pounds to treat microglia-mediated CNS diseases. The character-
ization of GAMs may help to develop new therapies for gliomas 
based on the specific targeting of microglia subsets.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting 
summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary informa-
tion, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author 
contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and 
code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-
019-0532-y.
Received: 4 July 2018; Accepted: 7 October 2019;  
Published online: 18 November 2019
References
	1.	 Ransohoff, R. M. & Cardona, A. E. The myeloid cells of the central nervous 
system parenchyma. Nature 468, 253–262 (2010).
	2.	 Prinz, M., Priller, J., Sisodia, S. S. & Ransohoff, R. M. Heterogeneity of CNS 
myeloid cells and their roles in neurodegeneration. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 
1227–1235 (2011).
	3.	 Prinz, M. & Priller, J. Microglia and brain macrophages in the molecular 
age: from origin to neuropsychiatric disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15, 
300–312 (2014).
	4.	 Prinz, M., Erny, D. & Hagemeyer, N. Ontogeny and homeostasis of CNS 
myeloid cells. Nat. Immunol. 18, 385–392 (2017).
	5.	 Paolicelli, R. C. et al. Synaptic pruning by microglia is necessary for normal 
brain development. Science 333, 1456–1458 (2011).
	6.	 Takahashi, K., Rochford, C. D. & Neumann, H. Clearance of apoptotic 
neurons without inflammation by microglial triggering receptor expressed on 
myeloid cells-2. J. Exp. Med. 201, 647–657 (2005).
	7.	 Jordao, M. J. C. et al. Single-cell profiling identifies myeloid cell subsets with 
distinct fates during neuroinflammation. Science 363, eaat7554 (2019).
	8.	 Hickman, S. E. et al. The microglial sensome revealed by direct RNA 
sequencing. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1896–1905 (2013).
	9.	 Gosselin, D. et al. An environment-dependent transcriptional network 
specifies human microglia identity. Science 356, eaal3222 (2017).
	10.	Galatro, T. F. et al. Transcriptomic analysis of purified human cortical 
microglia reveals age-associated changes. Nat. Neurosci. 20,  
1162–1171 (2017).
	11.	Ajami, B. et al. Single-cell mass cytometry reveals distinct populations of 
brain myeloid cells in mouse neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration 
models. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 541–551 (2018).
	12.	Mrdjen, D. et al. High-dimensional single-cell mapping of central nervous 
system immune cells reveals distinct myeloid subsets in health, aging, and 
disease. Immunity 48, 380–395.e6 (2018).
	13.	Zeisel, A. et al. Brain structure. Cell types in the mouse cortex  
and hippocampus revealed by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 347,  
1138–1142 (2015).
	14.	Macosko, E. Z. et al. Highly parallel genome-wide expression profiling of 
individual cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214 (2015).
	15.	Van Hove, H. et al. A single-cell atlas of mouse brain macrophages reveals 
unique transcriptional identities shaped by ontogeny and tissue environment. 
Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1021–1035 (2019).
	16.	Matcovitch-Natan, O. et al. Microglia development follows a stepwise 
program to regulate brain homeostasis. Science 353, aad8670 (2016).
	17.	Goldmann, T. et al. Origin, fate and dynamics of macrophages at central 
nervous system interfaces. Nat. Immunol. 17, 797–805 (2016).
	18.	Masuda, T. et al. Spatial and temporal heterogeneity of mouse and human 
microglia at single-cell resolution. Nature 566, 388–392 (2019).
	19.	Hammond, T. R. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing of microglia throughout 
the mouse lifespan and in the injured brain reveals complex cell-state 
changes. Immunity 50, 253–271.e6 (2019).
	20.	Li, Q. et al. Developmental heterogeneity of microglia and brain  
myeloid cells revealed by deep single-cell rna sequencing. Neuron 101, 
207–223.e10 (2019).
	21.	Keren-Shaul, H. et al. A unique microglia type associated with restricting 
development of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 169, 1276–1290.e17 (2017).
	22.	Mathys, H. et al. Temporal tracking of microglia activation in 
neurodegeneration at single-cell resolution. Cell Rep. 21, 366–380 (2017).
	23.	Darmanis, S. et al. A survey of human brain transcriptome diversity at the 
single cell level. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 7285–7290 (2015).
	24.	Zhong, S. et al. A single-cell RNA-seq survey of the developmental landscape 
of the human prefrontal cortex. Nature 555, 524–528 (2018).
	25.	Böttcher, C. et al. Human microglia regional heterogeneity and phenotypes 
determined by multiplexed single-cell mass cytometry. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 
78–90 (2019).
	26.	Darmanis, S. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of infiltrating neoplastic 
cells at the migrating front of human glioblastoma. Cell Rep. 21,  
1399–1410 (2017).
	27.	Patel, A. P. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq highlights intratumoral heterogeneity in 
primary glioblastoma. Science 344, 1396–1401 (2014).
	28.	Tirosh, I. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq supports a developmental hierarchy in 
human oligodendroglioma. Nature 539, 309–313 (2016).
	29.	Venteicher, A. S. et al. Decoupling genetics, lineages, and microenvironment 
in IDH-mutant gliomas by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 355, eaai8478 (2017).
	30.	Filbin, M. G. et al. Developmental and oncogenic programs in H3K27M 
gliomas dissected by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 360, 331–335 (2018).
	31.	Jakel, S. et al. Altered human oligodendrocyte heterogeneity in multiple 
sclerosis. Nature 566, 543–547 (2019).
	32.	Schirmer, L. et al. Neuronal vulnerability and multilineage diversity in 
multiple sclerosis. Nature 573, 75–82 (2019).
	33.	Velmeshev, D. et al. Single-cell genomics identifies cell type-specific molecular 
changes in autism. Science 364, 685–689 (2019).
	34.	Mathys, H. et al. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Nature 570, 332–337 (2019).
	35.	Herman, J. S., Sagar & Grun, D. FateID infers cell fate bias in multipotent 
progenitors from single-cell RNA-seq data. Nat. Methods 15, 379–386 (2018).
	36.	Grun, D. et al. Single-cell messenger RNA sequencing reveals rare intestinal 
cell types. Nature 525, 251–255 (2015).
	37.	Grun, D. et al. De novo prediction of stem cell identity using single-cell 
transcriptome data. Cell Stem Cell 19, 266–277 (2016).
	38.	van den Brink, S. C. et al. Single-cell sequencing reveals dissociation-induced 
gene expression in tissue subpopulations. Nat. Methods 14, 935–936 (2017).
Fig. 6 | Characterization of human brain-tumor-linked microglia clusters by CyTOF. a, Pseudotemporal ordering of single-cell transcriptomes using 
StemID, with transcriptionally similar nodes on the y axis and single-cell transcriptomes arranged along the x axis, based on a pseudotemporal ordering on 
a trajectory from a control to a GBM-affected brain. Next to the diffusion map are representative genes from the given nodes and GO terms significantly 
enriched in these nodes. The color bar represents the z-score for the gene expression across the pseudotime trajectory. b, CyTOF analysis of 11 control 
and 13 GBM samples reveals distinct clustering of cells from each condition. c, Stacked bar plot showing the relative contribution of microglia from each 
control and GBM sample to the control and glioma cluster from b. d, t-SNE plots for representative protein markers assessed using CyTOF. e, A heatmap 
representation of protein expression shows distinct clustering of control microglia and GAMs. f, Overview of protein markers encoded by genes (symbols 
in parentheses) with higher expression along the pseudotemporal trajectory from a. Proteins with P < 0.05 using one-sided unpaired t-tests are shown. 
Data are provided on n = 11 control and n = 13 GBM samples. Mean expressions are color-coded for each sample; each circle represents an independent 
sample. g, Overview of protein markers encoded by genes (symbol in parentheses) with lower expression along the pseudotemporal trajectory from a. 
P values are provided for one-sided unpaired t-tests followed by Sidak–Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. Data on n = 11 control and n = 13 GBM 
samples are displayed. The horizontal lines represent the mean; each circle represents an independent sample.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 22 | December 2019 | 2098–2110 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
2109

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
	39.	Gautier, E. L. et al. Gene-expression profiles and transcriptional regulatory 
pathways that underlie the identity and diversity of mouse tissue 
macrophages. Nat. Immunol. 13, 1118–1128 (2012).
	40.	Butovsky, O. et al. Identification of a unique TGF-beta-dependent  
molecular and functional signature in microglia. Nat. Neurosci. 17,  
131–143 (2014).
	41.	Grabert, K. et al. Microglial brain region-dependent diversity and selective 
regional sensitivities to aging. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 504–516 (2016).
	42.	Hagemeyer, N. et al. Microglia contribute to normal myelinogenesis and to 
oligodendrocyte progenitor maintenance during adulthood. Acta Neuropathol. 
134, 441–458 (2017).
	43.	Wlodarczyk, A. et al. A novel microglial subset plays a key role in 
myelinogenesis in developing brain. EMBO J. 36, 3292–3308 (2017).
	44.	Chabas, D. et al. The influence of the proinflammatory cytokine, 
osteopontin, on autoimmune demyelinating disease. Science 294, 
1731–1735 (2001).
	45.	Hambardzumyan, D., Gutmann, D. H. & Kettenmann, H. The role of 
microglia and macrophages in glioma maintenance and progression. Nat. 
Neurosci. 19, 20–27 (2016).
	46.	Trapnell, C. et al. The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed 
by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 381–386 (2014).
	47.	Safaiyan, S. et al. Age-related myelin degradation burdens the clearance 
function of microglia during aging. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 995–998 (2016).
	48.	Paloneva, J. et al. Mutations in two genes encoding different subunits of a 
receptor signaling complex result in an identical disease phenotype. Am. J. 
Hum. Genet. 71, 656–662 (2002).
	49.	Rademakers, R. et al. Mutations in the colony stimulating factor 1 receptor 
(CSF1R) gene cause hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids. 
Nat. Genet. 44, 200–205 (2011).
	50.	Wu, Y. E., Pan, L., Zuo, Y., Li, X. & Hong, W. Detecting activated cell 
populations using single-cell RNA-seq. Neuron 96, 313–329.e6 (2017).
	51.	Yu, G., Wang, L.-G., Han, Y. & He, Q.-Y. clusterProfiler: an R package for 
comparing biological themes among gene clusters. OMICS 16, 284–287 (2012).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc. 2019, 
corrected publication 2022
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 22 | December 2019 | 2098–2110 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
2110

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
Methods
Prospective tissue collection. Radiologically healthy brain tissue samples from 
15 individuals (7 females and 8 males aged 14–74 years; 14 temporal, 1 frontal 
lobe) undergoing brain surgery for epilepsy, glioma or metastasis, were placed in 
ice-cold PBS immediately after resection. Stained cryosections were examined by 
a fully trained neuropathologist. No statistical methods were used to predetermine 
sample sizes, but our sample sizes were similar to those reported in previous 
publications9,18,20,25,29,31,32. Control tissue samples from glioma and metastasis 
surgeries were selected based on radiological appearance and localization of >2 cm 
from the lesion. After absence of pathologies was confirmed, the control cases were 
included in the study. To assess glioma-associated changes in microglia, four IDH 
wild-type GBM, grade WHO IV, were examined. All experiments were conducted 
in accordance with the institutional review board of the University of Freiburg 
Medical Center.
Histology. Data collection and analyses were performed blind to the conditions of 
the experiments. Formalin-fixed-paraffin-embedded tissue samples were sectioned 
into 3-µm sections, and immunohistochemistry for the microglial markers IBA1 
(Wako, Japan), HLA-DR (clone CR3/43, Agilent Dako), TMEM119, P2RY12, 
CD74, CD68 (clone PG-M1, Agilent Dako), GFAP (glial fibrillary astrocytic 
protein), pan-cytokeratin and CD3 was conducted for in situ validation. Cresyl 
violet was used for counterstaining. All image analyses were conducted by an 
experimenter blinded to the source of the samples.
Immunofluorescence. Data collection and analyses were performed blind to 
the conditions of the experiments. Formalin-fixed-paraffin-embedded sections 
were blocked and permeabilized with PBS containing 5% normal donkey serum 
and 0.5% Triton-X 100 for 1 h at room temperature. Primary antibodies were 
incubated overnight at a dilution of 1:500 for IBA1 (Abcam) and SPP1 (Merck). 
Secondary antibodies were added as follows: Alexa Fluor 405 at 1:250 dilution, 
Alexa Fluor 488 at 1:500 dilution, Alexa Fluor 568 at 1:500 dilution and Alexa 
Fluor 647 at 1:500 dilution for 2 h at room temperature. Nuclei were counterstained 
with DAPI when necessary. Images were taken using conventional fluorescence 
microscopes (Olympus BX-61 and Keyence), and the confocal pictures were taken 
using Fluoview FV 1000 (Olympus). All image analyses were conducted by an 
experimenter blinded to the source of the samples.
Tissue dissection and flow cytometry. Following inclusion in the study, tissue 
samples were processed for flow cytometry and scRNA-seq as described below 
and, if enough tissue was available, for paraffin-embedding. All processing steps 
were performed on ice. Under the binocular lens, the leptomeninges were removed 
and, if both regions were present, gray and white matter tissue samples were 
dissected. Afterwards, tissue samples were placed in ice-cold HBSS containing 
10 mM glucose and 10 mM HEPES buffer. Cell suspensions were obtained through 
mechanical dissociation using glass shearing with a 10-ml Potter-Elvehjem 
pestle and glass tube homogenizer (Merck) followed by passing through a 70-µm 
cell strainer (BD Bioscience). Myeloid cells were separated using a 37% Percoll 
(Merck) gradient from the homogenized tissue. Cell pellets were cryopreserved 
in FCS:dimethylsulfoxide (9:1; Merck) until further processing. To minimize 
batch effects, sample processing was conducted in a blocked manner, whereby 
control and diseased tissue samples were processed together. Also, where possible, 
several control tissue samples were processed on the same day. Cell sorting was 
performed using a MoFlo Astrios instrument (Beckman Coulter). The following 
antibodies were used for cell surface marker detection: anti-CD45 (clone HI30, 
BD Bioscience), anti-CD11b (clone M1/70, eBioscience), anti-CD3 (clone SP34-2, 
BD Bioscience), anti-CD19 (clone SJ25C1, BioLegend) and anti-CD20 (clone 2H7, 
BioLegend). Before surface staining, Fc receptors were blocked (BD Bioscience). 
Dead cells were stained using DAPI.
scRNA amplification and library preparation. Single-cell suspensions were 
subjected to single-cell sorting using a MoFlow Astrios machine. After lineage 
exclusion (CD3e, CD19 and CD20), all CD45+ cells were sorted into 384-well 
plates (Bio-Rad). scRNA-seq was performed using an automated and miniaturized 
mCEL-Seq2 protocol on a mosquito nanoliter-scale liquid-handling robot35,52. 
Eight libraries with 192 cells each were sequenced per lane on an Illumina HiSeq 
3000 sequencing system (pair-end multiplexing run) at a depth of ~130,000–
200,000 reads per cell.
Quantification of transcript abundance. Transcriptome alignment of paired-
end reads was achieved using bwa (v.0.6.2-r126) with default parameters53. The 
transcriptome contained all gene models based on the human ENCODE V24 
release. All isoforms of the same gene were treated as a single gene locus. The right 
mate of each read pair was mapped to the ensemble of all gene loci and to the set 
of 92 ERCC spike-ins in the sense direction54. Reads mapping to multiple loci were 
discarded. The left read contained the following barcode information: the first six 
bases represented the unique molecular identifier (UMI) followed by six bases with 
the cell-specific barcode. A polyT stretch comprised the remainder of the left read 
that was therefore not used for quantification. The number of UMIs per transcript 
was aggregated for each gene locus and assigned to individual cells depending on 
the barcode. Binomial statistics were used to model transcript counts from the 
number of observed UMIs55.
scRNA-seq data analysis. Data collection and analyses were performed in an 
unsupervised manner, but not blinded to the conditions of the experiments. 
Only cells expressing microglia markers were included in the analysis (non-
microglial cells were excluded). A total of 72 libraries were sequenced, and 6,417 
cells (4,564 healthy cells, 1,853 glioma cells) were analyzed after quality control. 
The number of quantified genes was 31,799 for healthy and 28,289 for glioma-
associated microglia. Data analysis and visualization were performed using the 
RaceID3 algorithm with 40 principal components35. Cells with a total number 
of transcripts of <1,500 were discarded, and gene counts of the remaining cells 
were normalized by downscaling. Before normalization, cells expressing >2% of 
KCNQ1OT1 transcripts, a previously identified37 marker of low-quality cells, were 
removed from analysis. Likewise, transcripts correlating to KCNQ1OT1 with a 
Pearson’s correlation coefficient of >0.65 were removed. The following parameters 
were used for RaceID3 analysis: mintotal = 1,500, minexpr = 5, outminc = 5, 
probthr = 10−8. We regressed out technical differences between the batches by 
passing the information that batches were processed and sequenced together 
to the VarRegression() function of RaceID3 (see Supplementary Tables 1 and 6 
for batch information). The following genes were excluded from clustering as 
they likely represented dissociation-induced human genes, similar to previously 
published37,38 murine dissociation-induced genes: DNAJB1, DUSP1, FOS, FOSB, 
H3F3B, HSP90AA1, HSP90AB1, HSP90B1, HSPA1A, HSPA1B, HSPA5, HSPA6, 
HSPA8, HSPB1, IVNS1ABP, JUN, JUNB, MALAT1, RP11-212I21.4, RPS16 and 
ZFP36L1. Differentially expressed genes between two clusters were identified as 
previously described56. First, negative binomial distributions were inferred for the 
gene expression variability based on a background model computed by RaceID3  
(ref. 35). Then, a P value for the observed difference in transcript counts was 
calculated. Correction for multiple testing was performed using the Benjamini–
Hochberg method.
StemID2. StemID2 analysis was performed as previously described37 with the 
default parameters except for ‘nmode = TRUE, fast = TRUE’ in the projcells(), 
projback(), lineagetree() and comppvalue() functions. For trajectory identification, 
all links with scthr = 0.75 were considered. For the trajectory, genes were filtered 
using the parameters ‘minexpr = 4,minnumber = 1’ in the filterset() function.
Monocle. Monocle pseudotime analysis46 was conducted to independently validate 
the findings obtained using StemID2. Default parameters were used. Only genes 
expressed in at least 50 cells at a min_expr = 0.5 were considered. Dimensionality 
reduction was achieved with ‘num_dim = 6’ using the t-SNE method. Ordering 
genes for pseudotemporal ordering were obtained from the differentialGeneTest() 
function that was run for the ‘Diagnosis’ variable (with two levels, ‘Healthy’ and 
‘GMB’, depending on which patient the cells came from). Only genes with a qval of 
<0.01 were considered.
Cross-dataset comparisons. To achieve a quantitative comparison of our data 
to published datasets, we implemented a deep-neural-network-based classifier 
approach. The general principle was to obtain cluster assignment to one of the 
clusters described in this study for any given microglia transcriptome. This 
meant that the input dataset was a gene count matrix and the output dataset was 
a probabilistic assignment to a cluster that best represents the input data. The 
classifier was implemented using the keras R package57, which serves as an R 
interface to Tensorflow58. For training, we utilized a normalized counts matrix 
with columns containing genes that are expressed at five or more normalized 
counts in at least one cell and row containing cells. According to these criteria, 
the control dataset was trained on 792 genes and the GAM dataset on 463 genes. 
Before training, the dataset was split into a training and test dataset at a ratio of 
0.7:0.3. The test dataset was held out during training for post hoc assessment of the 
classification accuracy. Preprocessing steps and network geometry were modified 
from existing approaches59. Input data were normalized, scaled up to 10,000 and 
log2-transformed. The network contained an input, 3 hidden layers with 100, 50 
and 25 nodes and an output layer (Supplementary Fig. 5a). Rectified linear unit 
functions were used as activation functions for the hidden layers and softmax 
function was used for the output layer. Categorical cross entropy was used as the 
loss function and adaptive moment estimation as the optimizer. Accuracy was 
chosen as optimization metrics. The model was trained for 300 epochs with a 
batch size of 128 and a validation split of 0.2. Default settings were chosen for the 
remaining parameters. Raw gene counts from independent datasets were filtered 
for the genes used for the training of the classifier. Individual missing values were 
imputed using means from the training set. The classifier output was visualized 
using Marimekko charts.
Data analysis and visualization. Data collection and analyses were performed in 
an unsupervised manner, but not blinded to the conditions of the experiments. 
Only cells expressing microglia markers were included in the analysis (non-
microglial cells were excluded). Data analysis was conducted using the R 
programming language60 v.3.6.1 and GraphPad Prism 6.07. The tidyverse R 
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
package was used for data processing and visualization (https://CRAN.R-project.
org/package=tidyverse). GO term analysis was conducted using the clusterProfiler 
R package51. The code for Marimekko plots was modified from R. Scavetta (https://
campus.datacamp.com/courses/data-visualization-with-ggplot2-2/chapter-5-case-
study?ex=10).
Intracellular barcoding for mass cytometry. Percoll-isolated myeloid cells were 
fixed with fixation/stabilization buffer11 (SmartTube) and frozen at −80 °C until 
analysis by mass cytometry. Cells were thawed and subsequently stained with pre-
made combinations of the following six different palladium isotopes: 102Pd, 104Pd, 
105Pd, 106Pd, 108Pd and 110Pd (Cell-ID 20-plex Pd Barcoding kit, Fluidigm). This 
multiplexing kit applies a 6-choose-3 barcoding scheme that results in 20 different 
combinations of three Pd isotopes. After 30 min of staining (at room temperature), 
individual samples were washed twice with cell staining buffer (0.5% BSA in PBS, 
containing 2 mM EDTA). All samples were pooled together, washed and further 
stained with antibodies.
Antibodies. Anti-human antibodies (Supplementary Tables 11 and 12) were  
purchased either preconjugated to metal isotopes (Fluidigm) or from commercial 
suppliers in purified form and conjugated in-house using a MaxPar X8 kit 
(Fluidigm) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For surface and intracellular 
staining, after cell barcoding, washing and pelleting, the combined samples 
were re-suspended in 100 µl of antibody cocktail against surface markers 
(Supplementary Tables 11 and 12) and incubated for 30 min at 4 °C. Then, cells 
were washed twice with cell staining buffer. For intracellular staining, the stained 
(non-stimulated) cells were then incubated in fixation/permeabilization buffer 
(Fix/Perm Buffer, eBioscience) for 60 min at 4 °C. Cells were then washed twice 
with permeabilization buffer (eBioscience). The samples were then stained with 
antibody cocktails against intracellular molecules in permeabilization buffer for 
1 h at 4 °C. Cells were subsequently washed twice with permeabilization buffer and 
incubated overnight in 2% methanol-free formaldehyde solution. Fixed cells were 
then washed and re-suspended in 1 ml of iridium intercalator solution (Fluidigm) 
for 1 h at room temperature. Next, the samples were washed twice with cell staining 
buffer and then twice with ddH2O (Fluidigm). Cells were pelleted and kept at 4 °C 
until CyTOF measurement.
CyTOF measurement. Cells were analyzed using a CyTOF2 instrument upgraded 
to Helios specifications with software v.6.5.236. The instrument was tuned 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions with tuning solution (Fluidigm), and 
measurement of EQ four element calibration beads (Fluidigm) containing 140/142Ce, 
151/153Eu, 165Ho and 175/176Lu served as a quality control for sensitivity and recovery. 
Immediately before analysis, cells were re-suspended in ddH2O, filtered (20 µm 
Celltrix, Sysmex), counted and adjusted to 3–5 × 105 cells ml–1. EQ four element 
calibration beads were added at a final concentration of 1:10 of the sample volume 
to be able to normalize the data to compensate for signal drift and day-to-day 
changes in instrument sensitivity.
Samples were acquired with a flow rate of 300–400 events s–1. A lower 
convolution threshold was set to 400, with noise reduction mode on and cell-
definition parameters set at an event duration of 10–150. The resulting flow 
cytometry standard (.fcs) files were normalized and randomized using the 
CyTOF software’s internal fcs-processing module on the non-randomized 
(‘original’) data. Settings were used according to the default settings in the 
software with time interval normalization (100 s per minimum of 50 beads) and 
passport v.2. Intervals with fewer than 50 beads per 100 s were excluded from 
the resulting .fcs file.
Mass cytometry data processing and analysis. Cytobank was used for initial 
manual gating on live single cells. Nucleated single viable cells were manually  
gated by the DNA intercalators 191Ir/193Ir and event length. For debarcoding, 
Boolean gating was used to deconvolute individual samples according to the 
barcode combination. For gated human microglia from different individuals, the 
expression levels of each marker were assessed and visualized in heatmaps, dot 
plots and/or histograms. Microglia immune phenotypes were visualized using  
two-dimensional t-SNE maps generated from P2RY12+ (panel A) or TMEM119+ 
(panel B) pre-gated human microglia cells. For embedding, we used Cytobank’s 
default hyperparameters (perplexity = 30, theta = 0.5 and 1,000 iterations).
Statistics. For Fig. 1c, differential gene expression analysis was conducted using 
an approach implemented in the DESeq2 R package61. The underlying statistic is 
assumed to be negative binomial. The diffexpnb RaceID function was used. The 
top differentially expressed genes were chosen based on the log2-fold change.
For Fig. 2a, hypergeometric testing for enrichment was conducted using the 
clusterProfiler R package51 with default settings. Multiple testing was corrected and 
q values are provided. A total of 31,799 genes quantified in this dataset were used 
as background.
For Fig. 3b,c, one-sided paired t-tests were utilized for statistical testing. 
Between 11 and 15 datapoints were compared for each protein. Multiple testing 
adjustment was achieved using the Benjamini–Hochberg method. Sample means 
and distributions were compared and a normal distribution was assumed, but 
not explicitly tested. For Fig. 3e, hypergeometric testing was applied using the 
phyper R function (see Supplementary Table 5b for the underlying cell numbers 
per cluster and region). The Benjamini–Hochberg method was used for multiple 
testing adjustment. For Fig. 3g, one-sided unpaired t-test was used followed by 
Sidak–Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. Sample means and distributions 
were compared and a normal distribution was assumed, but not explicitly tested. 
For Fig. 3i, hypergeometric testing was applied using the phyper R function 
(see Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 for the underlying cell numbers per age bin 
and cluster). The Benjamini–Hochberg method was used for multiple testing 
adjustment. For Fig. 3j, Spearman’s correlation was used on n = 10 samples with 
3–4 datapoints per age bin.
For Fig. 4d, differential gene expression analysis was conducted using an 
approach implemented in the DESeq2 R package61. The underlying statistic is 
assumed to be negative binomial. The diffexpnb RaceID function was used. The 
top differentially expressed genes were chosen based on the log2-fold change. 
For Fig. 4f, hypergeometric testing was applied using the phyper R function (see 
Supplementary Table 8b for the underlying cell numbers per diagnosis and cluster). 
The Benjamini–Hochberg method was used for multiple testing adjustment.
For Fig. 5b, one-sided unpaired t-tests were utilized for statistical testing.  
Up to 15 controls and 7 patients with GBM were compared for each protein. 
Multiple testing adjustment was achieved using the Benjamini–Hochberg method. 
Sample means and distributions were compared and a normal distribution was 
assumed, but not explicitly tested. For Fig. 5f, one-sided unpaired t-test was 
utilized. Samples from n = 4 controls and n = 7 patients with GBM were assessed. 
Sample means and distributions were compared and a normal distribution was 
assumed, but not explicitly tested.
For Fig. 6a, pseudotime analysis was conducted using the StemID2 R 
algorithm37. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using the clusterProfiler 
R package51. For Fig. 6e,f, one-sided unpaired t-test was used followed by Sidak–
Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. Sample means and distributions were 
compared and a normal distribution was assumed, but not explicitly tested  
(see Supplementary Table 12 for results of statistical testing).
For Extended Data Fig. 7b, two-way analysis of variance and Tukey post 
hoc test were performed (see Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 for the underlying 
cell numbers per age bin and cluster). Expression means and distributions were 
compared and a normal distribution was assumed, but not explicitly tested.
For Supplementary Fig. 1, statistical testing was conducted using two-way 
analysis of variance followed by Tukey post hoc test (see Supplementary  
Table 8b for the underlying cell numbers per diagnosis and cluster). Expression 
means and distributions were compared and a normal distribution was assumed, 
but not explicitly tested.
For Supplementary Fig. 2a, hypergeometric testing for enrichment was 
conducted using the clusterProfiler R package51 with default settings. Multiple 
testing was corrected and q values are provided. A total of 28,289 genes quantified 
in this dataset were used as background.
For Supplementary Fig. 5, pseudotime analysis was conducted using the 
StemID2 R algorithm37.
For Supplementary Fig. 6a,b, pseudotime analysis was performed using the 
monocle R package46 with default settings. Diagnosis with the levels ‘control’ and 
‘GAM’ was used to calculate the trajectory.
For Supplementary Fig. 8a–c, one-sided unpaired t-test was used followed by 
Sidak–Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. Sample means and distributions 
were compared and a normal distribution was assumed, but not explicitly tested 
(see Supplementary Table 12 for results of statistical testing).
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The raw data for this project are available at the Gene Expression Omnibus under 
accession code GSE135437. The data can be explored in a browser widget at  
https://single-cell.shinyapps.io/human-microglia/.
Code availability
Computer code for this project can be provided upon request and found at  
https://github.com/rsankowski/sankowski-et-al-microglia.
References
	52.	Hashimshony, T. et al. CEL-Seq2: sensitive highly-multiplexed single-cell 
RNA-seq. Genome Biol. 17, 77 (2016).
	53.	Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate long-read alignment with Burrows–
Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics 26, 589–595 (2010).
	54.	Baker, S. C. et al. The external RNA controls consortium: a progress report. 
Nat. Methods 2, 731–734 (2005).
	55.	Grun, D., Kester, L. & van Oudenaarden, A. Validation of noise models for 
single-cell transcriptomics. Nat. Methods 11, 637–640 (2014).
	56.	Anders, S. & Huber, W. Differential expression analysis for sequence count 
data. Genome Biol. 11, R106 (2010).
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
	57.	Allaire, J. & Chollet, F. keras: R Interface to ‘Keras’. R package version 
2.2.4.1.9001 (2017).
	58.	Abadi, M. et al. Tensorflow: large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous 
distributed systems. Preprint at arXiv https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.04467 (2016).
	59.	Ma, F. & Pellegrini, M. Automated identification of cell types in single cell 
RNA sequencing. Preprint at bioRxiv https://www.biorxiv.org/content/ 
10.1101/532093v1 (2019).
	60.	R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing  
(R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2013).
	61.	Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and 
dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550 (2014).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank J. Bodinek-Wersing, T. El Gaz, E. Barleon and A. Frömming for 
excellent technical support. R.S. is supported by the Berta-Ottenstein Programme 
for Clinician Scientists. M.P. is supported by the Sobek Foundation, the Ernst-Jung 
Foundation, the German Research Foundation (SFB 992, SFB1160, Reinhart-Koselleck-
Grant) and the Ministry of Science, Research and Arts, Baden-Wuerttemberg (Sonderlinie 
“Neuroinflammation”) and by the BMBF-funded competence network of multiple 
sclerosis (KKNMS). This study was supported by the German Research Foundation 
(DFG) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy (CIBSS, EXC-2189, project ID 390939984). 
The authors would also like to acknowledge the assistance of the BCRT Flow Cytometry 
Lab (Charité—Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany). C.B., M.P. and J.P. are supported 
by the German Research Foundation (SFB/TRR167 “NeuroMac”). J.P. received additional 
funding from the Berlin Institute of Health (CRG2aSP6) and the UK DRI (Momentum 
Award). D.G. was supported by the Max Planck Society, the German Research Foundation 
(DFG) (SPP1937 GR4980/1-1, GR4980/3-1 and GRK2344 MeInBio), by the DFG under 
Germany’s Excellence Strategy (CIBSS, EXC-2189, project ID 390939984), by the ERC 
(818846, ImmuNiche, ERC-2018-COG) and by the Behrens-Weise-Foundation.
Author contributions
R.S., C.B., T.M., L.G. and E.S. conducted the experiments and analyzed the data. C.S., 
M.J.S., D.H.H. and O.S. performed brain surgeries for tissue acquisition. R.S. and S. 
analyzed the scRNA-seq data (under the supervision of D.G.). R.S., C.B., T.S., A.M., D.G., 
J.P. and M.P. supervised the project and wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests
A.M. and T.S. are shareholders of AC Immune. All the other authors declare no 
competing interests.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-019-0532-y.
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41593-019-0532-y.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.G., J.P. or M.P.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Representative immunohistochemical pictures of control samples. (a) grey and (b) white matter from each subject included in the 
study. Each image is representative of n=10 independent images taken per specimen.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Pregating Strategy and FACS plots – control samples. Overview of FACS plots for the control samples included in the study.  
The boxplot whiskers represent 1.5 times the interquartile range. Each sample represents an independent experiment.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Cell signatures and microglia cell-to-cell-distance heatmap – control samples. a) Cell signatures of microglial and non-microglial 
cells. Aggregate transcript counts of genes enriched in the given cell type (indicated in parentheses) are color-coded on t-SNE maps. b) Unsupervised 
clustering of microglia after exclusion of non-microglial cells divided microglia in 9 major populations, that is clusters. The heatmap displays pairwise cell-
to-cell distances with clusters color-coded on the bottom. C4 (grey color) was removed from subsequent analysis due to upregulation of cell-stress genes 
indicating dissociation-induced artefacts. Minor clusters containing individual cells that comprise less than 1 % of all cells were also removed (white ‘x’ on 
black background), leading to n = 4,116 microglia that passed quality control. The color scale represents the pairwise distance between cells.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Resource
Nature Neuroscience
Extended Data Fig. 4 | t-SNE maps and line plots of selected genes - control samples. t-SNE maps color-coded for transcript counts with the 
corresponding line plots.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

===== Sapudom2021_npjRegenMed+M2macrophage =====
ARTICLE
OPEN
3D in vitro M2 macrophage model to mimic modulation of
tissue repair
Jiranuwat Sapudom
1, Shaza Karaman1,2, Walaa K. E. Mohamed1, Anna Garcia-Sabaté
1, Brian C. Quartey
1 and
Jeremy C. M. Teo
1,3✉
Distinct anti-inﬂammatory macrophage (M2) subtypes, namely M2a and M2c, are reported to modulate the tissue repair process
tightly and chronologically by modulating ﬁbroblast differentiation state and functions. To establish a well-deﬁned three-
dimensional (3D) cell culture model to mimic the tissue repair process, we utilized THP-1 human monocytic cells and a 3D collagen
matrix as a biomimetic tissue model. THP-1 cells were differentiated into macrophages, and activated using IL-4/IL-13 (MIL-4/IL-13)
and IL-10 (MIL-10). Both activated macrophages were characterized by both their cell surface marker expression and cytokine
secretion proﬁle. Our cell characterization suggested that MIL-4/IL-13 and MIL-10 demonstrate M2a- and M2c-like subtypes,
respectively. To mimic the initial and resolution phases during the tissue repair, both activated macrophages were co-cultured with
ﬁbroblasts and myoﬁbroblasts. We showed that MIL-4/IL-13 were able to promote matrix synthesis and remodeling by induction of
myoﬁbroblast differentiation via transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-β1). On the contrary, MIL-10 demonstrated the ability to
resolve the tissue repair process by dedifferentiation of myoﬁbroblast via IL-10 secretion. Overall, our study demonstrated the
importance and the exact roles of M2a and M2c-like macrophage subtypes in coordinating tissue repair in a biomimetic model. The
established model can be applied for high-throughput platforms for improving tissue healing and anti-ﬁbrotic drugs testing, as well
as other biomedical studies.
npj Regenerative Medicine  (2021) 6:83 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41536-021-00193-5
INTRODUCTION
Wound healing is a complex and dynamic process facilitated by
four overlapping, continuous phases namely homeostasis, inﬂam-
mation, proliferation, and tissue remodeling1,2. This entire process
is tightly modulated and orchestrated by biochemical signals, such
as growth factors and cytokines, and biophysical stimuli including
cell–cell interactions and cell–extracellular matrix (ECM) interac-
tions3. Various cell types, including immune cells, ﬁbroblasts,
endothelial cells, and keratinocytes are intricately involved in the
wound-healing process4,5. In the early phase of wound repair,
ﬁbroblasts proliferate and migrate from adjacent tissues towards
the wound bed via chemotaxis, in order to form granulation tissue
and synthesize new ECM6. Fibronectin is a high-molecular weight
adhesive glycoprotein that originates from blood plasma and
becomes part of the wound matrix due to the rupture of localized
vasculature during tissue injury. Fibronectin has also been
reported to enhance migration of ﬁbroblasts into wound tissue
and stimulate their proliferation7,8. Afterwards, ﬁbroblasts differ-
entiate into myoﬁbroblasts via transforming growth factor beta-1
(TGF-β1)-mediated Smad2/3 signaling9,10. Recent reports suggest
that
attenuation
of
TGF-β1
signaling
through
the
use
of
glycosaminoglycan-based hydrogel reduce scar formation in rat
dermal wounds11,12, while excessive reduction of TGF-β1 can be
paradoxical, delaying wound repair13. Myoﬁbroblasts are char-
acterized by pronounced actin stress ﬁbers and the expression of
alpha smooth-muscle actin (αSMA), as well as an extensive
production and deposition of ECM proteins, e.g. type I collagen
(Coll I) and ﬁbronectin containing extra domain-A (EDA-FN)8,14,15.
In addition, they are able to reorganize collagen ﬁbrils of the ECM
using their contractile machinery, actively playing a role in
physically closing the wound16,17. Alongside with that, collagen
ﬁbril density is increased during the tissue repair process and,
in turn, can act as a negative feedback to downregulate
myoﬁbroblastic activity18,19. However, if the tissue repair is
prolonged and myoﬁbroblasts remain to produce excessive ECM
components and steady remodel the tissue, it will result in
scarring or ﬁbrosis20,21.
Macrophages are known as the most dominating cells at the
wound site which coordinate the transition between phases
during the entire wound-healing process22–24. In particular, anti-
inﬂammatory macrophages, known as M2 macrophages, are key
regulators in the initiation and resolution of tissue repair phase by
secreting speciﬁc cytokines to modulate ﬁbroblast fates25,26. In
classical macrophage biology, M2 macrophages are classiﬁed into
distinct subtypes, namely M2a, M2b, M2c, M2d, and M2f based on
their
marker
expressions
and
cytokine
secretion
proﬁles27.
Macrophage
phenotype
is
in
fact
a
continuous
spectrum;
however, description through their distinct subtypes provides
clarity28. It has been hypothesized that the balance between
regenerative wound healing and scarring/ﬁbrosis pivots on the
equilibrium between the M2a and M2c phenotype, each with
distinct cellular functions. However, few studies have investigated
the role of M2a and M2c in other physiological contexts29–31 and
even less is known about how both cell subtypes regulate
ﬁbroblast differentiation and functions.
The limitation of the current in vitro wound-healing model is
that most of the previous models were conducted on two-
dimensional (2D) tissue culture plastic, which lacked representa-
tive ECM components and exhibited non-physiological features,
such as high mechanical stiffness and lack of porosity32–34. To
1Laboratory for Immuno Bioengineering Research and Applications, Division of Engineering, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE. 2Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Imperial College London, London, UK. 3Department of Mechanical and Biomedical Engineering, Tandon School of Engineering, New York University, New York, NY,
USA. ✉email: jeremy.teo@nyu.edu
www.nature.com/npjregenmed
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
1234567890():,;

bridge the gap between 2D cell culture models and native tissues,
three-dimensional (3D) ﬁbrillar collagen matrices can be utilized to
mimic wound tissue, since it recapitulates the ﬁbrillar micro-
structure of native tissues18,35,36. In addition, the 3D collagen
systems could be ﬁne-tuned in terms of their biophysical
properties, e.g., pore size, ﬁbril size and elasticity33, as well as
model tissue compartments37. Besides, they can be post-modiﬁed
with other ECM proteins such as ﬁbronectin and glycosaminogly-
cans to enhance the complexity of the biomimetic models33.
The aim of this work is to establish THP-1-derived M2 subtypes,
namely M2a and M2c, for utilization in a well-deﬁned 3D collagen-
based wound-healing model, facilitating the development of high-
throughput
platforms
for
models
of
wound
healing.
First,
phenotypes of both macrophage subtypes were comprehensively
characterized in terms of expression of cell surface markers and
cytokine secretion proﬁles. Afterwards, ﬁbroblasts and myoﬁbro-
blasts were each co-cultured with both M2 subtypes and studied
in terms of their differentiation, matrix protein production, matrix
remodeling, and migratory behavior.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Establish 3D in vitro model and macrophage morphology
Current wound-healing models are based on 2D tissue culture
plastic, lacking many biophysical and biochemical features found
in native wound tissue. In this work, we aimed to establish a
biomimetic 3D cell culture models to replicate modulation of the
initiation and resolution phases of the tissue repair. Our cell
culture model facilitates the development of well-deﬁned wound-
healing models for high-throughput screening in drug develop-
ment, studying of cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions, as well as
other biomedical studies. We utilized 3D collagen matrices as a
3D cell culture model. Our 3D collagen matrices reconstituted
at 2 mg/ml collagen concentration, exhibit a pore size of
8.1 ± 0.8 µm, a ﬁbril diameter of 652.0 ± 32.0 nm, and an elastic
modulus of 85.5 ± 7.3 Pa.
As high-throughput studies require large number of cells and to
overcome donor-to-donor variation of primary cells, we utilized
THP-1-derived macrophages as a cell model. To generate M2
macrophage subtypes, we ﬁrst differentiated embedded THP-1
cells into uncommitted macrophages using PMA and further
activated them using interleukin-4 (IL-4)/IL-13 and IL-10 into MIL-4/
IL-13 and MIL-10, respectively (Fig. 1a). After macrophage activation,
we quantiﬁed cell morphology by means of measuring cell area
(Fig. 1c) and cell aspect ratio (Fig. 1d) using an automated image
analysis toolbox38. Both MIL-4/IL-13 and MIL-10 cells exhibited a
round morphological appearance, as visualized in Fig. 1b and
quantiﬁed by cell aspect ratio (Fig. 1d), no signiﬁcant difference
could be found between both macrophage subtypes. Macro-
phages are distributed homogeneously throughout 3D collagen
matrices (Supplementary Fig. 1). For further characterization, we
comprehensively studied cell surface markers and cytokine
secretion proﬁle. Later, both activated macrophages subtypes
were co-cultured with ﬁbroblasts and myoﬁbroblasts to demon-
strate differential cellular functions. Speciﬁcally, we aim to
demonstrate the advantage of our 3D cell culture models for in-
depth study of collagen reorganization during the initiation and
resolution phases of the tissue repair.
Establish and characterization of MIL-4/IL-13 and MIL-10
macrophage
To distinguish between the macrophage subtypes used in this
study, we ﬁrst characterized both MIL-4/IL-13 and MIL-10 cells using
their surface marker proﬁle. The expression of CD14, CD68, CD80,
CD86, CD105, CD163, CD206, and HLA-DR was measured via
immunocytostaining using ﬂow cytometry and quantiﬁed by
geometric mean ﬂuorescence intensity (gMFI) (Fig. 2). Histogram
Fig. 1
Macrophage differentiation and activation in 3D collagen matrices. a Schematic workﬂow for macrophage differentiation and
activation towards MIL-4/IL-13 and MIL-10 in 3D collagen matrix. b Representative images of MIL-4/IL-13 and MIL-10 were gathered using bright-ﬁeld
microscopy. A quantitative morphological analysis, namely c cell area and d cell aspect ratio, was conducted using an image analysis toolbox.
Data are presented as a violin plot. At least 100 cells from three independent experiments were analyzed.
J. Sapudom et al.
2
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021)  83 
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
1234567890():,;

plots of quantiﬁed surface markers are depicted in Supplementary
Fig. 2.
As shown in Fig. 2, both M2 subtypes shared similar expression
levels of CD68 and CD86. Since CD68 is a pan-macrophage
marker39, it is not surprising that a recent report suggested
expression level of CD68 increased upon differentiation in THP-1-
derived macrophages, as compared to undifferentiated cell40. We
further
showed
that
THP-1-derived
macrophages
activated
towards pro-inﬂammatory subtype and treated using IL-4/IL-
13 showed no difference in CD68 expression40. CD86, on the other
hand, is reported to be highly expressed in pro-inﬂammatory
macrophages39 and hence used to discriminate M2a and M2c
from pro-inﬂammatory macrophages41.
MIL-4/IL-13 exhibited higher expression levels of CD105, CD206,
and HLA-DR when compared to MIL-10. HLA-DR is generally
expressed approximately 5- to 10-fold higher in pro-inﬂammatory
macrophages when compared to anti-inﬂammatory macrophages
for both PBMC- and THP-1-derived macrophages27,42. In this work,
we found a higher expression of HLA-DR in MIL-4/IL-13 when
compared to MIL-10 macrophages, suggesting a higher pro-
inﬂammatory activity of MIL-4/IL-13. As for the expression of
CD105 and CD206, it is reported that both these surface markers
can be induced by IL-4/IL-13 in both PBMC- and THP-1-derived
macrophages24,25, explaining the high expression of CD105 and
CD206 measured in our MIL-4/IL-13. We previously showed that THP-
1-derived pro-inﬂammatory macrophages and treated with IL-4/IL-
13 showed similar levels of CD206.
MIL-10 expressed high CD14, CD80, and CD163. CD14 is known
used as an M2c-speciﬁc marker31. It has been showed that IL-10
enhanced CD14 expression43. In general, CD80 surface markers
have been reported to be highly expressed in pro-inﬂammatory
macrophages44,45. However, a recent report demonstrated that
the presence of CD80 in anti-inﬂammatory macrophages is
involved in the differentiation of regulatory T cells which play
an important role in anti-rejection of transplants and maintaining
tolerance46,47.
CD163
is
identiﬁed
as
an
anti-inﬂammatory
receptor, which expression can be induced by IL-10 (ref. 48). The
high expression of CD14, CD80, and CD163 suggest an advanced
suppressive role of pro-inﬂammatory response49,50.
To further characterize both M2 phenotypes, we studied the
cytokine secretion proﬁle using a multiplex bead-based immu-
noassay (Fig. 3). To ensure that IL-4, IL-10, and IL-13 were
autologously secreted, and not absorbed and released by
the collagen through our exogenous application during macro-
phage activation, collagen matrices were incubated with those
cytokines and the release proﬁle in the media was determined
over 3 days. Additionally, matrices were digested using collage-
nase and cytokine levels were quantiﬁed. Both soluble or matrix-
bound IL-4, IL-10, and IL-13 were undetectable using the bead-
based immunoassay, and therefore quantiﬁed cytokines were
secreted by cells.
As shown in Fig. 3, we found signiﬁcantly higher secretion levels
of interferon-γ (IFN-γ), IL-2, IL-4, IL-8, IL-12p70, MCP-1, and TGF-β1
in MIL-4/IL-13 when compared to MIL-10. Both cells secreted similar
levels of IL-1β, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor-ɑ (TNF-ɑ), and IP-10. In
general, IFN-γ, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12p70, IP-10, and TNF-ɑ are pro-
inﬂammatory cytokines secreted by macrophages during the early
wound-healing process51; however, they are generally expressed
by M1 macrophages18,40,52. Especially, IFN-γ, IL-2, IL-4, and IL-12
have been associated with accelerated tissue repair53,54 and
reported to contribute to effective wound healing. Any dysregula-
tion in the secretion of those cytokines can lead to tissue
Fig. 2
Quantitative analysis of cell surface markers of MIL-4/IL-13 and MIL-10. Cell surface markers were analyzed by immunocytostaining of
CD14, CD68, CD80, CD86, CD105, CD163, CD206, and HLA-DR. Geometric mean ﬂuorescence intensity (gMFI) was plotted. Black line and error
bar in the plot represent mean and standard deviation, respectively. * indicates a signiﬁcance level of p ≤0.05 using Mann–Whitney test.
Experiments were performed in four independent replicates.
J. Sapudom et al.
3
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021)  83 

ﬁbrosis55–58. In addition to pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, MIL-4/IL-13
secreted a high amount of TGF-β1, a well-known multifunctional
cytokine involved in the process of ﬁbroblast differentiation. It has
been demonstrated that TGF-β1 is secreted by macrophages
activated with IL-4/IL-13 in both PBMC and THP-1-derived
macrophages18,30. The secretion of TGF-β1 also supports the
maintenance of M2a phenotype59.
On the other hand, MIL-10 produced high amounts of IL-17 and
IL-10 which were undetectable from MIL-4/IL-13. While most
analyzed pro-inﬂammatory cytokines have been demonstrated
to enhance tissue repair, IL-17 is a pro-inﬂammatory cytokine that
is involved in the activation of M2 macrophages via NFκB
signaling60 and the administration of recombinant IL-17A leads
to delayed wound healing61, which might relate to stimulation of
differentiation of human anti-inﬂammatory macrophages M2c in
response to IL-10 (ref. 62). IL-10 is the anti-inﬂammatory cytokine
reported to be highly secreted in IL-10 activated PBMC-derived
macrophages (M2c) in particular52. It is coupled with the
regulation of the different phases during wound healing35,63–66.
The cytokine secretion proﬁle of our MIL-4/IL-13 and MIL-10
matches that of PBMC-derived M2a and M2c, respectively52.
However, it will be incorrect to compare actual levels of secreted
cytokines from both PBMC- and THP-1-derived macrophages due
to experimental differences in cell number, activation protocols,
cell culture dimensionality, biophysical and biochemical properties
of cell culture substrate, and cell culture conditions. It should be
reiterated that our cytokine analysis is based on activated
macrophages in 3D cell culture models. We previously have
reported that many cytokines, including IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12,
MCP-1, and TGF-β1, are secreted in collagen density-dependent
manner by macrophages18. In that latter study, pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and TNFα, were elevated in macro-
phages treated with LPS/IFNγ, namely pro-inﬂammatory macro-
phages as compared to MIL-4/IL-13.
In sum, surface markers and cytokine secretion proﬁles suggest
that MIL-4/IL-13 and MIL-10 activated macrophages demonstrate
distinct M2 phenotypes, which are in line with previous ﬁndings
on M2a and M2c macrophage subtypes in primary human
macrophages22,28,52, respectively.
Fig. 3
Quantitative analysis of cytokine secretion proﬁle of MIL-4/IL-13 and MIL-10. Cytokine secretion proﬁle was analyzed from cell culture
supernatants after 3 days of macrophage activation by a bead-based multiplex immunoassay using ﬂow cytometry. Data are shown as a dot
plot. Black line and error bar in the plot represent mean and standard deviation, respectively. * indicates a signiﬁcance level of p ≤0.05 using
Mann–Whitney test. Experiments were performed in six independent replicates.
J. Sapudom et al.
4
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021)  83 
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute

Mimicking the early phase of tissue repair
To further differentiate between both M2 phenotypes and
demonstrate their potential in regulating ﬁbroblast differentiation
during the early phase of tissue repair, human primary dermal
ﬁbroblasts were co-cultured with M2 phenotypes for 3 days and
myoﬁbroblast-related genes were analyzed using qPCR analysis
(Fig.
4).
Respectively,
as
negative
and
positive
control
of
myoﬁbroblast differentiation, ﬁbroblasts were monocultured in
the absence and presence of 10 ng/ml TGF-β1 for 3 days. TGF-β1 is
known to trigger ﬁbroblast differentiation in vitro21,67. Fibroblasts
cultured in the presence of TGF-β1 and co-cultured with our MIL-4/IL-13
exhibited more pronounced actin stress ﬁbers with αSMA
incorporation as well as a more ﬂattened cell morphology,
suggesting a differentiation of ﬁbroblast into myoﬁbroblast (Fig. 4a).
This could not be observed in untreated ﬁbroblasts (control) and
those co-cultured with MIL-10.
To conﬁrm the ﬁbroblast differentiation, we quantiﬁed αSMA
expression, a myoﬁbroblast marker8,68, using immunocytostaining
(Fig. 4b) and gene expression (Fig. 4c) analysis. αSMA-positive cells
and gene expression increased in ﬁbroblast culture treated with
TGF-β1 and when co-cultured with MIL-4/IL-13, when compared to
control and co-cultured with MIL-10. Both αSMA-positive cells and
gene expression correlated nicely. This result also corroborates
with previous reports which demonstrate the effect of TGF-β1
(refs. 8,66,69) and MIL-4/IL-13 mediated ﬁbroblast differentiation18.
Besides αSMA expression, we analyzed matrix protein production
potential, through analyzing alpha 1 chain of the type 1 collagen
(Coll1a1) and ﬁbronectin containing Extra Domain-A (EDA-FN). The
expression of both Coll1a1 (Fig. 4d) and EDA-FN (Fig. 4e) follow the
same trend of αSMA expression. Again, Coll1a1 and EDA-FN were
highly expressed in ﬁbroblast co-cultured with MIL-4/IL-13 rather
than TGF-β1-treated ﬁbroblasts. Fibroblasts co-cultured with MIL-10
did not show an enhanced expression and the expression level of
both matrix proteins was in the same range as untreated
ﬁbroblasts.
In sum, by co-culturing ﬁbroblasts with both macrophage
subtypes, we found that only MIL-4/IL-13 is able to differentiate
ﬁbroblast into myoﬁbroblast, as demonstrated by αSMA and
matrix protein expression. This could be explained by the higher
TGF-β1 expression in MIL-4/IL-13 when compared to MIL-10 (Fig. 3).
Interestingly, the expression levels of αSMA and matrix protein in
ﬁbroblast co-cultured with MIL-4/IL-13 are signiﬁcantly higher than
ﬁbroblast directly treated with TGF-β1, which is to our previous
ﬁnding18. This variation could be explained by the sustained
release of TGF-β1 by MIL-4/IL-13. As demonstrated using controlled
release microbeads, pulsed paracrine delivery of TGF-β1 in a
picogram range (100 pg/ml) from polyethylene glycol (PEG)
microbeads
embedded
in
3D
collagen
matrix
could
fully
differentiate ﬁbroblasts into myoﬁbroblast similar to a continuous
10 ng/ml systematic delivery69.
Besides production of matrix proteins, another major feature
reserved for myoﬁbroblasts is their ability to remodel the matrix.
Fig. 4
Alteration of ﬁbroblast morphology and speciﬁc markers in the presence of TGF-β1 and co-culture with M2 macrophages
subtypes. a Representative images showing nuclei (blue), actin ﬁlaments (gray), and αSMA (green) (scale bar: 50 μm). Fibroblast differentiation
was analyzed by b manual counting of αSMA-positive cells. At least 200 cells per condition were counted. Gene expression analysis of c αSMA,
d Coll1a1, and e EDA-FN were performed using qPCR. Data are represented as mean ± SD; *a signiﬁcance level of p ≤0.05 using a one-way
ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc analysis. The characters # and § represent the signiﬁcance level of p ≤0.05 using a one-way ANOVA
followed by Tukey’s post hoc analysis when compared to control, and treated samples with TGF-β1, respectively. Experiments were performed
in four replicates.
J. Sapudom et al.
5
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021)  83 

Collagen matrices were decellularized using osmotic pressure by
incubating in bi-distilled water and stained using TAMRA-SE for
visualization by confocal laser microscopy (Fig. 5a). Changes in
matrix characteristics could be visually observed. The quantitative
analysis of matrix porosity and ﬁbril diameter using a custom-built
image analysis toolbox demonstrated that matrices of TGF-β1
treated ﬁbroblasts exhibit a higher collagen density than the
untreated counterpart and matrices of ﬁbroblast co-cultured with
both M2 macrophage (Fig. 5b). Matrices of ﬁbroblast co-cultured
with MIL-4/IL-13 showed signiﬁcantly smaller pore size than when
co-cultured with MIL-10. Interestingly, an increase in collagen ﬁbril
diameter was only found in matrices of ﬁbroblast co-cultured with
MIL-4/IL-13. This observation is consistent with the initial develop-
ment of ﬁbrosis, where an increase of collagen ﬁbril can be found
in pro-inﬂammatory milieu70, which at low levels, our MIL-4/IL-13 are
able to secrete (Fig. 3). In addition, it has been reported that
collagen ﬁbril diameter can mechanically actuate myoﬁbroblast
differentiation71, which might also explain why ﬁbroblast differ-
entiation in co-culture with MIL-4/IL-13 exhibited higher expression
of αSMA (Fig. 4b, c) and matrix proteins (Fig. 4d, e).
Furthermore, we analyzed the elastic modulus of the remodeled
matrices using a contactless rheometer (Fig. 5d). Matrices of
untreated ﬁbroblast and ﬁbroblast co-culture with MIL-10 showed a
similar range of elastic modulus. Interestingly, matrices of
ﬁbroblast
co-cultured
with
MIL-4/IL-13
showed
higher
elastic
modulus
than
that
from
TGF-β1-treated
ﬁbroblasts.
As
demonstrated in various works71–74, the contribution of collagen
ﬁbril diameter on bulk matrix modulus is not negligible. For
example, collagen matrices with bigger pore size and thicker ﬁbrils
demonstrated higher elastic modulus than matrices with smaller
pore size and thinner ﬁbrils72,74. These previous ﬁndings provide
an explanation for our obtained results of mechanical analysis.
Mimicking the resolution phase of tissue repair
While MIL-4/IL-13 has shown their potential in initiating tissue repair,
MIL-10 has been hypothesized to terminate the tissue repair phase
due to their low pro-inﬂammatory cytokine secretion and high
secretion of IL-10 (Fig. 3). It has been reported that exogenously
applied IL-10 is able to convert myoﬁbroblasts into ﬁbroblast35,66.
However,
few
studies
have
been
performed
in
co-culture
conditions to investigate this phenomenon35. To address this,
we ﬁrst derived myoﬁbroblasts by treating ﬁbroblasts with 10 ng/
ml TGF-β1 on 2D cell culture plastic for 3 days. Afterwards,
myoﬁbroblasts were detached and cultured on top of the collagen
matrices pre-embedded with and without M2 subtypes. It has to
be noted that the cell culture media of the myoﬁbroblast in the
control condition is TGF-β1 supplemented (10 ng/ml) to prevent
myoﬁbroblast apoptosis, as previously reported66. It is known that
TGF-β1 can block the intrinsic apoptotic pathway by inhibiting the
pro-apoptotic protein BCL-2-associated death promoter (BAD) via
the FAK–PI3K–AKT signaling pathway in ﬁbroblast75.
Fig. 5
Matrix remodeling by ﬁbroblasts in the presence of TGF-β1 and co-culture with M2 subtypes. a Representative images of
decellularized collagen matrices in mono and co-culture with M2 subtypes (scale bar: 50 μm). Decellularized collagen matrices were
characterized regarding b matrix porosity characterized as mean pore size, c collagen ﬁbril diameter, and d bulk matrix elastic modulus (data
are represented as mean ± SD; *signiﬁcance level of p ≤0.05 using a one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc analysis). The characters #
and § represent the signiﬁcance level of p ≤0.05 using a one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc analysis when compared to control,
and treated samples with TGF-β1, respectively. For the quantiﬁcation of matrix porosity and collagen ﬁbril diameter, 10 different positions of
each matrix condition were analyzed. Experiments were performed in four replicates.
J. Sapudom et al.
6
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021)  83 
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute

While myoﬁbroblasts in monoculture exhibit pronounced actin
stress ﬁbers with αSMA incorporation (Fig. 6a), this observation is
attenuated when IL-10 is present systemically. Quantitative
analysis of αSMA-positive cells (Fig. 6b) and αSMA expression
(Fig. 6c) conﬁrmed the observation, along with reduction matrix
proteins expression, namely Coll1a1 (Fig. 6d) and EDA-FN (Fig. 6e).
In co-culture conditions, myoﬁbroblastic phenotypes are main-
tained
in
the
presence
of
MIL-4/IL-13,
while
myoﬁbroblasts
co-cultured with MIL-10 manifests a reduction in αSMA-positive
cells and expression. The expression of matrix proteins was also
reduced and correlated ﬁttingly with the reduction of αSMA
expression.
Both
results
suggested
the
dedifferentiation
of
myoﬁbroblast into ﬁbroblast phenotypes when co-cultured with
MIL-10, which is in line with dedifferentiation of myoﬁbroblasts by
PBMC-derived anti-inﬂammatory macrophages using macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF)35. To elucidate that myoﬁbro-
blast dedifferentiation is related to the secretion of IL-10, we
subsequently supplemented cell culture media with anti-IL-10
antibody (aIL-10). Results suggested that in the presence of aIL-10,
the number of αSMA-positive cells and expression, as well as the
expression of matrix proteins, remained at a similar level to control
and co-culture with MIL-4/IL-13. Our results are in line with the
presence of M2c, as well as a detected IL-10 secretion in the late
state of the tissue repair phase35,66,76, which emphasized the
importance of IL-10 in the myoﬁbroblast dedifferentiation process,
and hence, termination of the tissue repair phase.
The question arises whether de-differentiated myoﬁbroblasts
are able to remodel collagen matrices. To address this underlying
question, we decellularized collagen matrices and analyzed their
matrix porosity, ﬁbril diameter, and matrix elasticity. Changes in
matrix characteristics could be visually observed (Fig. 7a) and
further quantitative analysis of matrix porosity showed that
matrices of myoﬁbroblasts treated with IL-10 and in co-culture
with MIL-10 were signiﬁcantly higher than those found in the co-
culture with MIL-4/IL-13, and MIL-10 in the presence of aIL-10
(Fig. 7b). By analyzing collagen ﬁbril diameter, we found that ﬁbril
diameter increased only in co-cultured conditions with MIL-4/IL-13,
but not in monoculture and co-culture with MIL-4/IL-13 and MIL-10
with aIL-10 (Fig. 7b). This observation is similar to the one found in
co-culture of ﬁbroblast and MIL-4/IL-13 (Fig. 5), which might be
caused by the enhanced pro-inﬂammatory milieu, tissue stiffness,
microRNA77,78. Signiﬁcantly lower matrix elasticity could be
observed in myoﬁbroblast treated with IL-10 and in co-culture
with MIL-10 (Fig. 7d). Together with αSMA expression and matrix
production, our matrix remodeling data suggest the dedifferentia-
tion of myoﬁbroblasts into ﬁbroblast phenotypes in the presence
of IL-10 and MIL-10. By blocking IL-10 using neutralizing antibody
(aIL-10), we found that the expression of αSMA, matrix proteins,
and the matrix remodeling remains at similar levels as myoﬁbro-
blasts. It suggests that the dedifferentiation of myoﬁbroblast is in
response to the presence of supplemented or MIL-10 secreted IL-
10. Our data emphasize the importance of IL-10 on the reduction
of
matrix
remodeling
by
initiation
of
myoﬁbroblast
dedifferentiation.
Fibroblast differentiation state is correlated with migratory
behavior
Besides matrix remodeling, another advantage of the 3D cell
culture models is they allow to study cell migration. Migration of
ﬁbroblast cells during different stages of wound healing is
Fig. 6
Alteration of myoﬁbroblasts morphology and speciﬁc markers in the presence of IL-10 and co-culture with M2 macrophages
subtypes. a Representative images showing nuclei (blue), actin ﬁlaments (gray), and αSMA (green) (scale bar: 50 μm). Myoﬁbroblast de-
dedifferentiation were analyzed using b percentage of αSMA-positive cells by manual counting of cells with αSMA incorporation into actin
stress ﬁbers and quantitative analysis of c αSMA, d Coll1a1, and e EDA-FN gene expression. For quantitative analysis of αSMA-positive cells, at
least 200 cells per condition were counted. Data are represented as mean ± SD; *signiﬁcance level of p ≤0.05 using a one-way ANOVA
followed by Tukey’s post hoc analysis). The characters # and § represent the signiﬁcance level of p ≤0.05 using a one-way ANOVA followed by
Tukey’s post hoc analysis when compared to control, and treated samples with IL-10, respectively. Experiments were performed in four
replicates.
J. Sapudom et al.
7
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021)  83 

important for tissue repair, but not much experimental evidence
exists on the migratory behavior of ﬁbroblasts at different
differentiation stages and in co-culture conditions. We performed
a migration analysis of both ﬁbroblasts and myoﬁbroblasts in
mono- and co-culture conditions to address this underlying
problem. Representative side-view images of ﬁbroblast (Fig. 8a)
and myoﬁbroblast (Fig. 8d) show that ﬁbroblast migration into 3D
collagen matrices is signiﬁcantly higher than that of myoﬁbro-
blasts (TGF-β1-treated conditions), as required during early tissue
repair phase. This data corroborate with our previous ﬁndings8,66.
In addition, ﬁbroblast co-culture with MIL-10 exhibited a similar
migration capacity in both percentage of migrating cells (Fig. 8b)
and maximal migration depth (Fig. 8c) when compared to
untreated ﬁbroblasts, but exhibited signiﬁcantly higher migration
when compared to myoﬁbroblast and in co-culture with MIL-4/IL-13.
In another experiment, modeling the late tissue repair phase,
where pre-differentiated myoﬁbroblasts were seeded onto 3D
collagen matrices, we found that myoﬁbroblasts showed limited
migration into collagen matrices (Fig. 8d). However, an enhanced
migration of myoﬁbroblast in the presence of IL-10 and in co-
culture with MIL-10 could be observed both in the migrating cell
number
(Fig.
8e)
and
maximal
migration
depth
(Fig.
8f).
Myoﬁbroblasts co-culture with MIL-4/IL-13 and MIL-10 in the presence
of aIL-10 showed similar migration patterns as those found in
myoﬁbroblast alone.
Overall, our data suggest that myoﬁbroblast exhibits limited
migration capacity when compared to ﬁbroblast, which is well
correlated with the high expression of αSMA and the contractile
phenotypes, as previously published8,17,79. The dedifferentiation of
myoﬁbroblast into ﬁbroblast phenotypes in the presence of IL-10
and in co-culture with MIL-10 could be conﬁrmed by migratory
behavior. In addition, by neutralizing IL-10 using antibody in the
co-culture with MIL-10, the migratory behavior remains at the level
of myoﬁbroblasts, conﬁrming the effect of IL-10 in myoﬁbroblast
dedifferentiation.
General discussion and conclusion
To establish wound-healing models for high-throughput assess-
ment of pathobiological changes and testing of anti-ﬁbrotic drugs,
well-deﬁned biosystems, including cells and their cell culture
substrate, are required. Although primary human cells have
become a major interest in the ﬁeld of regeneration, they cannot
be utilized to establish a well-deﬁned wound model due to
patient-to-patient variability as well as possible lack of data
regarding their underlying activation stage. To overcome these
issues, we used THP-1, a human monocytic cell line widely used as
an established macrophages model in many biomedical studies
such as wound repair, infection models, and immuno-oncology80.
Although THP-1 based M1-like macrophage models have been
extensively established, few studies attempted to study M2a- and
M2c-like macrophages and address their cellular functions in the
context of wound repair. In this work, we utilized collagen
matrices as a biomimetic wound model and comprehensively
analyzed and demonstrated that surface markers and cytokines
secretion proﬁle of MIL-4/IL-13 and MIL-10 is akin to M2a and M2c
macrophages derived from human PBMC, respectively22,28,52. We
showed that MIL-4/IL-13 can modulate tissue repair by controlled
secretion of TGF-β1 to induce ﬁbroblast differentiation, while
MIL-10 macrophages secrete high amounts of IL-10 to resolve
inﬂammation and tissue repair processes. Besides, we demon-
strate
that
IL-10
can
reverse
myoﬁbroblast
into
ﬁbroblast
phenotypes, as published elsewhere35,66. By neutralizing IL-10
Fig. 7
Matrix remodeling by myoﬁbroblasts in the presence of IL-10 and co-culture with M2 subtypes. a Representative images of
decellularized collagen matrices in mono and co-culture with M2 subtypes (scale bar: 50 μm). Decellularized collagen matrices were
characterized regarding b matrix porosity characterized as mean pore size, c collagen ﬁbril diameter, and d matrix elastic modulus. (Data are
represented as mean ± SD; *signiﬁcance level of p ≤0.05 using a one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc analysis.) The characters # and
§ represent the signiﬁcance level of p ≤0.05 using a one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc analysis when compared to control, and
treated samples with IL-10, respectively. For the quantiﬁcation of matrix porosity and collagen ﬁbril diameter, 10 different positions of each
matrix condition were analyzed. Experiments were performed in four replicates.
J. Sapudom et al.
8
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021)  83 
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute

with antibody in co-culture with MIL-10, no dedifferentiation of
myoﬁbroblast could be observed, emphasizing the role of IL-10 in
resolution of the tissue repair phase. An illustration summary of
our results in different tissue repair phases is depicted in Fig. 9.
Interestingly, we found an increase in collagen ﬁbril diameter only
in the co-culture of myoﬁbroblasts and MIL-4/IL-13 (M2a). This
suggests that the contribution of MIL-4/IL-13 to the tissue repair
process is through remodeling provisional wound tissue22. Our
recent report demonstrates that thicker collagen ﬁbrils could
activate ﬁbroblast differentiation via cell contractility71, advancing
the development of tissue scarring and ﬁbrosis. Alongside with
that, a prolonged presence of M2a might also contribute to
ﬁbrosis81,82. Overall, our results pinpoint the importance of the co-
culture model of ﬁbroblast and macrophages for biomimetic
wound healing, instead of ﬁbroblast monoculture. In addition, our
established biomimetic model can guide the development of well-
deﬁned high-throughput platforms for improving tissue healing
and anti-ﬁbrotic drugs testing, as well as other biomedical studies.
METHODS
Preparation of cell-embedded 3D collagen matrix
To prepare collagen solution, Rat Tail type I Collagen (Advanced BioMatrix,
Inc., CA, USA), 250 mM phosphate buffer (Merck KGaA, Munich, Germany),
and 0.1% acetic acid (Merck KGaA, Germany) were mixed on ice at a
concentration of 2 mg/ml, as previously published72. THP-1 monocytic cells
(AddexBio, CA, USA) were deposited and resuspended in the prepared
collagen solution and subsequently transferred onto a glutaraldehyde-
coated coverslip (VWR, Darmstadt, Germany), allowing covalent binding of
the collagen matrix via a lysine side chain18. The number of THP-1 cells
used was 1 × 105 cells per 3D collagen matrix. Collagen ﬁbrillation was
initiated immediately at 37 °C, 5% CO2 and 95% humidity for 45 min. Cell-
embedded matrices were then rinsed three times with PBS (Merck KGaA,
Germany).
Cell culture and macrophages differentiation
Cell-embedded matrices were cultured in RPMI-1640 media supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% sodium pyruvate, 0.01% of 2-
mercaptoethanol, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C, 5% CO2, and
95% humidity. Cell culture media and supplements were purchased from
Invitrogen, CA, USA.
THP-1 cells were differentiated into uncommitted macrophages using
300 nM phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA; Merck KGaA, Germany)) in
RPMI-1640 cell culture media without FBS supplement, according to the
established protocol18,40. After 6 h, differentiation media was removed,
cell-embedded matrices were washed with PBS, and rested for 24 h in
RPMI-1640 without FBS supplement nor PMA. Afterwards, cells were
activated for 48 h into two different macrophages subtypes M2IL-4/IL-13 by
treatment with 20 ng/ml interleukin 4 (IL-4; Biolegend, CA, USA) and 20 ng/
ml interleukin 13 (IL-13; Biolegend, USA), or into M2IL-10 by adding 20 ng/
ml interleukin 10 (IL-10; Biolegend, USA).
After successful cell activation, cells were imaged in a bright-ﬁeld mode
by a DMi8 S microscope using ×20 long distance objective (NA 0.4; Leica,
Fig. 8
Migration of ﬁbroblasts and myoﬁbroblasts into 3D collagen matrices. Cells were stained with Phalloidin conjugated with Alexa
Fluor-488 and DAPI, for visualization and quantiﬁcation of cell migration into 3D collagen matrices, respectively. Representative images of xz-
view of a ﬁbroblast and d myoﬁbroblast into 3D collagen matrices in mono- and co-culture with macrophages. Quantitative analysis of b, e
percentage of migrating cells and c, f maximum migration depth of ﬁbroblast and myoﬁbroblasts. Cells found >20 μm beneath the matrix
surface were counted as migrating cells. The maximum migration distance was deﬁned as the distance crossed by 10% of all cells. Data are
represented as mean ± SD; *signiﬁcance level of p ≤0.05 using a one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc analysis. The characters # and §
represent the signiﬁcance level of p ≤0.05 using a one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc analysis when compared to control, and
treated samples with TGF-β1 or IL-10, respectively. Three different positions of each matrix condition were analyzed. Experiments were
performed in four replicates.
J. Sapudom et al.
9
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021)  83 

Germany). Cell area and cell aspect ratio (cell length/cell width) were
analyzed using an automated image analysis toolbox38. At least 100 cells
were analyzed. The experiment was performed at least in triplicates.
Quantitative analysis of macrophage cell surface markers
To study the expression of cell surface markers, cells were harvested from
3D collagen matrices by digestion with 6 mg/ml type IV collagenase
(Worthington, NJ, USA) for 10 min at the standard cell culture conditions.
Prior cell staining, cells were incubated with Human TruStain FcX™-Fc
Receptor Blocking Solution (5 µl of blocking solution in 100 µl of staining
volume; Biolegend, USA) for 5 min at standard cell culture conditions. Cells
were then stained with mouse anti-human antibodies against CD14, CD68,
CD80, CD86, CD105, CD163, CD206, HLA-DR, and DRAQ7 (live/dead
staining dye) for 30 min at standard cell culture conditions. Antibodies and
DRAQ7 dye were diluted in cell culture medium at a ratio of 1:250. All
antibodies used in this study were purchased from Biolegend, USA and
listed with conjugated dye, clone, isotype, and catalog number in
Supplementary Table 1. Stained cells were analyzed using Attune NxT
Flow Cytometer equipped with an autosampler (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc,
CA, USA). Compensation settings were applied prior to running the
analysis. Data analysis was done using FlowJo software ((Becton, Dickinson
and Company, NJ, USA). Gating strategy and representative histogram plot
were depicted in Supplementary Fig. 2. gMFI of cell surface markers was
evaluated. Experiments were performed in four replicates.
Quantitative analysis of cytokine secretion proﬁle
To analyze cytokines secreted by macrophages, cell culture supernatants
were collected after cell activation. Bead-based multiplex immunoassay for
IL-4, IL-2, CXCL10 (IP-10), IL-1β, TNF-α, MCP-1 (CCL-2), IL-17A, IL-6, IL-10,
IFN-γ, IL-12p70, IL-8 (CXCL8), and TGF-β1 (Human essential immune
response panel; Biolegend, USA) was utilized to quantify cytokines
following instructions by the manufacturer. Samples were analyzed using
an Attune NxT Flow Cytometer equipped with autosampler (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc, USA). Data analysis was done by applying a ﬁve-parameter curve
ﬁtting algorithm using LEGENDplex™data analysis software (Biolegend,
USA). Experiments were performed in six replicates.
Co-culture with ﬁbroblasts and myoﬁbroblasts
For the co-culture with ﬁbroblasts, macrophages activation media was
removed, and matrices were washed three times with PBS prior to the
introduction of ﬁbroblasts/myoﬁbroblasts. 1 × 104 human primary dermal
ﬁbroblasts (ATCC, VA, USA) were seeded onto 3D collagen matrices with
and without embedded macrophages and cultured for an additional
3 days at standard cell culture conditions.
For
the
co-culture
with
myoﬁbroblasts,
human
primary
dermal
ﬁbroblasts (ATCC, USA) were pre-differentiated into myoﬁbroblasts by
culturing onto 2D tissue culture plate in the presence of 10 ng/ml of
recombinant human TGF-β1 (Biolegend, USA) for 3 days at standard cell
culture conditions. Pre-differentiated myoﬁbroblasts were quantiﬁed
regarding their speciﬁc markers, namely αSMA, Coll1a1, and EDA-FN to
ensure the differentiation (Supplementary Fig. 3). Afterwards, myoﬁbro-
blasts were detached using TrypLETM Express Enzyme (1×) with phenol red.
Similar to co-culture with ﬁbroblasts, macrophages activation media was
removed, and matrices were washed three times with PBS prior to the
introduction of myoﬁbroblasts. 1 × 104 pre-differentiated myoﬁbroblasts
were seeded onto 3D collagen matrices with and without embedded
macrophages. Co-culture of myoﬁbroblasts and each macrophage subtype
was performed for 3 days at standard cell culture conditions.
To verify the effect of IL-10 in myoﬁbroblast dedifferentiation, we
performed IL-10 blocking experiment in co-culture with M2IL-10, where
5 µg/ml of anti-human IL-10 antibody (aIL-10; Biolegend, USA) was
supplemented to the cell culture media. Cells were culture for 3 days at
standard cell culture condition prior to further analyses. All co-culture
experiments were performed in four replicates.
Cell staining and imaging
Cells were ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Biolegend, USA) for 10 min
and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X100 (Merck KGaA, Germany) for
10 min. Cells were washed three times with PBS after each step.
Afterwards, cells were stained with Phalloidin conjugated with Alexa Fluor
594 (dilution 1:250 in PBS; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and Hoechst-
33342 (dilution 1:10,000 in PBS; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). For staining
the αSMA, cells were blocked with 1% bovine serum albumin for 1 h at
room temperature, incubated with mouse anti-human αSMA (dilution
1:250 in PBS; Biolegend, USA) overnight at 4 °C, and incubated with goat
anti-mouse IgG conjugated with Alexa Fluor-488 (dilution 1:250 in PBS;
Invitrogen, USA) for 2 h. Cells were washed three times with PBS after each
step. Cell imaging was performed using an epi-ﬂuorescence microscope
(DMi8 S; Leica, Germany) using a ×20 long distance objective (NA 0.4; Leica,
Germany).
Gene expression analysis
Gene expression analysis was performed using an established protocol18.
Brieﬂy, RNA was extracted using TRIzol (Invitrogen, USA). The RNA
concentration and the ratio of absorbance at 260 and 280 nm of cDNA
were quantiﬁed using NanoDrop Spectrophotometers (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc, USA). Afterwards, RNA was converted into complementary DNA
(cDNA) using high-capacity cDNA reverse transcription kit (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The primers were synthesized from
Bioneer (Republic of Korea). Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)
was performed using the SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems,
USA) and was set as follows: denaturation for 5 min at 95 °C; 45 cycles of
denaturation (95 °C, 15 s), annealing under primer-speciﬁc conditions
(30 s), and target gene-speciﬁc extension (30 s at 72 °C). Fluorescence
signals were measured for 20 s at 72 °C. RPS26 gene was used as a
reference gene. All primer sequences with accession number are listed in
Fig. 9
Schematic illustration of the proposed M2-associated functions in initiation and termination phases of tissue repair in 3D
biomimetic wound-healing model. MIL-4/IL-13 macrophages control the initiation of tissue repair by modulating ﬁbroblast differentiation via
TGF-β1, while MIL-10 macrophages terminate the tissue repair by de-differentiating myoﬁbroblasts back into ﬁbroblasts via IL-10.
J. Sapudom et al.
10
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021)  83 
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute

Supplementary Table 2. To conﬁrm the speciﬁcity of the PCR products,
melting curve analysis was performed at the end of each run. Both cDNA
synthesis and qPCR were conducted using Stratagene Mx3005P (Agilent
Technologies, CA, USA). The relative expression levels were calculated
using the 2−ΔΔCT method. Experiments were undertaken in four replicates.
Topological and mechanical characterization of 3D collagen
matrix
Cell-embedded matrices were decellularized by osmotic shock through
incubation
with distilled water for
1 h,
as
previously
published83.
Afterwards, cell-free collagen matrices were analyzed to assess their
topological and mechanical properties. Brieﬂy, for topological analysis,
collagen matrices were stained with 50 µM of 5-(and-6)-carboxytetra-
methylrhodamine succinimidyl
ester (TAMRA-SE, Sigma-Aldrich)
and
visualized by confocal laser scanning microscope (cLSM) (SP8; Leica,
Germany) using ×40 water immersion objective (Leica, Germany), as
published elsewhere72. The cLSM stacked images were analyzed using a
custom-built MATLAB script (MATLAB 2019a; MathWorks, USA)84. For the
quantiﬁcation of pore size and ﬁbril diameter of collagen matrices, stacked
images of 10 different positions of each matrix condition were analyzed.
Mechanical properties of cell-free matrices were analyzed using non-
destructive rheological measurement using ElastoSensTM Bio (Rheolution,
Quebec, Canada)18. The topological and mechanical characterization were
performed in four replicates.
Cell migration into 3D collagen matrices
Fibroblast
migration
into
3D
collagen
matrices
was
quantitatively
determined by analyzing Hoechst-33342 ﬂuorescence signal from indivi-
dual cell nuclei, as previously reported72. Z-stack images with an interval of
5 µm were gathered using an epi-ﬂuorescence microscope with an
automatic scanning stage (DMi8 S; Leica, Germany) using a ×10 dry
objective (Leica, Germany). For each experiment, three different positions
of each cell culture condition were analyzed. The z-position of cell nuclei as
a function of migration distance was examined using a custom-built
MATLAB script (MATLAB R2019b; MathWorks Inc., USA). Since macro-
phages exhibit relatively less actin expression when compared to
ﬁbroblasts/myoﬁbroblasts,
we
use
this
phenomenon
to
distinguish
ﬁbroblasts for migration analysis. Cells located >20 µm below the collagen
matrix surface were classiﬁed and counted as migrated cells. Maximum
migration distance was deﬁned as the distance that was crossed by 10% of
all migrating cells. For visualization of cell migration into 3D collagen
matrices in Fig. 8, ﬂuorescence signal of Phalloidin conjugated with Alexa
Fluor-488 was used. Experiments were performed in four independent
replicates.
Statistical analysis
Experiments were performed at least in four replicates unless otherwise
stated. Error bars indicate standard deviation (SD). Levels of statistical
signiﬁcance were determined by a Mann–Whitney test or by a one-way
ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc analysis using GraphPad Prism 8
(GraphPad Software, USA). The signiﬁcance level was set at p < 0.05.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research
Reporting Summary linked to this article.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available
from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
CODE AVAILABILITY
Custom script was built to measure (1) collagen microarchitecture and (2) maximum
cellular migration depth into collagen hydrogels. Script 1 can be assessed here:
https://git.sc.uni-leipzig.de/pe695hoje/topology-analysis and 2 can be made available
upon reasonable request.
Received: 16 May 2021; Accepted: 29 October 2021;
REFERENCES
1. Tottoli, E. M. et al. Skin wound healing process and new emerging technologies
for skin wound care and regeneration. Pharmaceutics 12, 1–30. (2020).
2. Reinke, J. M. & Sorg, H. Wound repair and regeneration. Eur. Surg. Res. 49, 35–43
(2012).
3. Schultz, G. S. & Wysocki, A. Interactions between extracellular matrix and growth
factors in wound healing. Wound Repair Regen. 17, 153–162 (2009).
4. Leoni, G., Neumann, P. A., Sumagin, R., Denning, T. L. & Nusrat, A. Wound repair:
role of immune-epithelial interactions. Mucosal Immunol. 8, 959–968 (2015).
5. Wilkinson, H. N. & Hardman, M. J. Wound healing: cellular mechanisms and
pathological outcomes: cellular mechanisms of wound repair. Open Biol. 10,
200223 (2020).
6. Addis, R. et al. Fibroblast proliferation and migration in wound healing by phy-
tochemicals: evidence for a novel synergic outcome. Int. J. Med. Sci. 17,
1030–1042 (2020).
7. Clark, R. A. F. F., Lin, F., Greiling, D., An, J. & Couchman, J. R. Fibroblast invasive
migration into ﬁbronectin/ﬁbrin gels requires a previously uncharacterized der-
matan sulfate-CD44 proteoglycan. J. Invest. Dermatol. 122, 266–277 (2004).
8. Sapudom, J. et al. The interplay of ﬁbronectin functionalization and TGF-β1
presence on ﬁbroblast proliferation, differentiation and migration in 3D matrices.
Biomater. Sci. 3, 1291–1301 (2015).
9. Meng, X. M., Nikolic-Paterson, D. J. & Lan, H. Y. TGF-β: the master regulator of
ﬁbrosis. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 12, 325–338 (2016).
10. Clark, R. A. F., Lin, F., Greiling, D., An, J. & Couchman, J. R. Fibroblast invasive
migration into ﬁbronectin/ﬁbrin gels requires a previously uncharacterized der-
matan sulfate-CD44 proteoglycan. J. Invest. Dermatol. 122, 266–277 (2004).
11. Lohmann, N. et al. Glycosaminoglycan-based hydrogels capture inﬂammatory
chemokines and rescue defective wound healing in mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 9,
eaai9044 (2017).
12. Koehler, L. et al. Sulfated hyaluronan derivatives modulate TGF-β1: receptor
complex formation: possible consequences for TGF-β1 signaling. Sci. Rep. 7, 1210
(2017).
13. Finnson, K. W., Arany, P. R. & Philip, A. Transforming growth factor beta signaling
in cutaneous wound healing: lessons learned from animal studies. Adv. Wound
Care 2, 225–237 (2013).
14. Hinz, B. Formation and function of the myoﬁbroblast during tissue repair. J.
Invest. Dermatol. 127, 526–537 (2007).
15. Hinz, B., Celetta, G., Tomasek, J. J., Gabbiani, G. & Chaponnier, C. Alpha-smooth
muscle actin expression upregulates ﬁbroblast contractile activity. Mol. Biol. Cell
12, 2730–2741 (2001).
16. Tomasek, J. J., Gabbiani, G., Hinz, B., Chaponnier, C. & Brown, R. A. Myoﬁbroblasts
and mechano-regulation of connective tissue remodelling. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
3, 349–363 (2002).
17. Wipff, P. J., Rifkin, D. B., Meister, J. J. & Hinz, B. Myoﬁbroblast contraction activates
latent TGF-β1 from the extracellular matrix. J. Cell Biol. 179, 1311–1323 (2007).
18. Sapudom, J. et al. Collagen ﬁbril density modulates macrophage activation and
cellular functions during tissue repair. Bioengineering 7, 33 (2020).
19. Sohutskay, D. O., Buno, K. P., Tholpady, S. S., Nier, S. J. & Voytik-Harbin, S. L. Design
and biofabrication of dermal regeneration scaffolds: role of oligomeric collagen
ﬁbril density and architecture. Regen. Med. 15, 1295–1312 (2020).
20. Pohlers, D. et al. TGF-β and ﬁbrosis in different organs—molecular pathway
imprints. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1792, 746–756 (2009).
21. Darby, I. A., Zakuan, N., Billet, F. & Desmoulière, A. The myoﬁbroblast, a key cell in
normal and pathological tissue repair. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 73, 1145–1157 (2016).
22. Lech, M. & Anders, H. J. Macrophages and ﬁbrosis: how resident and inﬁltrating
mononuclear phagocytes orchestrate all phases of tissue injury and repair. Bio-
chim. Biophys. Acta 1832, 989–997 (2013).
23. Boniakowski, A. E., Kimball, A. S., Jacobs, B. N., Kunkel, S. L. & Gallagher, K. A.
Macrophage-mediated inﬂammation in normal and diabetic wound healing. J.
Immunol. 199, 17–24 (2017).
24. Novak, M. L. & Koh, T. J. Macrophage phenotypes during tissue repair. J. Leukoc.
Biol. 93, 875–881 (2013).
25. Krzyszczyk P., Schloss R., Palmer A. & Berthiaume F. The role of macrophages in
acute and chronic wound healing and interventions to promote pro-wound
healing phenotypes. Front. Physiol. 9, https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2018.00419
(2018).
26. Ploeger, D. T. et al. Cell plasticity in wound healing: paracrine factors of M1/M2
polarized macrophages inﬂuence the phenotypical state of dermal ﬁbroblasts.
Cell Commun. Signal. 11, 29 (2013).
J. Sapudom et al.
11
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021)  83 

27. Shapouri-Moghaddam, A. et al. Macrophage plasticity, polarization, and function
in health and disease. J. Cell Physiol. 233, 6425–6440 (2018).
28. Murray, P. J. et al. Macrophage activation and polarization: nomenclature and
experimental guidelines. Immunity 41, 14–20 (2014).
29. Makita, N., Hizukuri, Y., Yamashiro, K., Murakawa, M. & Hayashi, Y. IL-10 enhances
the phenotype of M2 macrophages induced by IL-4 and confers the ability to
increase eosinophil migration. Int. Immunol. 27, 131–141 (2015).
30. Parsa, R. et al. Adoptive transfer of immunomodulatory M2 macrophages pre-
vents type 1 diabetes in NOD mice. Diabetes 61, 2881–2892 (2012).
31. Loegl, J. et al. Hofbauer cells of M2a, M2b and M2c polarization may regulate
feto-placental angiogenesis. Reproduction 152, 447–455 (2016).
32. Baker, B. M. & Chen, C. S. Deconstructing the third dimension—how 3D culture
microenvironments alter cellular cues. J. Cell Sci. 125, 3015–3024 (2012).
33. Sapudom, J. & Pompe, T. Biomimetic tumor microenvironments based on col-
lagen matrices. Biomater. Sci. 6, 2009–2024 (2018).
34. Court, M., Malier, M. & Millet, A. 3D type I collagen environment leads up to a
reassessment of the classiﬁcation of human macrophage polarizations. Bioma-
terials 208, 98–109 (2019).
35. Ullm, F. et al. 3D scaffold-based macrophage ﬁbroblast coculture model reveals
IL-10 dependence of wound resolution phase. Adv. Biosyst. 4, 1900220 (2020).
36. Smithmyer, M. E., Sawicki, L. A. & Kloxin, A. M. Hydrogel scaffolds as in vitro
models to study ﬁbroblast activation in wound healing and disease. Biomater. Sci.
2, 634–650 (2014).
37. Sapudom, J., Rubner, S., Martin, S. & Pompe, T. Mimicking tissue boundaries by
sharp multiparameter matrix interfaces. Adv. Health. Mater. 5, 1861–1867 (2016).
38. Sapudom, J., Waschke, J., Franke, K., Hlawitschka, M. & Pompe, T. Quantitative
label-free single cell tracking in 3D biomimetic matrices. Sci. Rep. 7, 14135 (2017).
39. Stöger, J. L. et al. Distribution of macrophage polarization markers in human
atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis 225, 461–468 (2012).
40. Garcia-Sabaté, A. et al. Biomimetic 3D models for investigating the role of
monocytes and macrophages in atherosclerosis. Bioengineering 7, 1–20. (2020).
41. Wang, Lxun, Zhang, Sxi, Wu, Hjuan, Rong, Xlu & Guo, J. M2b macrophage
polarization and its roles in diseases. J. Leukoc. Biol. 106, 345–358 (2019).
42. Lee, J. et al. The MHC class II antigen presentation pathway in human monocytes
differs by subset and is regulated by cytokines. PLoS ONE 12, e0183594 (2017).
43. Sandanger, Ø. et al. IL-10 enhances MD-2 and CD14 expression in monocytes and
the proteins are increased and correlated in HIV-infected patients. J. Immunol.
182, 588–595 (2009).
44. Parker, D. CD80/CD86 signaling contributes to the proinﬂammatory response of
Staphylococcus aureus in the airway. Cytokine 107, 130–136 (2018).
45. Raggi, F. et al. Regulation of human macrophage M1-M2 polarization balance by
hypoxia and the triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-1. Front. Immu-
nol. 8, https://doi.org/10.3389/ﬁmmu.2017.01097 (2017).
46. Okeke E. B. & Uzonna J. E. The pivotal role of regulatory T cells in the regulation
of
innate
immune
cells.
Front.
Immunol.
10,
https://doi.org/10.3389/
ﬁmmu.2019.00680 (2019).
47. Romano, M., Fanelli, G., Albany, C. J., Giganti, G. & Lombardi, G. Past, present, and
future of regulatory T cell therapy in transplantation and autoimmunity. Front.
Immunol. 10, https://doi.org/10.3389/ﬁmmu.2019.00043 (2019).
48. Yu, X., Guo, C., Fisher, P. B., Subjeck, J. R. & Wang, X. Y. Scavenger receptors:
emerging roles in cancer biology and immunology. Adv. Cancer Res. 128,
309–364 (2015).
49. Iqbal, S. & Kumar, A. Characterization of in vitro generated human polarized
macrophages. J. Clin. Cell Immunol. 6, https://doi.org/10.4172/2155-9899.1000380
(2015).
50. Etzerodt, A. & Moestrup, S. K. CD163 and inﬂammation: biological, diagnostic, and
therapeutic aspects. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 18, 2352–2363 (2013).
51. Eming, S. A., Krieg, T. & Davidson, J. M. Inﬂammation in wound repair: molecular
and cellular mechanisms. J. Invest. Dermatol. 127, 514–525 (2007).
52. Xue, J. et al. Transcriptome-based network analysis reveals a spectrum model of
human macrophage activation. Immunity 40, 274–288 (2014).
53. Kanno, E. et al. Defect of interferon γ leads to impaired wound healing through
prolonged neutrophilic inﬂammatory response and enhanced MMP-2 activation.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 5657 (2019).
54. Li, J. et al. Effect of recombinant interleukin-12 on murine skin regeneration and
cell dynamics using in vivo multimodal microscopy. Biomed. Opt. Express 6, 4277
(2015).
55. Ding, J. & Tredget, E. E. The role of chemokines in ﬁbrotic wound healing. Adv.
Wound Care 4, 673–686 (2015).
56. Park, M. J. et al. IL-1-IL-17 signaling axis contributes to ﬁbrosis and inﬂammation
in two different murine models of systemic sclerosis. Front. Immunol. 9, https://
doi.org/10.3389/ﬁmmu.2018.01611 (2018).
57. Johnson, B. Z., Stevenson, A. W., Prêle, C. M., Fear, M. W. & Wood, F. M. The role of
IL-6 in skin ﬁbrosis and cutaneous wound healing. Biomedicines 8, 101 (2020).
58. Yang, Y. M. & Seki, E. TNFα in liver ﬁbrosis. Curr. Pathobiol. Rep. 3, 253–261 (2015).
59. Gong, D. et al. TGFβ signaling plays a critical role in promoting alternative
macrophage activation. BMC Immunol. 13, 31 (2012).
60. Shen, J. et al. IL-17 induces macrophages to M2-like phenotype via NF-κB. Cancer
Manag Res. 10, 4217–4228 (2018).
61. Takagi, N. et al. IL-17A promotes neutrophilic inﬂammation and disturbs acute
wound healing in skin. Exp. Dermatol. 26, 137–144 (2017).
62. Zizzo, G. & Cohen, P. L. IL-17 stimulates differentiation of human anti-
inﬂammatory macrophages and phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils in
response to IL-10 and glucocorticoids. J. Immunol. 190, 5237–5246 (2013).
63. Sato, Y., Ohshima, T. & Kondo, T. Regulatory role of endogenous interleukin-10 in
cutaneous inﬂammatory response of murine wound healing. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 265, 194–199 (1999).
64. Peranteau, W. H. et al. IL-10 overexpression decreases inﬂammatory mediators
and promotes regenerative healing in an adult model of scar formation. J. Invest.
Dermatol. 128, 1852–1860 (2008).
65. King, A., Balaji, S., Le, L. D., Crombleholme, T. M. & Keswani, S. G. Regenerative
wound healing: the role of interleukin-10. Adv. Wound Care 3, 315–323 (2014).
66. Sapudom, J. et al. Fibroblast fate regulation by time dependent TGF-β1 and IL-10
stimulation in biomimetic 3D matrices. Biomater. Sci. 5, 1858–1867 (2017).
67. LEASK, A. TGF- signaling and the ﬁbrotic response. FASEB J. 18, 816–827 (2004).
68. Hinz, B. et al. The myoﬁbroblast. Am. J. Pathol. 170, 1807–1816 (2007).
69. Ansorge, M. et al. Short-range cytokine gradients to mimic paracrine cell inter-
actions in vitro. J. Control Release 224, 59–68 (2016).
70. Wilgus, T. A. Inﬂammation as an orchestrator of cutaneous scar formation: a
review of the literature. Plast. Aesthetic Res. 2020, https://doi.org/10.20517/2347-
9264.2020.150 (2020).
71. Seo, B. R. et al. Collagen microarchitecture mechanically controls myoﬁbroblast
differentiation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 201919394 (2020).
72. Sapudom, J. et al. The phenotype of cancer cell invasion controlled by ﬁbril
diameter and pore size of 3D collagen networks. Biomaterials 52, 367–375 (2015).
73. Sapudom, J. et al. Fibril bending stiffness of 3D collagen matrices instructs
spreading and clustering of invasive and non-invasive breast cancer cells. Bio-
materials 193, 47–57 (2019).
74. Doyle, A. D., Carvajal, N., Jin, A., Matsumoto, K. & Yamada, K. M. Local 3D matrix
microenvironment regulates cell migration through spatiotemporal dynamics of
contractility-dependent adhesions. Nat. Commun. 6, 8720 (2015).
75. Hinz, B. & Lagares, D. Evasion of apoptosis by myoﬁbroblasts: a hallmark of
ﬁbrotic diseases. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 16, 11–31 (2020).
76. Balaji, S. et al. Interleukin-10-mediated regenerative postnatal tissue repair is
dependent on regulation of hyaluronan metabolism via ﬁbroblast-speciﬁc
STAT3 signaling. FASEB J. 31, 868–881 (2017).
77. Borthwick, L. A., Wynn, T. A. & Fisher, A. J. Cytokine mediated tissue ﬁbrosis.
Biochim Biophys. Acta 1832, 1049–1060 (2013).
78. Distler, J. H. W. et al. Shared and distinct mechanisms of ﬁbrosis. Nat. Rev.
Rheumatol. 15, 705–730 (2019).
79. Rønnov-Jessen, L. & Petersen, O. W. A function for ﬁlamentous alpha-smooth
muscle actin: retardation of motility in ﬁbroblasts. J. Cell Biol. 134, 67–80 (1996).
80. Auwerx, J. The human leukemia cell line, THP-1: a multifacetted model for the
study of monocyte-macrophage differentiation. Experientia 47, 22–31 (1991).
81. Feng, Y. et al. Direct and indirect roles of macrophages in hypertrophic scar
formation. Front. Physiol. 10, https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2019.01101 (2019).
82. Xu, X. et al. The role of macrophages in the formation of hypertrophic scars and
keloids. Burn Trauma 8, https://doi.org/10.1093/burnst/tkaa006 (2020).
83. Sapudom, J. et al. Biomimetic tissue models reveal the role of hyaluronan in
melanoma proliferation and invasion. Biomater. Sci. 8, 1405–1417 (2020).
84. Franke, K., Sapudom, J., Kalbitzer, L., Anderegg, U. & Pompe, T. Topologically
deﬁned composites of collagen types I and V as in vitro cell culture scaffolds. Acta
Biomater. 10, 2693–2702 (2014).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the support from New York University Abu Dhabi (NYUAD)
Faculty Research Fund (AD266). The authors would also like to acknowledge support
from NYUAD core technology platform. Experiments were performed using the
NYUAD Light Microscopy and Molecular and Cell Biology Platforms.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.S. and J.C.M.T. devised the project and the main conceptual ideas. J.S., S.K., W.K.E.M.,
and B.C.Q. performed the experiments. J.S., S.K., and A.G.-S. analyzed experimental
data. J.S. took the lead in writing the manuscript with input from the authors. All
authors provided critical feedback and helped shape the research, analysis, and
manuscript. J.C.M.T. supervised the project.
J. Sapudom et al.
12
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021)  83 
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute

COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41536-021-00193-5.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Jeremy C. M. Teo.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2021
J. Sapudom et al.
13
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021)  83

===== Sas2020_NatImmunol_CNS+Neutrophil+Inflammation =====
Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-020-00813-0
1Department of Neurology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA. 2The Neuroscience Research Institute, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, USA. 3Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 4Department of Computational Medicine and 
Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 5Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
6Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 7These authors contributed equally: Andrew R. Sas, Kevin S. Carbajal. 
✉e-mail: benjamin.segal@osumc.edu
A
xonal transection and neuronal death are pathological 
features of a wide range of CNS disorders, including trau-
matic brain or spinal cord injury (SCI), multiple sclerosis 
and motor neuron disease. They are also hallmarks of glaucoma 
and ischemia–reperfusion injury of the eye. Protracted disability in 
individuals with these conditions is due, in large part, to the poor 
regenerative capacity of the CNS, which includes the retina, optic 
nerves, brain, brainstem and spinal cord. There is a dire need for 
novel therapies that not only mitigate but also reverse chronic neu-
rological deficits. One potential strategy that has been proposed to 
promote neuroprotection and regeneration involves modulation 
of the local immune response to CNS damage. Studies in cutane-
ous wound healing, atherosclerosis and myocardial infarction have 
elucidated alternative immune pathways that most likely evolved 
to repair bystander tissue damage associated with the clearance 
of microbial infections1–3. Although CNS-infiltrating, proinflam-
matory leukocytes are detrimental in the context of multiple scle-
rosis and neuromyelitis optica4, and possibly Alzheimer’s disease 
and stroke5,6, there is growing evidence that alternatively activated, 
restorative leukocyte subsets and their products can improve clini-
cal outcomes in a range of neurological disorders7–10. A deeper 
understanding of the phenotypes of beneficial immune cells, their 
developmental pathways and mechanisms of action, could lead to 
the development of novel neurorestorative immunotherapies.
A classic model of immune-driven CNS axon regeneration 
involves crush injury to the murine optic nerve, resulting in exten-
sive neuronal loss and axonal transection, which is mitigated by 
intraocular (i.o.) injection of zymosan, a fungal cell wall extract11,12. 
Similarly to white matter tracts in the brain and spinal cord, tran-
sected axons in the optic nerve fail to undergo long-distance regen-
eration. However, i.o. zymosan injection, at the time of optic nerve 
crush (ONC) injury or up to 3 d afterwards, induces vitreal inflam-
mation associated with rescue of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs, the 
neurons that give rise to the axons in the optic nerve) from death, and 
RGC axon regeneration. We previously showed that β-1,3-glucan, 
a cognate ligand of the innate immune pattern recognition recep-
tor dectin-1, is the active ingredient in zymosan responsible for its 
pro-regenerative properties in this model12. We detected dectin-1 on 
eye-infiltrating myeloid cells, as well as on retina-resident microg-
lia and dendritic cells (DCs), in i.o. zymosan-injected mice, but not 
on RGCs, Muller cells, oligodendrocytes or astrocytes. The cellu-
lar and molecular mediators that trigger neurorepair downstream 
of dectin-1 signaling are poorly understood. In the current study, 
we identify a unique granulocyte with characteristics of an imma-
ture neutrophil that accumulated in the vitreous fluid in response 
to i.o. zymosan and exerted neuroprotective and axonogenic effects 
that are, in part, secondary to the secretion of a cocktail of growth 
factors. We found that the same myeloid cell subset was capable of 
driving axon regeneration in the spinal cord, demonstrating its rel-
evance across CNS compartments. A human cell line with charac-
teristics of immature neutrophils also exhibited neuroregenerative 
capacity, suggesting that our observations might be translatable to 
the clinic.
Results
Intraocular Ly6Glo neutrophils drive RGC axon regrowth. We 
used flow cytometric analysis to determine the cellular composition 
of infiltrates that accumulated in the posterior chamber of the eye 
following i.o. zymosan injection and ONC injury (gating strategy 
is illustrated in Extended Data Fig. 1a). Vitreous fluid was serially 
collected until day 14 after ONC injury, a standard time point when 
optic nerves are harvested to assess axon regeneration. Myeloid 
cells (neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages) were predominant 
at every time point (Fig. 1a). Neutrophils outnumbered all other 
leukocyte subsets from days 1–5 following i.o. zymosan injection, 
previously established as the critical time window for instigating 
A new neutrophil subset promotes CNS neuron 
survival and axon regeneration
Andrew R. Sas1,2,3,7, Kevin S. Carbajal3,7, Andrew D. Jerome1,2, Rajasree Menon   4, Choya Yoon5, 
Ashley L. Kalinski   5, Roman J. Giger5,6 and Benjamin M. Segal   1,2,3 ✉
Transected axons typically fail to regenerate in the central nervous system (CNS), resulting in chronic neurological disabil-
ity in individuals with traumatic brain or spinal cord injury, glaucoma and ischemia–reperfusion injury of the eye. Although 
neuroinflammation is often depicted as detrimental, there is growing evidence that alternatively activated, reparative leuko-
cyte subsets and their products can be deployed to improve neurological outcomes. In the current study, we identify a unique 
granulocyte subset, with characteristics of an immature neutrophil, that had neuroprotective properties and drove CNS axon 
regeneration in vivo, in part via secretion of a cocktail of growth factors. This pro-regenerative neutrophil promoted repair in 
the optic nerve and spinal cord, demonstrating its relevance across CNS compartments and neuronal populations. Our findings 
could ultimately lead to the development of new immunotherapies that reverse CNS damage and restore lost neurological func-
tion across a spectrum of diseases.
Nature Immunology | VOL 21 | December 2020 | 1496–1505 | www.nature.com/natureimmunology
1496

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
RGC rescue and axonal regeneration11. Lymphocytes and DCs were 
minor constituents of the vitreal infiltrates, irrespective of the day 
of harvest. Intraocular zymosan-driven RGC axon regeneration was 
unimpaired in Rag1−/− mice, indicating that mature T and B cells are 
dispensable in this model (Extended Data Fig. 1b).
To assess the contribution of neutrophils, we attempted to impede 
their entry into the posterior chamber of the eye with a block-
ing antiserum specific for CXCR2, the predominant chemokine 
receptor expressed by mature murine neutrophils. Unexpectedly, 
systemic administration of anti-CXCR2, from the day of ONC 
injury/i.o. zymosan injection onward, significantly enhanced RGC 
survival and axon regeneration (Fig. 1b–e). The augmentation of 
axonal regeneration by administration of anti-CXCR2 was sus-
tained through day 28 following ONC injury/i.o. zymosan injec-
tion (Extended Data Fig. 1c), with some axons reaching the optic 
chiasm (data not shown). Flow cytometric analyses revealed that 
i.o. neutrophil accumulation was delayed, but not prevented, in 
the cohort treated with anti-CXCR2, such that the number of neu-
trophils peaked on day 5 rather than days 1–3 (Fig. 1a). The peak 
of i.o. monocyte and DC accumulation was delayed until day 7. 
Furthermore, the characteristics of the infiltrating leukocyte popu-
lation were altered. Intraocular inflammatory cells, isolated between 
days 3 through 7 after ONC injury/i.o. zymosan and anti-CXCR2 
treatment, contained an expanded subpopulation of CD11b+ 
myeloid cells that expressed relatively low amounts of Ly6G and 
Ly6B and had relatively high expression of CD14, when compared 
with i.o. infiltrates isolated from the mice treated with control sera 
(Fig. 2a). The majority of these Ly6Glo CD14hi cells had ring-shaped 
nuclei and were CD101lo–neg, indicative of an immature neutrophil 
phenotype (Fig. 2a,b). In contrast, their Ly6GhiCD14low counterparts 
(the most populous subset in the control group), universally had 
segmented nuclei and were CD101hi, consistent with conventional 
mature neutrophils. Both Ly6GloCD14hi and Ly6GhiCD14low cells 
possessed cytoplasmic granules and expressed comparable amounts 
of elastase and myeloperoxidase (Fig. 2b). Intraocular Ly6G+ cells, 
isolated 5 d following ONC injury/i.o. zymosan and anti-CXCR2 
treatment, directly stimulated the neurite outgrowth of primary 
RGCs in vitro (Fig. 2c). The frequency of Ly6GloCD101lo–neg myeloid 
cells was elevated in the blood and spleen of the cohort treated 
with anti-CXCR2, suggesting that the combination of i.o. zymosan 
administration and CXCR2 blockade accelerates mobilization of 
immature neutrophils from the bone marrow to the circulation, 
from where they are recruited to the eye (Extended Data Fig. 2; data 
not shown). These results implicate a subpopulation of immature 
neutrophils in i.o. zymosan-induced optic nerve axon regeneration.
Transcriptome profiling of intraocular Ly6Glo cells. For in-depth 
analysis, we purified Ly6G+ cells from the vitreous fluid of mice 
5 d following i.o. zymosan injection and treatment with either 
anti-CXCR2 or control sera. Whole-transcriptome analysis with 
single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) was then performed. 
Three distinct clusters were observed in the single-cell datasets 
a
b
Time (d)
Immune cells per eye (×105)
0
1
2
3
4
1
3
5
7
10 14
0
1.6
Survival (%)
0
10
20
30
40
50
PBS
Zym
PBS
Zym
Time (d)
0
1
2
3
4
1
3
5
7
10 14
0
NRS
αCXCR2
Neutrophils
Monocytes
T cells
B cells
DCs
d
PBS
+ NRS
PBS
+ αCXCR2
Zym
+ NRS
Zym
+ αCXCR2
Control
c
e
60
i.o.
i.p.
PBS
NRS
Zym
NRS
PBS
Zym
αCXCR2
αCXCR2
Number of axons
Distance from crush site (mm)
0
200
400
600
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
800
P = 0.017
P = 0.0005
P < 0.0001
#
##
###
###
###
****
****
********
********
****
****
****
****
****
****
***
***
** ***
##
αCXCR2
NRS
PBS + NRS
PBS + αCXCR2
Zym + NRS
Zym + αCXCR2
*
*
*
*
Fig. 1 | Zymosan-driven regrowth of optic nerve axons is enhanced by 
blockade of eye-infiltrating CXCR2+ neutrophils. a–e, Mice with ONC 
injury received a single i.o. injection of zymosan or PBS on day 0 and 
i.p. injections of either normal rabbit serum (NRS) control or αCXCR2 
antiserum every other day starting on day 0. a, The cellular composition 
of vitreal infiltrates collected at serial time points from zymosan-injected 
eyes in the NRS or αCXCR2 treatment groups (n = 10 eyes per group at 
each time point). Data are from one experiment representative of seven 
independent experiments with similar results. b–e, Optic nerves and 
retinas were harvested on day 14. b, The density of GAP-43+ regenerating 
axons in longitudinal optic nerve sections at serial distances from the 
crush site (n = 12 nerves per group); scale bar, 200 μm. Data are from one 
experiment representative of three independent experiments. c, Images 
are representative of optic nerves from each group in one experiment 
from b. d, The frequency of viable BRN3a+ RGC neurons in whole mounts, 
normalized to healthy retinas (n = 12 retinas per group). Data are from one 
experiment representative of three independent experiments. e, Images are 
representative of retinal whole mounts from each group in one experiment 
from d. ‘Control’ indicates a healthy, naive retina; scale bar, 100 μm. In 
a, b and d, data are shown as the mean ± s.e.m.; statistical significance 
was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. 
*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and ****P < 0.0001, compared with i.o. 
PBS/i.p. NRS group; #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01 and ###P < 0.001, compared with 
i.o. zymosan/i.p. NRS group.
Nature Immunology | VOL 21 | December 2020 | 1496–1505 | www.nature.com/natureimmunology
1497

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
αCXCR2
a
NRS
αCXCR2
NRS
Ly6G
CD14
Ly6B
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
MFI
MFI
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
0
20
40
60
80
100
% CD101+
b
P = 0.012
CD101
c
Longest neurite (µm)
16
8
4
1
No tx
CNTF
Zym
NRS
Nϕ
αCXCR2
Nϕ
No tx
CNTF
Zym
MPO
Elastase
αCXCR2
NRS
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
0
200
400
600
800
2
32
64
128
256
0
20
40
60
Count
80
100
0
103
104
0
103
104 105
0 103
–103
104
105
0 103
–103
104
105
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
P = 0.0003
P = 0.014
P = 0.012
NS
NS
P < 0.0001
P < 0.0001
P = 0.001
P = 0.03
NRS Nϕ
αCXCR2 Nϕ
0 103
–103
104 105
0
103
104 105
Fig. 2 | Treatment of mice with αCXCR2 antiserum, starting on the day of i.o. zymosan injection, skews eye-infiltrating neutrophils toward an 
immature phenotype. a–c, Mice were injected i.o. with zymosan on day 0 of ONC injury and i.p. with either αCXCR2 (red) or NRS (blue) on days 0, 
2 and 4. Inflammatory cells were isolated from the vitreous fluid on day 5. a,b, Surface expression of myeloid cell markers. a, Upper, representative 
histograms. Lower, geometric mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of Ly6G (n = 5 mice per group), CD14 (n = 5 mice per group), Ly6B (n = 5 mice per group), 
myeloperoxidase (MPO; n = 3 mice per group) and elastase (n = 3 mice per group) on Ly6G+-gated cells and the percentage of Ly6G+-gated cells that 
were CD101+ (n = 8 mice per group). Each symbol represents data obtained from a single mouse. Data are from one experiment representative of three 
independent experiments. Statistical significance was determined by a two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test. b, Cytospins of purified vitreal Ly6G+ cells, 
stained with Wright-Giemsa solution. Top: scale bar, 10 μm. Bottom: scale bar, 6 μm. Arrows point to granules. c, Mean length of the longest neurite grown 
by primary RGCs, following 24-h co-culture with i.o. Ly6G+ neutrophils (Nϕ) that were purified from the NRS or αCXCR2 treatment groups. RGCs were 
cultured with recombinant CNTF as a positive control or with particulate zymosan (zym) or medium alone (no tx) as negative controls (n = 200 RGCs per 
condition). Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. Right, representative images; scale bar, 20 μm. 
a–c, Data are shown as the mean ± s.e.m. NS, not significant.
Nature Immunology | VOL 21 | December 2020 | 1496–1505 | www.nature.com/natureimmunology
1498

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
a
c
Relative expression
NRS
Arg1 (FITC)
Ly6G (APC-Cy7)
2.8%
12.4%
d
b
αCXCR2 cluster 1
αCXCR2 cluster 3
NRS cluster 1
NRS cluster 3
Ly6g
Sell
S100a8
Cxcr2
Cd101
E2f8
Cdk1
Cdk4
Topbp1
Mature
markers
Immature
markers
αCXCR2 cluster 1
αCXCR2 cluster 3
NRS cluster 1
NRS cluster 3
Classical activation
markers
Alternative activation
markers
Tnf
Icam1
Fas
Il1b
Ccl3
CD24a
Itga6
Tgfb1
Arg1
Mrc1
Igf1
Ccl5
 Arg1+ %
NRS
0
5
10
15
20
0
0
105
105
104
104
103
103
–103
–103
NRS
1
2
3
62.2
27.2
10.6
0
5
10
15
20
0
5
10
15
20
UMAP_2
UMAP_1
αCXCR2
1
2
3
55.6
7.6
36.8
0
5
10
15
20
UMAP_1
10
20
UMAP_2
1
2
3
0
5
10
15
20
UMAP_2
0
5
10
15
20
UMAP_1
Arg1
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
0
5
10
15
20
UMAP_1
10
20
UMAP_2
0
Arg1
1
2
3
4
5
Arg1
NRS
500
400
300
200
100
0
P = 0.0012
NRS
50
40
30
20
10
0
IL4ra
P = 0.0109
NRS αCXCR2
5
4
3
2
1
0
MRC
P = 0.0078
P = 0.0003
αCXCR2
αCXCR2
αCXCR2
αCXCR2
–1
–0.5
0.5
0
Column
z-score
1
Fig. 3 | Neuroregenerative neutrophils have characteristics of alternatively activated cells. a–d, Mice with ONC injury were injected i.o. with zymosan 
on day 0 and i.p. with αCXCR2 or NRS on days 0, 2 and 4. Ly6G+ cells were purified from i.o. infiltrates on day 5. a,b, Single-cell analysis of pooled i.o. 
Ly6G+ cells from the NRS or αCXCR2 treatment groups using 10x Genomics (n = 5 mice per group). a, Uniform manifold approximation and projection 
(UMAP) visualizations showing 5,909 cells (left, NRS treatment group) and 4,844 cells (right, αCXCR2 treatment group) by cluster. Pie charts indicate 
the percentage of cells in each cluster. Lower, feature plots showing cluster-specific expression of arginase-1 (Arg1). b, Heat maps depicting the scaled 
expression of genes related to neutrophil maturation (left) and classical or alternative activation markers (right). c, RNA was extracted from Ly6G+ cells 
purified from the i.o. infiltrates of individual mice. Arg1, Il4Ra and CD206/mannose receptor (MRC) transcripts were quantified by qPCR and normalized 
to β-actin (n = 4 mice per group). Data are from one experiment representative of three independent experiments. d, Representative flow cytometric dot 
plots showing intracellular Arginase-1 protein expression in Ly6G+-gated cells. Right, percentage of Ly6G+ cells that are Arginase-1+ (n = 5 mice per group). 
Data are from one experiment representative of two independent experiments. FITC, fluorescein isothiocyanate. c,d, Each symbol represents the results 
obtained from an individual mouse. Data are the mean ± s.e.m. Statistical significance was determined by a two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test.
Nature Immunology | VOL 21 | December 2020 | 1496–1505 | www.nature.com/natureimmunology
1499

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
derived from the groups treated with either the anti-CXCR2 or con-
trol sera, with profiles indicative of immature (cluster 3), intermedi-
ate (cluster 2) or mature (cluster 1) stages of neutrophil development 
(Fig. 3a,b). Consistent with our flow cytometric data, the percentage 
of i.o. Ly6G+ cells that fell within the immature neutrophil cluster 
was more than threefold higher in mice treated with anti-CXCR2 
compared to mice treated with control sera (36.8% versus 10.6%, 
respectively). These results confirm that RGC axon regrowth is 
associated with the accumulation of immature neutrophils close to 
the site of nerve injury.
Zymosan-induced Ly6Glo cells are alternatively activated. Novel 
subpopulations of neutrophils were recently described in animal 
models of cancer, myocardial infarction and infection. ‘N2’ neu-
trophils, which express arginase-1, vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGFα) and bear a ring-shaped nucleus, were initially 
identified in intratumoral infiltrates13. These cells are distinct 
from conventional ‘N1’ neutrophils, which express proinflam-
matory cytokines and chemokines and bear a multi-segmented 
nucleus. Enrichment of N2 neutrophils in the tumor bed is asso-
ciated with impaired antitumor immunity and accelerated tumor 
growth. Unconventional neutrophils with features similar to 
N2 cells have subsequently been described in animal models of 
helminth and staphylococcus infection, stroke and myocardial 
infarction14–16. In all of these models, unconventional neutrophils 
are characterized by ring-shaped nuclei, as well as expression of 
genes encoding type 2 cytokines (Il4, Il5 and/or Il13 mRNA) and 
genes traditionally associated with alternatively activated ‘M2’ 
macrophages (such as Arg1/arginase-1, Mrc1/mannose receptor 
(CD206), Il4ra/interleukin(IL)-4 receptor α-chain, Itga6/VLA-6, 
Tgfb1/transforming growth factor-β1, Igf1/insulin-like growth 
factor 1 and Ccl5). However, the ability of alternatively activated 
neutrophil subsets to induce neuroprotection and neuroregenera-
tion has yet to be demonstrated.
Reminiscent of the ‘N2’ and the other alternatively activated 
neutrophils described above, Ly6Glo cells, purified from the vitre-
ous fluid of mice on day 5 after ONC injury/i.o. zymosan/αCXCR2 
treatment, exhibited elevated abundance of transcripts for Arg1, 
Mrc1 and Il4ra relative to their Ly6Ghi counterparts (Fig. 3c). 
Furthermore, a significant percentage of those cells expressed 
arginase-1 protein (Fig. 3d). Consistent with these results, 
scRNA-seq of i.o. Ly6G+ cells revealed that transcripts for Arg1 and 
Mrc1, as well as Itga6, Tgfb1, Igf1 and Ccl5, were enriched in the 
immature neutrophil subset (cluster 3) that was expanded in the 
cohort treated with αCXCR2 (Fig. 3a,b and Extended Data Fig. 3). 
Thus, zymosan-induced Ly6Glo neutrophils have characteristics of 
an alternatively activated myeloid cell.
Donor Ly6Glo cells promote RGC survival and axon regrowth. 
We used an adoptive transfer approach to directly evaluate the neu-
roprotective and pro-regenerative potential of zymosan-elicited 
Ly6Glo neutrophils in vivo. The low yield of Ly6Glo cells sorted 
from vitreal infiltrates of mice injected with i.o. zymosan prohib-
its adoptive transfer experiments with those cells. As an alterna-
tive approach, we isolated Ly6G+ cells from the peritoneal cavities 
of naive mice at serial time points following intraperitoneal (i.p.) 
injection of zymosan, and characterized them by flow cytomet-
ric analysis and quantitative PCR with reverse transcription 
(RT–qPCR). We found that neutrophils isolated on day 3 after i.p. 
zymosan injection (3 d Nϕ) simulated a number of the properties 
of the pro-regenerative neutrophils harvested from the eyes of the 
i.o. zymosan/anti-CXCR2 treatment group, including relatively low 
expression of cell surface markers Ly6G and CD101, high expres-
sion of cell surface CD14 and high expression of Arg1, Il4ra and 
Mrc1 transcripts (Fig. 4a,b). In contrast, neutrophils isolated from 
the peritoneal cavity of mice 4 h following i.p. zymosan injection 
(4 h Nϕ) resembled conventional mature neutrophils in that they 
were Ly6GhiCD14lowCD101hi and expressed undetectable to low 
amounts of Arg1, Il4ra and Mr1c transcripts.
a
3 d Nϕ
4 h Nϕ
b
c
Relative expression
MFI
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
CD101+ %
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
10
20
30
40
0
50
100
150
200
P = 0.015
Ly6G
0
20
40
60
Count
80
100
0
103 104 105
0
103 104 105
0
103 104
CD14
0
20
40
60
80
100
CD101
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
6
8
MRC
Number of axons
Distance from crush site (mm)
0
100
200
300
400
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
**
**
#
**
#
**
**
##
*
#
*
#
500
PBS
BM Nϕ
4 h Nϕ
3 d Nϕ
**
##
P = 0.004
P = 0.003
Il4ra
Arg1
P = 0.0039
P = 0.0002
P = 0.0003
Fig. 4 | CD14+Ly6Glo cells, purified 3 d following i.p. zymosan injection, are 
neuroregenerative. Peritoneal cells were harvested via lavage 4 h (blue) 
or 3 d (red) following i.p. zymosan injection. a, Cell surface expression of 
indicated molecules on Ly6G+-gated cells. Upper, representative histograms. 
Lower, geometric MFI of Ly6G and CD14; the percentage of cells that were 
CD101+ (n = 5 mice per group). Data are from one experiment representative 
of three independent experiments. b, RNA was extracted from purified 
Ly6G+ cells. Expression levels of Arg1, IL4Ra and MRC were measured by 
qPCR and values were normalized to Actβ (n = 5 mice per group). Data are 
from one experiment representative of three independent experiments. 
c, Ly6G+ cells (NΦ), purified from zymosan-induced i.p. infiltrates, were 
adoptively transferred into the eyes of mice on days 0 and 3 after ONC 
injury. For negative controls, separate groups of mice were injected i.o. with 
PBS or naive BM Nϕ according to the same dosing regimen. Optic nerves 
were harvested 14 d later and analyzed by GAP-43 immunohistochemistry. 
The density of regenerating axons in optic nerve sections at serial distances 
from the crush site (n = 10 nerves per group) is shown. Data are from one 
experiment representative of four independent experiments. Statistical 
significance was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s 
post hoc test (*P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01, compared with PBS; #P < 0.05 
and ##P < 0.01, compared with 4 h NΦ). a,b, Each symbol represents data 
obtained using inflammatory cells pooled from both eyes of a single mouse. 
Error bars depict the mean ± s.e.m. for all datasets.
Nature Immunology | VOL 21 | December 2020 | 1496–1505 | www.nature.com/natureimmunology
1500

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
When injected into the eyes of wild-type mice with ONC injury, 
3 d Nϕ induced robust RGC survival and axonal regeneration, 
while 4 h Nϕ were less effective, and naive bone marrow neutro-
phils (BM Nϕ) had no significant impact (Fig. 4c, Extended Data 
Fig. 4a and data not shown). In mice genetically deficient in the 
zymosan receptors dectin-1 and TLR2, 3 d Nϕ promoted RGC 
axon regeneration, ruling out the possibility that free zymosan 
particles (either inadvertently cotransferred with donor neutro-
phils or released into the vitreous fluid by dying donor neutro-
phils) are responsible for their pro-regenerative effect (Extended 
Data Fig. 4b). Intraocular transfer of 3 d Nϕ was still capable of 
triggering RGC axon regeneration when delayed by 6 h (and to 
some extent, up to 12 h) from ONC injury, demonstrating a thera-
peutic window that extends beyond the time of the acute traumatic 
event (Extended Data Fig. 5a).
Intraocular injection of 3 d Nϕ (and, to a lesser extent, PBS) 
resulted in upregulation of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) 
and Iba-1 staining in retinal cross-sections obtained from mice 
with ONC injury (Extended Data Fig. 4c). Enhanced Iba-1 stain-
ing is consistent with activation of retinal microglia, which we pre-
viously reported occurs in response to ONC injury alone12. Both 
GFAP and Iba-1 expression waned by 14 d after transfer and, at that 
point, were comparable between the groups injected with 3 d Nϕ 
versus PBS. Transfer of 3 d Nϕ triggered secondary recruitment of 
host monocytes from the periphery via a CCR2-dependent path-
way (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Alternatively activated neutrophils 
have been shown to polarize monocyte/macrophages toward a 
reparative and/or pro-resolving phenotype that enhances heal-
ing in animal models of helminth infection, myocardial infarc-
tion and acetaminophen-induced liver injury14,17,18. However, 3 d 
Nϕ promoted axon regeneration in Ccr2−/− hosts, independent of 
i.o. monocyte/ macrophage infiltration (Extended Data Fig. 4e,f). 
This finding is consistent with the ability of highly purified 3 d 
Nϕ to directly induce neurite outgrowth of RGCs in culture, in 
the absence of other myeloid cell subsets (Fig. 5a). When 3 d Nϕ 
were added to dissociated RGCs 4 h after the neurons were plated, 
they were still able to induce neurite outgrowth, providing fur-
ther evidence that neurons remain responsive to the regenerative 
properties of alternatively activated neutrophils in a therapeutic 
paradigm (Extended Data Fig. 5b). Collectively, these data dem-
onstrate that zymosan-modulated Ly6Glo neutrophils directly 
stimulate the regeneration of transected optic nerve axons in vivo 
and are capable of doing so after a substantial delay from the time 
of acute injury.
Ly6Glo neutrophils secrete an array of growth factors. Conditioned 
culture medium harvested from 3 d Nϕ (3 d NCM) promoted neu-
rite outgrowth of primary RGCs, indicating that soluble factors are, 
at least in part, responsible for the pro-regenerative properties of 
3 d Nϕ (Fig. 5a). The neurite growth-promoting effect of NCM was 
heat sensitive, suggesting that proteins were responsible for this 
activity. We performed a multiplexed antibody array assay to screen 
NCM for a panel of candidate growth factors. Nerve growth factor 
(NGF) and IGF-1 were highly elevated in NCM versus uncondi-
tioned medium (Extended Data Fig. 6a). High expression levels of 
NGF and IGF-1 by 3 d Nϕ, in comparison to 4 h Nϕ, were corrobo-
rated by RT–qPCR and ELISA (Fig. 5b). NGF and IGF-1 proteins 
were readily detectable in the vitreous fluid on days 3 and 5 follow-
ing i.o. zymosan injection, and their abundance was enhanced by 
the administration of αCXCR2 antiserum (Fig. 5c).
Neutralization of either NGF or IGF-1 with antagonistic anti-
bodies mitigated NCM-driven RGC neurite outgrowth in vitro 
(Fig. 5d). Neutralization of both growth factors together had a 
greater impact than blocking either one alone. Similarly, i.o. admin-
istration of either anti-NGF or anti-IGF-1 neutralizing antibody, 
at the time of 3 d Nϕ adoptive transfer, impeded RGC protection 
and axon regeneration in vivo; administration of both antibodies 
had an additive effect (Fig. 5e,f). Conversely, recombinant NGF and 
IGF-1 acted in a collaborative fashion to promote RGC neurite out-
growth in vitro and RGC axon regeneration in vivo (Extended Data 
Fig. 6b,c). These findings indicate that zymosan-modulated Ly6Glo 
neutrophils promote neuronal survival and axon regeneration, in 
part, via secretion of NGF and IGF-1.
Ly6Glo cells drive repair in the spinal cord. To determine whether 
the neuroregenerative effects of Ly6Glo neutrophils are limited to 
RGCs and the microenvironment of the eye, or are more broadly 
applicable, we assessed their effects on dorsal root ganglia (DRG) 
cells. Importantly, 3 d Nϕ stimulated axon outgrowth of primary 
DRG neurons when added at the initiation of culture or up to 8 h 
later, whereas naive bone marrow neutrophils and 4 h Nϕ were 
ineffectual (Fig. 6a; Extended Data Fig. 5c). The CM of 3 d Nϕ also 
induced neurite outgrowth of DRG (Fig. 6a). To test the regenera-
tive potential of alternatively activated neutrophils in the setting 
of traumatic SCI, we injected 3 d Nϕ, 4 h Nϕ, naive bone marrow 
neutrophils or PBS alone into sciatic nerves 5 d before laceration 
of spinal cord dorsal columns at the T4 level. For a positive con-
trol, a separate group of mice was subjected to conditioning injury 
(that is, sciatic nerve crush) 5 d before SCI, which is a widely used 
Fig. 5 | CD14+Ly6Glo cells induce RGC axon outgrowth, in part, via secretion of growth factors. a–d, Ly6G+ cells were purified from peritoneal lavage 
fluid that was collected 4 h (4 h NΦ) or 3 d (3 d NΦ) following i.p. zymosan injection. a, 3 d NΦ, 4 h NΦ, 3 d NCM or heat-shocked conditioned medium 
of 3 d NΦ (HS NCM) was added to primary RGC cultures, and neurite outgrowth was measured 24 h later. RGCs were cultured with recombinant CNTF 
or particulate zymosan as positive and negative controls, respectively. Each circle represents the mean neurite length of 200 RGCs counted in one 
experiment; data are representative of three independent experiments. Statistical significance determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post 
hoc test. Right, representative images. b, Upper, NGF and IGF-1 mRNA levels in 4 h or 3 d NΦ, quantified using qPCR and normalized to Actβ. Lower, NGF 
and IGF-1 protein levels, measured in the CM of 4 h or 3 d NΦ by ELISA. c, NGF and IGF-1 protein levels, measured by ELISA, in vitreous fluid collected on 
day 5 following ONC injury and i.o. zymosan or PBS injection. Mice were injected i.p. with either NRS or αCXCR2 on days 0, 2 and 4 after ONC injury. b,c, 
Statistical significance was determined by a two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test (n = 3 mice per group). One of two experiments is shown. d, Primary RGCs 
were cultured with the CM of 3 d NΦ in the absence or presence of neutralizing antibodies against NGF and/or IGF-1 or isotype-matched control antibodies. 
Neurite length was measured 24 h later. Each symbol represents the mean neurite length of 100 RGCs counted in one independent experiment; n = 10 
experiments. Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. e,f, Purified 3 d NΦ were adoptively transferred, 
with or without neutralizing antibodies against NGF and/or IGF-1 or isotype-matched control antibodies, into the eyes of mice with ONC injury, as in Fig. 
4c. A negative control group was injected with PBS alone. Optic nerves and retinas were harvested 14 d later. e, Density of regenerating axons in optic nerve 
sections at serial distances from the crush site (n = 10 nerves per group). Data are from one experiment representative of three independent experiments. 
Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and ****P < 0.0001, 
compared with PBS; #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, ###P < 0.001 and ####P < 0.0001, compared with αNGF + αIGF-1). f, Frequency of viable BRN3a+ RGCs in whole 
mounts, normalized to healthy retina (n = 10 retinas per group). Data are from one experiment representative of two independent experiments. Statistical 
significance was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. a, d and f: *, #P < 0.05, **, ##P < 0.01, ***, ###P < 0.001 and ****, 
####P < 0.0001, δP = 0.058. a–f, Error bars depict the mean ± s.e.m.
Nature Immunology | VOL 21 | December 2020 | 1496–1505 | www.nature.com/natureimmunology
1501

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
method for priming the regeneration of severed dorsal column 
axons19. Spinal cords were harvested from all groups on day 52 
after SCI and subjected to immunohistological analysis. We found 
severed dorsal column axons retracted proximally, away from the 
injury site, in the groups of mice that had been injected in the 
sciatic nerves with either vehicle or bone marrow neutrophils 
(Fig. 6b). Administration of 4 h Nϕ prevented axonal retraction 
but did not trigger regeneration past the injury site. Conversely, 
severed axons regrew rostrally in the mice that had been injected 
with 3 d Nϕ, passing beyond the injury site by a distance com-
mensurate to that reached by axons in mice subjected to a con-
ditioning injury. Thus, 3 d Nϕ displayed neuroprotective and 
pro-regenerative functions in several CNS compartments, namely 
the optic nerve and the spinal cord.
40
30
20
10
0
Longest neurite (µm)
CNTF
Zym
3 d
NCM
HS
NCM
***
**
**
No tx
Zym
CNTF
3 d NCM
HS NCM
Relative expression
NGF (pg ml–1)
IGF1 (pg ml–1)
0
2
4
6
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
0
20
40
60
80
0
50
100
150
200
NGF
IGF-1
+3 d  NCM
40
30
20
10
0
Longest neurite (µm)
No tx
No Ab
+Isotype
****
***
**
*
####
###
##
***
****
****
****
****
**
**
*
###
####
###
###
##
##
##
#
*
*
*
*
**
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
#
#
#
#
#
#
3 d
Nϕ
No
tx
PBS
0
20
40
60
+3 d Nϕ
**
**
*
*
*
δ
Viable RGCs (%)
Isotype
e
a
b
c
f
No tx
200
150
100
50
0
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
PBS NRS
PBS αCXCR2
Zym NRS
Zym αCXCR2
IGF-1 (pg ml–1)
NGF (pg ml–1)
d
0
200
400
600
Number of axons
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Distance from crush site (mm)
PBS
Isotype
αIGF-1
αNGF
αIGF-1 + αNGF
*
4 h
Nϕ
#
250
8
10
80
P = 0.016
P = 0.0001
P = 0.0001
P = 0.045
P = 0.039
P = 0.011
P = 0.029
P = 0.0001
P = 0.0014
P = 0.048
3 d Nϕ
4 h Nϕ
3 d
Nϕ
4 h
Nϕ
3 d
Nϕ
4 h
Nϕ
3 d
Nϕ
4 h
Nϕ
3 d
Nϕ
4 h
Nϕ
PBS NRS
PBS αCXCR2
Zym NRS
Zym αCXCR2
αIGF-1 αNGF αIGF-1
αNGF
+αIGF-1
+αNGF
+αNGF
+αIGF-1
Nature Immunology | VOL 21 | December 2020 | 1496–1505 | www.nature.com/natureimmunology
1502

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
Human neutrophil-like cells are neuroregenerative. We next 
investigated the capacity of human myeloid cells, with character-
istics of an immature neutrophil, to initiate neurorepair. HL-60 is a 
human promyelocytic leukemia cell line that, following short-term 
resting culture with dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), exhibits morpho-
logical, enzymatic and chemotactic properties, and a cell surface 
antigen profile, indicative of immature neutrophils (that is, promy-
elocytes and blasts)20,21. At that point, they are deficient in secondary 
granules, suggestive of an early developmental stage in the granu-
locyte lineage22. Similarly to zymosan-modulated Ly6Glo murine 
neutrophils, HL-60 cells expressed Arg1 and NGFB (Fig. 7a). 
Furthermore, they stimulated the regrowth of severed RGC axons 
upon adoptive transfer into the eyes of RAG1-deficient mice with 
ONC injury (Fig. 7b). In contrast, adoptive transfer of DG-75 cells, 
a human B cell lymphoma line, had no measurable effect. CM of 
HL-60 but not DG-75 cells induced neurite outgrowth by explanted 
RGC and DRG neurons (Fig. 7c and data not shown). Similarly to 
3 d Nϕ NCM, the axonogenic effect of HL-60 NCM was heat sen-
sitive and partially suppressed by neutralization of NGF (Fig. 7c). 
HL-60 but not DG-75 cells directly stimulated neurite outgrowth 
by human cortical neurons in co-cultures (Fig. 7d). These results 
illustrate the neuroprotective and reparative potential of immature 
human granulocytes, mediated in part by a growth factor-dependent 
mechanism.
Discussion
In this study, we identify a novel myeloid cell phenotype with neu-
roprotective and axogenic properties that arises in the setting of 
optic nerve and spinal cord injury. In contrast to the widely held 
notion that myeloid cells that promote tissue repair are generally 
of the monocyte/macrophage lineage23–26, the reparative cell that 
we characterize here is a CD14+Ly6Glo granulocyte with features 
of an immature neutrophil. This finding is particularly surprising 
since numerous studies have highlighted the destructive impact 
of neutrophils infiltrating the CNS27–30. However, as opposed to 
pro-regenerative CD14+Ly6Glo cells, the neutrophils that mediate 
CNS damage in these experimental systems are mature hyperseg-
mented neutrophils, that access the CNS in a CXCR2-dependent 
manner. Although a few published studies have suggested that neu-
trophils may play a beneficial role in the context of CNS trauma31,32, 
here we characterize a CD14+Ly6Glo neutrophil subset and its bio-
logical functions. The neuroprotective and axonogenic properties 
of the CD14+Ly6Glo cells are, in part, secondary to secretion of the 
growth factors NGF and IGF-1. Although highly effective, treat-
ment with a combination of antibodies against NGF and IGF-1 
did not completely abrogate CD14+Ly6Glo neutrophil-mediated 
axonal regeneration in vivo, implicating the presence of additional 
growth-promoting factors. Proteomics analyses have revealed 
numerous growth factors, besides NGF and IGF-1, in vitreous 
fluid isolated from i.o. zymosan-injected mice, as well as superna-
tants of pro-regenerative 3 d NΦ, that could collectively contribute 
to RGC rescue and axon regrowth (data not shown). Interestingly, 
we have found that adoptively transferred 3 d NΦ spatially align 
against the inner retina; the role of cell-to-cell interactions in the 
RGC regenerative process is a subject of ongoing investigation. We 
have considered the possibility that pro-regenerative neutrophils, 
and their products, modulate Muller glia and/or retinal astrocytes, 
and that these glial cells, in turn, promote or amplify RGC survival 
and axon regrowth, possibly via production of NGF and IGF-1 or 
other factors such as apolipoprotein E and ciliary neurotrophic fac-
tor (CNTF)33. GFAP expression is elevated in the retina of mice fol-
lowing i.o. injection of 3 d NΦ, indicative of reactive astrogliosis. 
Future experiments with conditional knockout or transgenic mice 
might help clarify the roles and mechanisms of action of different 
glial populations in the regenerative process.
Our findings add to a growing body of literature that attests to 
the heterogeneity and functional subspecialization of circulating 
and tissue-infiltrating neutrophils. In particular, zymosan-elicited 
neuroregenerative neutrophils are reminiscent of recently described 
subpopulations of neutrophils that bear the signatures of an early 
developmental stage (based on cell surface phenotype and nuclear 
morphology), as well as alternative activation (based on expression 
of markers associated with M2-like macrophages), and play immu-
noregulatory and/or reparative roles in murine models of cancer, 
chronic infection and myocardial ischemia13–15,17. Alternatively 
activated neutrophils have been detected in ischemic brain tissue 
a
b
Longest neurite (µm)
300
200
100
0
P = 0.002
No tx
CI
3 d Nϕ
BM Nϕ
3 d NCM HS CM
Regeneration
Retraction
4 h Nϕ
–400
–200
0
200
400
600
PBS
BM Nϕ
4 h Nϕ
3 d Nϕ
CI
Distance from lesion (µm)
P = 0.031
P = 0.043
P = 0.019
P = 0.024
P = 0.029
P = 0.0005
P = 0.049
P = 0.0042
Fig. 6 | CD14+Ly6Glo cells drive the regeneration of spinal cord axons. a, Primary DRG neurons were cultured alone (no tx) or with 3 d NΦ, 4 h NΦ, BM 
NΦ, 3 d NCM or HS NCM. For a positive control, DRGs were harvested 5 d following conditioning injury (CI) to the sciatic nerve. Neurite length was 
measured 24 h later. Each symbol represents the mean of 50 DRGs counted in one independent experiment; data are representative of n = 3 independent 
experiments. Statistical significance determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. b, Bilateral sciatic nerves were injected with either 
3 d NΦ, 4 h NΦ, BM NΦ or PBS, 5 d before spinal cord (SC) dorsal column transection. For a positive control, a separate group of mice was subjected to 
CI of the sciatic nerves 5 d before the SC transection. Sagittal sections of the spinal cord were obtained 52 d following SC transection and subjected to 
immunohistochemistry. The data show the average distance between the lesion center and the rostral tip of regenerating axons. n = 7 (PBS injection), 4 
(BM NΦ), 4 (4 h NΦ), 10 (3 d NΦ) and 3 CI. Data are from one experiment representative of two independent experiments. Statistical significance was 
determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. a,b, Data are shown as the mean ± s.e.m.
Nature Immunology | VOL 21 | December 2020 | 1496–1505 | www.nature.com/natureimmunology
1503

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
in rodent models of stroke, and their frequency correlates with 
increased neuronal survival, reduced infarct size and enhanced 
clinical recovery16,34. The extent to which the alternatively activated 
neutrophils characterized in these diverse models are biologically or 
developmentally related to one another, or share common mecha-
nisms of action, remains to be determined. The existence of human 
neuroregenerative neutrophils is supported by our finding that 
HL-60 cells, widely used as a surrogate for immature human neutro-
phils, have axonogenic properties comparable to zymosan-elicited 
CD14+Ly6Glo murine neutrophils. HL-60-mediated neurite out-
growth is also partially dependent on NGF but not IGF-1 (data not 
shown). However, HL-60 is a transformed myeloid leukemic cell 
line, as opposed to a subset of naturally occurring, primary neu-
trophils. An atypical subpopulation of Arg1+ primary human neu-
trophils, isolated in the low-density mononuclear layer of Ficoll 
gradients, has been described in the setting of advanced-stage 
cancer, HIV infection, pregnancy and systemic lupus erythemato-
sus35–40. Although heterogeneous, the majority of these low-density 
neutrophils are immature on the basis of nuclear morphology 
(banded) and cell surface phenotype (CD33+CD10−CD16lo). In a 
number of studies, low-density human neutrophils were shown to 
possess immunosuppressive properties35–37. It is unknown whether 
they also possess reparative properties and/or they mobilize to sites 
of CNS injury.
ONC injury, in and of itself, induces the upregulation of dectin-1 
on retinal microglia and DCs12. We hypothesize that engagement of 
dectin-1 on resident myeloid cells triggers the generation of a local 
inflammatory milieu conducive to the recruitment and polariza-
tion of neuroregenerative Ly6Glo neutrophils. Granulocyte colony 
stimulating factor levels rise in the vitreous fluid and the serum 
following i.o. zymosan injection, in conjunction with the mobiliza-
tion of CD101−CD14+Ly6Glo neutrophils, which bear ring-shaped 
nuclei, into the bloodstream (data not shown). These circulating 
Ly6Glo cells do not express Arg1 or other markers of alternative 
activation, suggesting that they have not acquired neuroprotective 
or growth-promoting properties in the periphery (data not shown). 
Hence, it is likely that Ly6Glo neutrophils are polarized toward a 
neuroregenerative phenotype only after they cross the blood–eye 
barrier. Zymosan-elicited Ly6Glo neutrophils express low levels of 
CXCR2 and infiltrate the vitreous fluid by a CXCR2-independent 
pathway. We are currently interrogating candidate chemoattrac-
tants, other than ELR+ CXC chemokines, that might orchestrate their 
migration to the posterior chamber of the eye, as well as candidate 
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
0
200
400
600
800
Distance from crush site (mm)
Number of axons
DG-75
HL-60
C57BL/6 3 d Nϕ
No tx
Isotype
αNGF
HS
0
10
20
30
40
Longest neurite (µm)
****
****
##
####
a
b
c
40
30
20
10
0
NGF (pg ml–1)
HL-60
DG-75
Relative expression
HL-60
DG-75
DG-75 HL-60
P > 0.0001
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
Arg1
NGF
+HL-60 CM
1
16
128
Longest neurite (µm)
No tx
NGF
HL-60
DG-75
d
****
####
****
####
******** ******** ****
****
****
****
******
***
***
** **
P = 0.011
P = 0.011
2
4
8
32
64
256
512
1,024
Fig. 7 | Human cell line–derived immature neutrophils are neuroregenerative. 
a, NGF protein levels were measured in CM of HL-60 and DG-75 cells by 
ELISA; Arg1 and NGF mRNA levels were measured in HL-60 and DG-75 
cells by qPCR and normalized to Actβ; data are representative of four 
independent experiments. Statistical significance was determined by 
a two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test. b, Human HL-60 or DG-75 cells 
or murine 3 d NΦ were adoptively transferred into the vitreous fluid of 
C57BL/6 RAG1−/− mice on days 0 and 3 after ONC injury. Optic nerves 
were harvested 14 d later. Bar graph shows the density of regenerating 
axons in optic nerve sections at serial distances from the crush site (n = 8 
nerves per group). Data are from one experiment representative of two 
independent experiments. Statistical significance was determined by 
one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test (**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 
and ****P < 0.0001, compared with DG-75). c, Primary RGCs were cultured 
with unconditioned medium (no tx) or HL-60 CM in the presence of either 
isotype control, anti-NGF antibodies or heat-shocked HL-60 CM. Neurite 
length was measured 24 h later (n = 200 RGCs per condition). One of two 
independent experiments is shown. Statistical significance was determined 
by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test (****P < 0.0001, 
compared with unconditioned medium; ##P < 0.01 and ####P < 0.0001, 
compared with HL-60 CM + isotype antibodies). d, Primary human cortical 
neurons were cultured with unconditioned medium alone (no tx), NGF 
(positive control), HL-60 cells or DG-75 cells. Neurite length was measured 
24 h later (n = 1,000 neurons per condition). One of two independent 
experiments shown. Statistical significance was determined by one-way 
ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test (****P < 0.0001, compared with 
no tx; ####P < 0.0001, compared with DG-75 cells). a–d, Data are shown as 
the mean ± s.e.m.
Nature Immunology | VOL 21 | December 2020 | 1496–1505 | www.nature.com/natureimmunology
1504

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
polarizing factors that might drive their differentiation locally. We 
are hopeful that this research will inform the development of pro-
tocols for the generation of neuroregenerative neutrophils from 
bone marrow precursors ex vivo, with the ultimate goal of reinfus-
ing the polarized neutrophils into individuals with axonal injury, 
as an autologous cellular therapy. Alternatively, selected mobilizing 
and polarizing factors could be administered systemically, or at sites 
of CNS injury, to expand endogenous populations of alternatively 
activated neutrophils. Finally, identification of CD14+Ly6Glo neu-
trophil chemoattractants may lead to the development of strategies 
that promote the migration of endogenous, as well as adoptively 
transferred, reparative neutrophils to sites of CNS injury while 
blocking the migration of potentially toxic mature neutrophils or 
other pathogenic leukocytes. In previous studies of the ONC model, 
multimodal therapeutic approaches were more effective than sin-
gle agents, in some cases achieving RGC axon regeneration across 
the optic chiasm (such as i.o. zymosan injection combined with a 
CAMP analog and Pten deletion)41. The distinctive mechanism of 
action of the Ly6Glo neuroregenerative neutrophil subset makes 
it an attractive candidate for multimodal therapy, in synergy with 
agents that block cell-intrinsic or cell-extrinsic suppressors of axon 
growth, to rescue dying neurons and enhance axonal regeneration 
after CNS injury.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research report-
ing summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary infor-
mation, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of 
author contributions and competing interests; and statements of 
data and code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41590-020-00813-0.
Received: 26 January 2020; Accepted: 16 September 2020;  
Published online: 26 October 2020
References
	1.	 Lucas, T. et al. Differential roles of macrophages in diverse phases of skin 
repair. J. Immunol. 184, 3964–3977 (2010).
	2.	 Tourki, B. & Halade, G. Leukocyte diversity in resolving and nonresolving 
mechanisms of cardiac remodeling. FASEB J. 31, 4226–4239 (2017).
	3.	 Chinetti-Gbaguidi, G., Colin, S. & Staels, B. Macrophage subsets in 
atherosclerosis. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 12, 10–17 (2015).
	4.	 Segal, B. M. CNS chemokines, cytokines, and dendritic cells in autoimmune 
demyelination. J. Neurol. Sci. 228, 210–214 (2005).
	5.	 Akiyama, H. et al. Inflammation and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 
21, 383–421 (2000).
	6.	 Shi, K. et al. Global brain inflammation in stroke. Lancet Neurol. 18, 
1058–1066 (2019).
	7.	 Miron, V. E. et al. M2 microglia and macrophages drive oligodendrocyte 
differentiation during CNS remyelination. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1211–1218 (2013).
	8.	 Giles, D. A. et al. Myeloid cell plasticity in the evolution of central nervous 
system autoimmunity. Ann. Neurol. 83, 131–141 (2018).
	9.	 Bollaerts, I., Van houcke, J., Andries, L., De Groef, L. & Moons, L. 
Neuroinflammation as fuel for axonal regeneration in the injured vertebrate 
central nervous system. Mediators Inflamm. 2017, 9478542 (2017).
	10.	Jassam, Y. N., Izzy, S., Whalen, M., McGavern, D. B. & El Khoury, J. 
Neuroimmunology of traumatic brain injury: time for a paradigm shift. 
Neuron 95, 1246–1265 (2017).
	11.	Yin, Y. et al. Macrophage-derived factors stimulate optic nerve regeneration. 
J. Neurosci. 23, 2284–2293 (2003).
	12.	Baldwin, K. T., Carbajal, K. S., Segal, B. M. & Giger, R. J. Neuroinflammation 
triggered by β-glucan/dectin-1 signaling enables CNS axon regeneration. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 2581–2586 (2015).
	13.	Fridlender, Z. G. et al. Polarization of tumor-associated neutrophil phenotype 
by TGF-β: ‘N1’ versus ‘N2’ TAN. Cancer Cell 16, 183–194 (2009).
	14.	Chen, F. et al. Neutrophils prime a long-lived effector macrophage  
phenotype that mediates accelerated helminth expulsion. Nat. Immunol. 15, 
938–946 (2014).
	15.	Tsuda, Y. et al. Three different neutrophil subsets exhibited in mice with 
different susceptibilities to infection by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus. Immunity 21, 215–226 (2004).
	16.	Cuartero, M. I. et al. N2 neutrophils, novel players in brain inflammation 
after stroke modulation by the PPAR-γ agonist rosiglitazone. Stroke 44, 
3498–3508 (2013).
	17.	Horckmans, M. et al. Neutrophils orchestrate post-myocardial infarction 
healing by polarizing macrophages towards a reparative phenotype.  
Eur. Heart J. 38, 187–197 (2017).
	18.	Yang, W. et al. Neutrophils promote the development of reparative 
macrophages mediated by ROS to orchestrate liver repair. Nat. Commun. 10, 
1076 (2019).
	19.	Neumann, S. & Woolf, C. J. Regeneration of dorsal column fibers into and 
beyond the lesion site following adult spinal cord injury. Neuron 23,  
83–91 (1999).
	20.	Newburger, P. E., Chovaniec, M. E., Greenberger, J. S. & Cohen, H. J. 
Functional changes in human leukemic cell line HL-60. A model for myeloid 
differentiation. J. Cell Biol. 82, 315–322 (1979).
	21.	Boss, M. A., Delia, D., Robinson, J. B. & Greaves, M. F. Differentiation-linked 
expression of cell surface markers on HL-60 leukemic cells. Blood 56, 
910–916 (1980).
	22.	Olsson, I. & Olofsson, T. Induction of differentiation in a human 
promyelocytic leukemic cell line (HL-60). Production of granule proteins. 
Exp. Cell Res. 131, 225–230 (1981).
	23.	Ma, S. F. et al. Adoptive transfer of M2 macrophages promotes locomotor 
recovery in adult rats after spinal cord injury. Brain Behav. Immun. 45, 
157–170 (2015).
	24.	Wynn, T. A. & Vannella, K. M. Macrophages in tissue repair, regeneration 
and fibrosis. Immunity 44, 450–462 (2016).
	25.	Schwartz, M. ‘Tissue-repairing’ blood-derived macrophages are essential for 
healing of the injured spinal cord: from skin-activated macrophages to 
infiltrating blood-derived cells? Brain Behav. Immun. 24, 1054–1057 (2010).
	26.	Gliem, M., Schwaninger, M. & Jander, S. Protective features of peripheral 
monocytes/macrophages in stroke. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1862,  
329–338 (2016).
	27.	von Leden, R. E., Parker, K. N., Bates, A. A., Noble-Haeusslein, L. J. & 
Donovan, M. H. The emerging role of neutrophils as modifiers of recovery 
after traumatic injury to the developing brain. Exp. Neurol. 317,  
144–154 (2019).
	28.	Semple, B. D., Bye, N., Ziebell, J. M. & Morganti-Kossmann, M. C. Deficiency 
of the chemokine receptor CXCR2 attenuates neutrophil infiltration and 
cortical damage following closed head injury. Neurobiol. Dis. 40,  
394–403 (2010).
	29.	Herz, J. et al. Role of neutrophils in exacerbation of brain injury after focal 
cerebral ischemia in hyperlipidemic mice. Stroke 46, 2916–2925 (2015).
	30.	Brennan, F. H. et al. Complement receptor C3aR1 controls neutrophil 
mobilization following spinal cord injury through physiological antagonism 
of CXCR2. JCI insight 4, https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.98254 (2019).
	31.	Roth, T. L. et al. Transcranial amelioration of inflammation and cell death 
after brain injury. Nature 505, 223–228 (2014).
	32.	Kurimoto, T. et al. Neutrophils express oncomodulin and promote optic 
nerve regeneration. J. Neurosci. 33, 14816–14824 (2013).
	33.	Lorber, B., Berry, M., Douglas, M. R., Nakazawa, T. & Logan, A. Activated 
retinal glia promote neurite outgrowth of retinal ganglion cells via 
apolipoprotein E. J. Neurosci. Res. 87, 2645–2652 (2009).
	34.	Hou, Y. et al. N2 neutrophils may participate in spontaneous recovery after 
transient cerebral ischemia by inhibiting ischemic neuron injury in rats.  
Int. Immunopharmacol. 77, 105970 (2019).
	35.	Sagiv, J. Y. et al. Phenotypic diversity and plasticity in circulating neutrophil 
subpopulations in cancer. Cell Rep. 10, 562–573 (2015).
	36.	Liu, C. Y. et al. Population alterations of l-arginase- and inducible nitric 
oxide synthase-expressed CD11b+/CD14−/CD15+/CD33+ myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells and CD8+ T lymphocytes in patients with advanced-stage 
non-small cell lung cancer. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 136, 35–45 (2010).
	37.	Rodriguez, P. C. et al. Arginase I–producing myeloid-derived suppressor  
cells in renal cell carcinoma are a subpopulation of activated granulocytes. 
Cancer Res. 69, 1553–1560 (2009).
	38.	Cloke, T., Munder, M., Taylor, G., Muller, I. & Kropf, P. Characterization of a 
novel population of low-density granulocytes associated with disease severity 
in HIV-1 infection. PLoS ONE 7, e48939 (2012).
	39.	Ssemaganda, A. et al. Characterization of neutrophil subsets in healthy 
human pregnancies. PLoS ONE 9, e85696 (2014).
	40.	Mistry, P. et al. Transcriptomic, epigenetic, and functional analyses implicate 
neutrophil diversity in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116, 25222–25228 (2019).
	41.	Benowitz, L. I., He, Z. & Goldberg, J. L. Reaching the brain: advances in optic 
nerve regeneration. Exp. Neurol. 287, 365–373 (2017).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc. 2020
Nature Immunology | VOL 21 | December 2020 | 1496–1505 | www.nature.com/natureimmunology
1505

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
Methods
Mice. C57BL/6 WT, Ccr2−/− (B6.129S4-Ccr2tm1Ifc/J), Clec7a−/− (B6.129S6- 
Clec7atm1Gdb/J), Tlr2−/− (B6.129-Tlr2tm1Kir/J) and Rag1−/− (B6.129S7-Rag1tm1Mom/J) 
mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory. Dectin-1–TLR2 double- 
deficient (Clec7a−/−Tlr2−/−) mice were bred and maintained in-house. Mice were 
group housed with a 12-h light/dark cycle and ad libitum access to food and water. 
All animal handling and surgical procedures were performed in compliance with 
national guidelines and approved by the University of Michigan and the Ohio State 
University Committees on Use and Care of Animals.
Optic nerve crush surgery and intraocular zymosan injection. Adult male or 
female mice (aged 8–10 weeks) were anesthetized with 100 mg per kg body weight 
(mg kg−1) ketamine and 10 mg kg−1 xylazine i.p. The optic nerve was exposed 
through an incision in the conjunctiva while being visualized under a Nikon 
microscope. The nerve was then compressed, ∼1–2 mm behind the eye, for 5 s  
using a curved forceps (Dumont no. 5; Roboz). Immediately after ONC injury,  
the posterior chamber of the eye was injected with 3 μl of zymosan (12.5 μg μl−1 in 
PBS) or PBS alone, using a Hamilton syringe with a 30-gauge removable needle. 
The eyes were then rinsed with a few drops of sterile PBS. Ophthalmic ointment 
(Puralube; Fera Pharmaceuticals) was applied on the operated eye. For all surgical 
procedures, buprenorphine (0.1 mg kg−1, subcutaneous) was given before and  
after surgery (12, 24, 36, 48 and 60 h). All operated mice were closely monitored 
until the endpoint. Two weeks after surgery, mice were given a lethal dose of 
ketamine/xylazine i.p. and then perfused transcardially with PBS for 5 min. Mice 
were inspected for lens injury after each i.o. injection and those with cataracts  
were eliminated.
Administration of antiserum. Mice were injected, i.p., every 2 d with 500 μl of 
rabbit polyclonal αCXCR2 neutralizing sera (Cocalico) or control sera (NRS; 
Sigma), as previously described42.
Intraperitoneal lavage and neutrophil isolation. Mice were injected i.p. with 
500 μl of zymosan (2 μg μl−1 in PBS) and euthanized either 4 h or 3 d later via 
CO2 fixation. Next, 10 ml of sterile ice-cold PBS was injected into the peritoneal 
cavity and aspirated after 5 min. Neutrophils were isolated from lavaged cells with 
magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) Ly6G magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec) 
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Purity (95–99%) was confirmed using 
flow cytometry.
Intraocular adoptive transfer. Purified Ly6G+ cells were resuspended in sterile 
PBS at a concentration of 1 × 105 cells per μl and loaded into a Hamilton syringe 
with a 30-gauge needle. In some cases, anti-NGF (Alomone) and/or anti-IGF-1 
(Abcam) polyclonal antibodies, or polyclonal control antibodies (Sigma), were 
included in the cell suspension, at a final concentration of 1 μg/μl. 3 μl of cell 
suspension was injected into the posterior chamber of each eye of anesthetized 
mice on days 0 and 3 after ONC injury.
Intraocular administration of growth factors. Recombinant mouse NGF (R&D) 
and/or IGF-1 (Peprotech) were reconstituted in sterile PBS at a concentration of 
1 μg μl−1. Recombinant growth factors or PBS alone were injected into the posterior 
chamber of the eye (1–2 μl per eye) of anesthetized mice immediately following 
ONC injury and on post-op day 3.
Dorsal spinal cord injury. Male mice were anesthetized with 100 mg kg−1 
ketamine and 10 mg kg−1 xylazine i.p. The T8 lamina were removed under a 
stereomicroscope using micro-rongeurs. The spinal column was exposed, and 
Roboz McPherson-Vannas Micro Dissecting Spring scissors were inserted 
1 mm deep. A hemisection of the dorsal spinal cord was performed to transect 
axons in the dorsal columns. Muscle layers were closed with Perma-Hand Black 
sutures (5-0, Ethicon) and skin incisions were closed with coated Vycryl sutures 
(5-0, Ethicon). Six weeks after SCI, rhodamine-conjugated dextran MW 3,000 
(microruby, Life Technology; 1.5 μl of 10% solution) was injected into the sciatic 
nerve using a Nanofil 10-μl syringe with a 36 G beveled needle (World Precision 
Instrument). Ten days after tracer injection, mice were perfused and spinal cords 
were harvested for immunohistochemical analysis.
Sciatic nerve crush. Five days before SCI, some mice received a conditioning 
injury to the sciatic nerve. Mice were anesthetized as described above and the 
sciatic nerves on both sides were exposed and compressed at mid-thigh level for 
10 s using fine forceps (Dumont no. 5). The surgical wound was closed by clipping 
the overlying skin.
Intraneural adoptive transfer. Purified Ly6G+ cells were resuspended in sterile 
PBS at a concentration of 1 × 105 cells per μl and loaded into a Nanofil syringe with 
a 33-gauge needle (World Precision Instrument). Each sciatic nerve was injected 
with 1.5 μl of cell suspension.
Primary mouse RGC cultures. Mouse pups between 6 and 7 days old were 
euthanized. Their eyes were dissected and placed in ice-cold PBS. Under a Nikon 
dissection stereoscope, retinas were exposed; the neural layer was dissected and 
placed into 1 ml of ice-cold PBS. Retinas were transferred to a 15-ml conical tube 
with 1 ml of 0.05% trypsin (Gibco). Retinas were triturated 20x with a fire polished 
glass pipette, incubated in a water bath at 37 °C for 5 min, after which trituration 
was repeated. Trypsin was quenched by adding 10 ml of 10% FBS in PBS. Tubes 
were centrifuged at 1,500 r.p.m. for 5 min. Supernatant was removed. Cells were 
suspended in MACS buffer (2% BSA and 0.004% EDTA in PBS). RGCs were 
isolated with MACS Thy1.2 magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec). Purified RGCs 
were suspended in Neurobasal medium (Gibco) supplemented with B-27 (Gibco), 
glutamine (2 mM; Gibco) and penicillin–streptomycin (100 units per ml; Gibco) 
and plated at 1 × 104 cells per well in a 96-well plate that had been precoated  
with poly-l-lysine (Sigma) and laminin (Millipore). RGCs were co-cultured  
with MACS-purified Ly6G+ neutrophils (1 × 104 cells per well), NCM, zymosan 
(1 μg ml−1) or recombinant CNTF (100 ng ml−1) for 20 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2,  
after which they were fixed with ice-cold 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS for  
30 min, before immunohistochemical staining and imaging.
Primary mouse DRG cultures. Lumbar (L4–5) DRG neurons, collected from 8- to 
10-week-old mice, were digested with collagenase type 2 (4 mg ml−1, Worthington 
Biochemical) and dispase (1 mg ml−1; Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 min at 37 °C and 5% 
CO2. DRG neurons were counted, resuspended in DMEM/F12 (Gibco) with FBS 
(10%; Atlanta Biologicals), glutamine (2 mM; Gibco), and penicillin–streptomycin 
(100 units per ml; Gibco) and plated at a concentration of 5 × 103 per well on laminin/
poly-l-lysine-coated 24-well plates. DRG neurons were incubated at 37 °C and 
5% CO2, either alone or in the presence of Ly6G MACS bead-purified neutrophils 
(1 × 104 cells per well) or NCM. After 20 h, cultures were fixed with ice-cold 4% PFA 
in PBS for 30 min before immunohistochemical staining and analysis.
Primary human cortical neuron in vitro culture. Primary human cortical 
neurons (ScienCell) were thawed, counted, diluted in neuronal medium with 
neuronal growth supplement (ScienCell) and plated at 1.2 × 104 cells per well in 
a 96-well plate precoated with poly-l-lysine (Sigma) and laminin (Millipore). 
Neurons were either cultured alone or in the presence of HL-60 cells, DG-75 cells 
(1.2 × 104 cells per well) or recombinant human NGF (10 μg ml−1) at 37 °C and 5% 
CO2. After 20 h, neurons were fixed with ice-cold 4% PFA in PBS for 30 min, before 
immunohistochemical staining and imaging.
Immunohistochemistry and quantification of regenerating axons, viable RGCs 
and neurite length. Optic nerves. Mice were perfused, optic nerves and eyes were 
dissected and post-fixed overnight in 4% PFA at 4 °C. Nerves were transferred 
to a 30% sucrose/PBS solution and maintained at 4 °C for at least 2 h and up to 
2 weeks. Optic nerves were imbedded in Tissue-Tek OCT compound (Sakura 
Fintek) and stored at −80 °C. Longitudinal sections (10-μm thick) were cut with 
a cryostat, mounted on Superfrost Plus microscope slides (Fisher Scientific) and 
stained with polyclonal rabbit anti-GAP-43 (Abcam). Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated 
donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Invitrogen) was used for fluorescence 
labeling. Images were acquired using an Olympus IX71 inverted microscope with 
Olympus Cellsens Dimension 2.0 software, attached to an Olympus DP72 digital 
camera. Regenerating GAP-43+ axons were counted at each 0.2-mm interval past 
the injury site, up to 1.6 mm, using a superimposed grid (3–5 sections per nerve). 
The number of labeled axons per section was normalized to the width of the 
section and converted to the total number of regenerating axons per optic nerve, as 
described previously43.
Retinas. For cross-sectional images, eyes were dissected, post-fixed as described 
above and cryoprotected. Sections (25-μm) were cut with a cryostat and mounted 
on Superfrost Plus microscope slides, rinsed with PBS, blocked with 5% normal 
goat serum in PBS with 0.25% Triton X-100 (PBS-T) at 25 °C and incubated with 
primary antibodies (anti-GFAP at a 1:500 dilution, Sigma; anti-Iba-1 at 1:300, 
Invitrogen) diluted in blocking solution (PBS-T + 5% goat serum) overnight at 
4 °C. The next day, sections were washed with PBS-T and incubated with secondary 
antibodies (goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 or goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 594) in 
blocking solution (PBS + 5% goat serum) for 2 h at 25 °C. DAPI (300 nM) was used 
to counterstain sections.
For whole-mount analysis, PFA-fixed retinas were placed in a 35-mm dish 
(Corning) with sterile PBS. The retinal neural layer was dissected out of the globe 
under a dissecting microscope. Retinas were incubated with goat anti-mouse Brn3a 
(Santa Cruz) for 3 d, followed by Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated donkey anti-goat 
secondary antibody (Invitrogen). Retinas were washed, placed on Superfrost Plus 
microscope slides and imaged. Images were acquired using an Olympus IX71 
inverted microscope attached to an Olympus DP72 digital camera. Brn3a+ RGCs 
were counted over eight fields distributed between four quadrants per retina at 
prespecified distances from the optic disc using Image J software32.
Spinal cords. Dissected spinal cords were post-fixed overnight and transferred to 
30% sucrose in solution for cryoprotection. Spinal cords were cut into 25-μm thick 
sagittal sections using a cryostat and processed for immunostaining44. Briefly, spinal 
cord tissue sections were rinsed with PBS, blocked with 5% normal donkey serum in 
PBS-T at 25 °C and incubated with primary antibodies (anti-GFAP and anti-laminin 
Nature Immunology | www.nature.com/natureimmunology

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
at 1:500 dilution; Sigma) diluted in blocking solution (PBS-T + 3% donkey serum) 
overnight at 4 °C. The next day, sections were washed with PBS-T and incubated 
with secondary antibodies (donkey anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 and donkey 
anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 647) in blocking solution (PBS + 3% donkey serum) for 2 h at 
25 °C. After washing with PBS and mounting (ProLong anti-fade mounting medium; 
Life Technologies), sections were imaged using a Zeiss Axiovert Zoom fluorescent 
microscope or Olympus IX71. Regeneration of dorsal column axons was quantified 
in all sections containing microruby-labeled axons (4–6 sections per animal), as 
previously described45. The lesion center was localized using characteristic GFAP 
and laminin staining patterns. The average distance from the epicenter to the most 
rostral, microruby-positive axon tips was measured using ImageJ. The average value 
from all tracer-containing sections was taken as one data point.
Primary murine DRG, murine RGC and human cortical neurons. Plates were 
washed in 0.1% PBS-T, then blocked with 10% goat serum in PBS-T for 1 h at 
25 °C. After washing twice in PBS-T, samples were incubated with anti-βIII tubulin 
(TUJ1, Promega) in 3% BSA in PBS-T overnight at 4 °C. Following two PBS-T 
washes, the samples were incubated with an Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated secondary 
antibody (Invitrogen) for 1–2 h at 25 °C. Samples were washed twice with PBS and 
left in a solution of PBS and DAPI (NucBlue Fixed Cell ReadyProbes Reagent, two 
drops per ml PBS; Thermo Fisher Scientific). RGCs and human cortical neurons 
were imaged at 20× and DRG neurons at 10x, using an Olympus IX71 inverted 
microscope attached to an Olympus DP72 digital camera. Images were analyzed 
with Neuromath (Weizmann Institute of Science). The longest neurite of each 
neuron was measured in GraphPad (Prism).
Neutrophil conditioned medium. MACS-purified neutrophils were placed into 
the RGC base medium (Neurobasal medium with B-27, penicillin–streptomycin 
and 2 mM l-glutamine) at a concentration of 5 × 106 cell per ml and incubated at 
37 °C and 5% CO2 for 24 h. Supernatant was collected and spun at 1,800 r.p.m.
Cell morphology. Purified neutrophils were subjected to cytospin for 5 min at 
5.5 × 103 r.p.m. Slides were air-dried, stained with Wright-Giemsa solution  
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) and imaged using an Olympus IX71 inverted microscope.
Flow cytometry. Flow cytometric analysis was performed as previously 
described46,47. Mice were euthanized by isoflurane overdose. Blood was collected 
from the left ventricle in an EDTA tube. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were 
isolated over a lympholyte gradient (Cedarlane), and incidental red blood cells were 
lysed using an Ammonium-Chloride-Potassium Lysing Buffer (Quality Biological). 
Eyes were dissected, rinsed in PBS and placed in a 35-mm dish (Corning). Each eye 
was opened, vitreous fluid was collected and retinas were rinsed with 200 μl of PBS. 
Cells in the vitreous fluid and retinal rinse were combined.
Cells were labeled with fixable viability dye (eFluor 506 or eFluor 780; 
eBioscience), blocked with anti-CD16/32 (clone 2.4G2) and stained with 
fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies specific for CD11b (clone M1/70), CD45 
(30-F11), CD11c (N418), CD3 (145-2C11), CD4 (GK1.5), CD8 (53-6.7), CD19 
(1D3), CD14 (61D3), Ly6B (7/4), CD101 (polyclonal) and F4/80 (BM8), all 
purchased from eBioscience; and Ly6C (AL-21) and Ly6G (1A8), purchased 
from Pharmingen. For intracellular staining, cells were fixed with 4% PFA, 
permeabilized with 0.5% saponin and stained with fluorescent antibodies specific 
for arginase-1 (polyclonal; eBioscience), neutrophil elastase (polyclonal; Bioss) or 
myeloperoxidase (polyclonal; Abcam). Flow cytometry was performed with a FACS 
Canto II cell analyzer (BD Biosciences). Cells were gated using forward and side 
scatter after doublet exclusion and analyzed on FlowJo v10 software.
Human hematopoietic cell lines. HL-60 and DG-75 cell lines were obtained from 
the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). Cells were cultured in RPMI 
with 10% FBS + 2 mM l-glutamine + penicillin–streptomycin. Approximately 
24 h before co-culture with RGCs, cells were transferred to Neurobasal with B-27 
supplementation, l-glutamine and penicillin–streptomycin.
Protein analysis. A panel of growth factors was measured in NCM using a growth 
factor antibody array (RayBiotech). ELISA was used to measure murine NGF 
(Millipore) and IGF-1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and human NGF and IGF-1 
(both Abcam) protein levels. Total protein was determined via a Bradford assay 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) and used to normalize analyte concentrations.
Quantitative PCR. Cells were resuspended in 300 ml of RLT buffer before Qiagen 
RNeasy RNA purification. Purified RNA was converted into cDNA using a 
high-capacity cDNA reverse transcription kit (Life Technologies). Transcripts were 
quantified via SYBR Green qPCR performed using an iQ Thermocycler (Bio-Rad) 
or ABI using Quant Studio Design v1.3. Primer sequences are shown below.
Mouse. Actb: FP: 5′-GGTCCACACCCGCCACCAG-3′  
RP: 5′-CACATGCCGGAGCCGGAGCCGTTGTC-3′
Arg1: FP: 5′-CTCCAAGCCAAAGTCCTTAGAG-3′  
RP: 5′-AGGAGCTGTCATTAGGGACATC-3′
Il4ra: FP: 5′-ACACTACAGGCTGATGTTCTTCG-3′  
RP: 5′-TGGACCGGCCTATTCATTTCC-3′
Mrc1: FP: 5′-AAGGCTATCCTGGTGGAAGAA-3′  
RP: 5′-AGGGAAGGGTCAGTCTGTGTT-3′
Ngfb: FP: 5′-CCCGAATCCTGTAGAGAGTGG-3′  
RP: 5′-GAGTTCCAGTGTTTGGAGTCGAT-3′
Igf1: FP: 5′-AGACAGGCATTGTGGATGAG-3′  
RP: 5′-TGAGTCTTGGGCATGTCAGT-3′
Human. ACTB: FP: 5′-CATGTACGTTGCTATCCAFFC-3′  
RP: 5′-CTCCTTAATGTCACGCACGAT-3′
ARG1: FP: 5′-GTGGAAACTTGCATGGACAAC-3′  
RP: 5′-AATCCTGGCACATCGGGAATC-3′
NGFB: FP: 5′-TGTGGGTTGGGGATAAGACCA -3′ 
RP: 5′-GCTGTCAACGGGATTTTGGGT-3′
Single-cell RNA-seq 10x genomics. Eyes were dissected and the vitreous fluid 
was collected. Retinas were rinsed with 200 μl of PBS and cells collected from 
rinse. Neutrophils were purified by MACS Ly6G bead purification. Cell purity and 
viability was confirmed by flow cytometry. A single-cell suspension was submitted to 
University of Michigan Genomics Core for processing and analysis. The single-cell 
suspension was loaded onto a well on a 10x Chromium Single Cell instrument 
(10x Genomics). Barcoding and cDNA synthesis were performed according to 
the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the 10x GemCode Technology partitions 
thousands of cells into nanoliter-scale Gel Bead-In-EMulsions (GEMs), where all the 
cDNA generated from an individual cell share a common 10x Barcode. To identify 
the PCR duplicates, a unique molecular identifier (UMI) was also added. The 
GEMs were incubated with enzymes to produce full-length cDNA, which was then 
amplified by PCR to generate enough quantity for library construction. Qualitative 
analysis was performed using the Agilent Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity assay.
The cDNA libraries were constructed using the 10x Chromium Single cell 
3′ Library Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For quality control 
after library construction, 1 μl of sample was diluted 1:10 and ran on the Agilent 
Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity chip for qualitative analysis. For quantification, 
an Illumina Library Quantification Kit was used. Libraries were sequenced on 
an Illumina HiSeq or NextSeq 2 × 150 paired-end kits using the following read 
lengths: 26-bp Read1 for cell barcode and UMI, 8-bp I7 index for sample index and 
98-bp Read2 for transcript. Cell Ranger 1.3 (https://10xgenomics.com/) was used 
to process Chromium single-cell 3′ RNA-seq output.48
Once the gene-by-cell data matrix was generated, poor quality cells were 
excluded, such as cells with less than 500 unique genes or more than 7,000 unique 
genes expressed. Only genes expressed in three or more cells were used for further 
analysis. Cells were also discarded if their mitochondrial gene percentages were 
over 20%. The data were natural log transformed and normalized for scaling the 
sequencing depth to a total of 1 × 104 molecules per cell, followed by regressing out 
the number of UMIs using Seurat package (version 2.3.3).
Seurat downstream-analysis steps included SCTransform, dimensionality 
reduction (principal-component analysis) and UMAP, standard unsupervised 
clustering and the discovery of differentially expressed cell-type-specific 
markers. The SCTransform functionality embedded in Seurat R package include 
normalization and scaling of UMIs, batch information and mitochondrial content. 
We included the batch information as a variable in the SCTransform to scale out 
the differences between the batches. For the unsupervised clustering, we chose a 
low-resolution parameter (0.1). Differential gene expression analyses, to identify 
cel-type-specific genes, were performed using the non-parametric Wilcoxon 
rank-sum test. To compare the average gene expression of genes in the cell types 
identified in the two single-cell datasets, heat maps using Pearson’s correlation 
values were generated.
Statistical analysis. RGC frequency and axon density data were analyzed by 
one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test using GraphPad 8.0 (Prism). 
The unpaired Student’s t-test was used to analyze flow cytometry, ELISA and qPCR 
data with only two groups, and one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc 
test was used to analyze flow cytometry, ELISA, RGC cultures and qPCR data with 
more than two groups.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Single-cell RNA-seq data are available in the Gene Expression Omnibus database 
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under accession no. GSE144637. Other data 
that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
on request.
References
	42.	Stoolman, J. S., Duncker, P. C., Huber, A. K. & Segal, B. M. Site-specific 
chemokine expression regulates central nervous system inflammation and 
determines clinical phenotype in autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J. Immunol. 
193, 564–570 (2014).
Nature Immunology | www.nature.com/natureimmunology

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
	43.	Leon, S., Yin, Y., Nguyen, J., Irwin, N. & Benowitz, L. I. Lens injury 
stimulates axon regeneration in the mature rat optic nerve. J. Neurosci. 20, 
4615–4626 (2000).
	44.	Yoon, C. et al. Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 
(LRP1)-dependent cell signaling promotes axonal regeneration. J. Biol. Chem. 
288, 26557–26568 (2013).
	45.	Ruschel, J. et al. Axonal regeneration. Systemic administration of epothilone 
B promotes axon regeneration after spinal cord injury. Science 348,  
347–352 (2015).
	46.	Giles, D. A., Duncker, P. C., Wilkinson, N. M., Washnock-Schmid, J. M. & 
Segal, B. M. CNS-resident classical DCs play a critical role in CNS 
autoimmune disease. J. Clin. Invest. 128, 5322–5334 (2018).
	47.	Grifka-Walk, H. M., Giles, D. A. & Segal, B. M. IL-12-polarized Th1 cells 
produce GM-CSF and induce EAE independent of IL-23. Eur. J. Immunol. 45, 
2780–2786 (2015).
	48.	Park, J. et al. Single-cell transcriptomics of the mouse kidney reveals potential 
cellular targets of kidney disease. Science 360, 758–763 (2018).
Acknowledgements
We thank S. Atkins for technical support. Financial support for this research 
was provided by the National Eye Institute (NEI), National Institutes of Health 
(R01EY029159 and R01EY028350 to B.M.S. and R.J.G; K08EY029362 to A.R.S.), 
the Wings of Life Foundation (C.Y.) and the Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson 
Research Foundation (R.J.G.). B.M.S. holds the Stanley D. and Joan H. Ross chair in 
neuromodulation at the Ohio State University.
Author contributions
A.R.S., K.S.C., A.D.J., C.Y. and A.L.K. performed experiments and data analysis. R.M. 
oversaw RNA-seq analysis. B.M.S. wrote the manuscript and coedited it with the help of 
the other authors. B.M.S., R.J.G. and A.R.S. directed the studies.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-020-00813-0.
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41590-020-00813-0.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to B.M.S.
Peer review information Peer reviewer reports are available. L. A. Dempsey was the 
primary editor on this article and managed its editorial process and peer review in 
collaboration with the rest of the editorial team.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Nature Immunology | www.nature.com/natureimmunology

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Zymosan-induced RGC axon regeneration is independent of mature T and B cells. a, Gating scheme for analysis of intraocular 
infiltrates by flow cytometry. b, C57BL/6 WT or RAG1 deficient mice were injected i.o. with zymosan or PBS on the day of ONC injury. Optic nerves 
were harvested 14 days later. Longitudinal sections were stained with fluorochrome-conjugated anti-GAP-43 antibodies to enumerate the density of 
regenerating axons at serial distances from the crush site (n = 6 nerves/ group). Data are shown as mean± sem. One of two independent experiments with 
similar results is shown. Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test (P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, 
compared with the PBS →WT group). c, Optic nerves were harvested on day 28 following i.o. injection of either PBS or zymosan. Mice received i.p. 
injections of either αCXCR2 antisera or control sera every other day from the day of ONC onward. The density of GAP-43+ regenerating axons was 
measured in optic nerve longitudinal sections at serial distances from the crush site (n = 10 nerves per group). Data are shown as mean± sem; statistical 
significance was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001 compared with the 
i.o. PBS/ i.p. NRS group; #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, ###P < 0.001, compared with the i.o. zymosan/ i.p. NRS group).
Nature Immunology | www.nature.com/natureimmunology

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Immature neutrophils are mobilized into the circulation following treatment with i.o. zymosan and i.p. αCXCR2. Mice received 
an i.o. injection of zymosan on day 0, and i.p. injections of NRS (blue) or αCXCR2 (red) on days 0, 2 and 4, post ONC injury. Peripheral blood cells were 
obtained on day 5 and analyzed by flow cytometry. a, Cell surface expression of Ly6G, CD14 and CD101. Upper panels, representative histograms. 
Lower panels, geometric Mean Fluorescence Intensity on gated Ly6G+ cells and percentage of CD101+ neutrophils. Each symbol represents data from 
an individual mouse (n = 3 mice/ group). Data are shown as mean± sem. One experiment representative of 3 with similar results is shown. Statistical 
significance was determined by two tailed unpaired Student’s t-test. b, Representative dot plots.
Nature Immunology | www.nature.com/natureimmunology

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
Extended Data Fig. 3 | A population of alternatively activated, immature neutrophils is expanded in intraocular infiltrates following treatment with 
i.o. zymosan and i.p. αCXCR2. Single-cell analysis using 10X Genomics of intraocular Ly6G+ cells from the NRS (left panels) or αCXCR2 (right panels) 
treatment groups, as in Fig. 3. a, Violin plots showing the cells expressing Arg1, Mrc, Hexb, Sgrn and Fpr1 in clusters 1 and 3 of the NRS and αCXCR2 
treatment groups. b, Featureplots showing cluster-specific expression of Mrc (CD206, alternative activation marker), CXCR2 and S100a8 (maturation 
markers).
Nature Immunology | www.nature.com/natureimmunology

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
Extended Data Fig. 4 | See next page for caption.
Nature Immunology | www.nature.com/natureimmunology

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Adoptively transferred CD14+Ly6Glow cells induce RGC axon regeneration independent of TLR2 and dectin-1 or CCR2 signaling. 
a, Mice were subjected to ONC injury on day 0 and received i.o. injections of either PBS, 4 h NΦ, or 3d NΦ, on days 0 and 3. Retina were harvested on day 
14. The frequency of viable BRN3a+ RGC neurons in whole mounts, normalized to healthy retina (n = 10 retina per group). One experiment representative 
of 2 is shown. Statistical significance determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. b, Peritoneal Ly6G+ cells were purified 3 days after 
i.p. zymosan injection (3d NΦ), and adoptively transferred into the eyes of naïve C57BL/6 WT or TLR2-/-dectin-1-/- double knock-out (dko) mice on days 
0 and 3 post ONC injury. For negative controls, additional groups were injected i.o. with PBS. Optic nerves were harvested 14 days later and analyzed by 
GAP-43 immunohistochemistry. The figure shows the density of regenerating axons, at serial distances from the crush site (n = 8 nerves per group). One 
of 2 independent experiments is shown. Statistical significance determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, 
***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001 compared with PBS/WT; #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, ###P < 0.001 compared with PBS/dKO). c, GFAP (green) and IBA1 (red) IHC 
of retinal cross-sections obtained 7 or 14 days following ONC and i.o injection of either 3d NΦ or PBS. Representative images shown (n = 3 mice, 1 of 3 
independent experiments, scale bar 80 μm). d, eGFP labeled 3d NΦ were injected i.o. on the day of ONC injury. Representative microscopic image of 
retinal cross-section prepared 3 days later (n = 3 mice, 1 of 2 independent experiments scale bar 200 μm). e, Representative flow cytometric analysis 
of intraocular infiltrates harvested from WT or Ccr2–/– mice on day 3 post ONC injury and i.o. injection of 3d NΦ (n = 5 mice per group). f, 3d NΦ were 
adoptively transferred into the eyes of C57BL/6 WT or Ccr2–/– mice on days 0 and 3 post ONC injury. Axonal densities at serial distances from the crush 
site, on day 14 post ONC injury (n = 6 nerves, 1 of 2 independent experiments is shown). Statistical significance determined by one-way ANOVA followed 
by Tukey’s post hoc test (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, compared with PBS/WT; #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, ###P < 0.001 ####P < 0.0001, compared with 
PBS/ Ccr2–/–). a, b, f Data are shown as mean± sem.
Nature Immunology | www.nature.com/natureimmunology

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Pro-regenerative neutrophils retain therapeutic efficacy when administered following CNS injury. a, 3d NΦ were adoptively 
transferred into the eyes of mice on the day of ONC injury, or after a delay of 6, 12, or 24 hrs. NΦ adoptive transfer was repeated 3 days later. A control 
group was injected i.o. with PBS alone on days 0 and 3. Optic nerves were harvested on day 14 for quantification of axonal densities by GAP-43 IHC (n = 8 
nerves per group). (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01 *** P < 0.001 compared with PBS). b, 4 h or 3d NΦ were added to primary RGC cultures 4hrs after RGC plating. 
In other wells, RGC were cultured in media alone (No Tx), or in the presence of recombinant CNTF, as negative and positive controls, respectively. Neurite 
outgrowth was measured 24 hours later (n = 2000 RGCs per condition, one of two independent experiments shown). Statistical significance determined 
by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. c, 4 h or 3d NΦ were added to primary DRG cultures 8hrs after DRG plating. In other wells, DRG 
were cultured in media alone (No Tx), or in the presence of recombinant NGF, for negative and positive controls, respectively. Neurite outgrowth was 
measured 24 hours later (n = 300 DRGs per condition, one of two independent experiments shown). Statistical significance determined by one-way 
ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. a-c, Data shown as mean± sem.
Nature Immunology | www.nature.com/natureimmunology

Articles
NATurE ImmunOlOgy
Extended Data Fig. 6 | NGF and IGF-1 drive RGC axon regeneration in a collaborative manner. a, Quantification of a panel growth factors in unconditioned 
media (circles) and NCM (squares) by multiplexed antibody array. b, Primary RGC were cultured in the absence or presence of recombinant mouse 
CNTF, IGF-1, NGF, or a combination of IGF-1 and NGF. Neurite length was measured 24 hours later. Each symbol represents the mean of 200 RGCs in one 
independent experiment (n = 6 independent experiments shown). Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post 
hoc test (**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 compared with No Tx; #P < 0.05 compared with NGF; ++P < 0.01, compared with IGF-1). c, Recombinant IGF-1 (blue bars), 
NGF (green), a combination of NGF and IGF1 (white), or PBS alone (black) was injected into the vitreous on days 0 and 3 post ONC injury. Optic nerves 
were harvested 14 days later. Density of regenerating axons in optic nerve sections, at serial distances from the crush site (n = 8 nerves per group). One 
experiment representative of 2 with similar results is shown. Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test 
(*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001 compared with PBS; #P < 0.05 compared with NGF; +P < 0.05, ++P < 0.01, compared with IGF-1).  
b,c, Data shown as mean± sem.
Nature Immunology | www.nature.com/natureimmunology

===== Sathyamurthy2018_CellRep_SpinalCord+scTx =====
Resource
Massively Parallel Single Nucleus Transcriptional
Proﬁling Deﬁnes Spinal Cord Neurons and Their
Activity during Behavior
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d An atlas of adult mouse spinal cord cell types
d A resource of the molecular repertoires of 43 neuronal
populations
d A simple method using snRNA-seq to identify activated
neurons following behavior
Authors
Anupama Sathyamurthy,
Kory R. Johnson, Kaya J.E. Matson, ...,
Michael C. Kelly, Matthew W. Kelley,
Ariel J. Levine
Correspondence
ariel.levine@nih.gov
In Brief
Sathyamurthy et al. use massively parallel
single nucleus RNA-seq to probe spinal
cord cell types and present an atlas of 43
neuronal populations. By using this
approach after a sensory and a motor
behavior, they were able to detect and
molecularly identify activated neurons
associated with each function.
Data and Software Availability
GSE103892
Sathyamurthy et al., 2018, Cell Reports 22, 2216–2225
February 20, 2018
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.02.003

Cell Reports
Resource
Massively Parallel Single Nucleus Transcriptional
Proﬁling Deﬁnes Spinal Cord Neurons
and Their Activity during Behavior
Anupama Sathyamurthy,1,4 Kory R. Johnson,2,4 Kaya J.E. Matson,1 Courtney I. Dobrott,1 Li Li,1 Anna R. Ryba,1
Tzipporah B. Bergman,1 Michael C. Kelly,3 Matthew W. Kelley,3 and Ariel J. Levine1,5,*
1Spinal Circuits and Plasticity Unit, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
2Bioinformatics Section, Information Technology Program, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA
3Laboratory of Cochlear Development, National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
4These authors contributed equally
5Lead Contact
*Correspondence: ariel.levine@nih.gov
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.02.003
SUMMARY
To understand the cellular basis of behavior, it is
necessary to know the cell types that exist in the
nervous system and their contributions to function.
Spinal networks are essential for sensory processing
and motor behavior and provide a powerful system
for identifying the cellular correlates of behavior.
Here, we used massively parallel single nucleus
RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) to create an atlas of
the adult mouse lumbar spinal cord. We identiﬁed
and molecularly characterized 43 neuronal popula-
tions. Next, we leveraged the snRNA-seq approach
to provide unbiased identiﬁcation of neuronal popu-
lations that were active following a sensory and a
motor behavior, using a transcriptional signature of
neuronal activity. This approach can be used in
the future to link single nucleus gene expression
data with dynamic biological responses to behavior,
injury, and disease.
INTRODUCTION
To understand how networks of cells mediate behavior, it is
necessary to classify the various cell types of the brain, spinal
cord, and peripheral nervous system and to know which popu-
lations of cells are involved in speciﬁc functions. Gene expres-
sion-based deﬁnitions of cell identity have been a foundation of
spinal cord biology for the past 30 years. In particular, the use
of post-natal genetic markers to control deﬁned classes of spi-
nal cord neurons has enabled the functional characterization of
many cell types and has advanced our understanding of how
these populations contribute to normal sensory-motor behavior
(Abraira et al., 2017; Azim et al., 2014; Bikoff et al., 2016; Bour-
ane et al., 2015; Dougherty et al., 2013; Duan et al., 2014; Hilde
et al., 2016; Koch et al., 2017b; Mishra and Hoon, 2013; Peirs
et al., 2015; Satoh et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2009). However, there
are three important limitations to this approach. First, there is
no census of neuronal cell types in the adult spinal cord. The
lack of such a resource limits the application and interpretation
of genetic manipulations, and it is not known how previously
described cell types relate to one another. Second, the unique
gene expression proﬁles that endow cell types with their func-
tional repertoires are not known. Third, we lack an unbiased
approach to identify the set of spinal cord cell types associated
with a given neural function, such as motor behavior or the
response to a sensory stimulus.
Pioneeringworkusingmassivelyparallelsingle-cell sequencing
has established that a cell’s transcriptional program is a powerful
strategy for deﬁning cell type (Campbell et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2017; Jaitin et al., 2014; Lake et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016; Macosko
et al., 2015; Shin et al., 2015; Tasic et al., 2016; Usoskin et al.,
2015;
Villani
et
al.,
2017).
Furthermore,
single-cell
RNA
sequencing has been adapted to provide unbiased detection of
immediate-early gene expression in molecularly deﬁned cell
types following seizure, acute anxiety, or sensory experience in
thestriatum and visualcortex (Hrvatinet al., 2018; Wuet al.,2017).
We sought to develop an approach that simultaneously pro-
vides a single-cell gene expression census of the cell types of
the adult spinal cord and the ability to overlay a map of the tran-
scriptional signature of neuronal activity following behavior. To
characterize the gene expression and cell-type composition of
the adult mouse spinal cord, we used massively parallel single
nucleus RNA-seq (snRNA-seq). We created a catalog of spinal
cord neuronal cell types, characterizing 43 classes of neurons.
Analysis of the genes expressed in each cell type provided a
powerful resource for understanding the mechanistic basis of
functional neuronal heterogeneity. This work also revealed
distinct organizing principles for molecular heterogeneity be-
tween neuronal populations in the dorsal and ventral horns. To
provide unbiased characterization of the classes of spinal neu-
rons that were associated with deﬁned behaviors, we performed
this technique immediately following a painful sensory stimula-
tion or a locomotor behavior. This approach could be used to
reveal comprehensive single nucleus response maps for a range
of behaviors and disease states, establishing an unprecedented
2216
Cell Reports 22, 2216–2225, February 20, 2018
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

link between single nucleus gene expression and circuit- and
system-level function within the spinal cord.
RESULTS
snRNA-Seq Identiﬁcation of Major Spinal Cord Cell
Types
To adapt massively parallel RNA sequencing approaches to the
spinal cord, we opted to perform single nucleus, rather than sin-
gle cell, analysis for three key reasons: single nucleus transcrip-
tional proﬁling accurately permits cell-type analysis, avoids
experimental artifacts from transcriptional changes induced in
intact cells during the tissue dissociation process, and can be
performed easily from whole tissue, including tissue that is difﬁ-
cult to dissociate (such as the spinal cord), frozen material, and
human biobank material (Grindberg et al., 2013; Habib et al.,
2017; Lake et al., 2016, 2017; Matevossian and Akbarian, 2008).
To establish an snRNA-seq strategy for the adult spinal cord,
we used a detergent-based protocol, which allowed rapid and
thorough nuclear release and transfer of the material to cold
temperatures, thereby minimizing gene expression changes
Figure
1. Massively
Parallel
snRNA-Seq
Was Used to Deﬁne Cell Types in the Adult
Mouse Spinal Cord
(A) Summary of experimental strategy.
(B) Barnyard plot of pooled human and mouse
spinal cord nuclei showing beads that were asso-
ciated with human transcripts, mouse transcripts,
both human and mouse transcripts (mixed), or
those that could not be determined (undeter-
mined).
(C) tSNE visualization plot of 17,354 spinal cord
nuclei, colored according to seven major SC3-
deﬁned clusters: neurons, oligodendrocytes (oli-
gos), meningeal and Schwann cells, astrocytes,
vascular cells, oligodendrocyte precursor cells
(OPCs), and microglia.
(D) Heatmap of normalized mean expression for
key marker genes for each major SC3-deﬁned
cluster.
See also Figure S1 and Table S1.
(Figure 1A; Figure S1A). Nuclei were easily
isolated from adult mouse spinal cord and
frozen adult human spinal cord. We next
sought to modify Drop-Seq (Macosko
et al., 2015), a droplet-based approach
for massively parallel single-cell RNA cap-
ture, cDNA synthesis, and sequencing, to
allow this technique to be used for single
nuclei. We found that simply increasing
the concentration of detergent in the
Drop-Seq lysis buffer improved nuclear
lysis
and
generated
smaller
droplets
than standard Drop-Seq (mean 0.48 ±
0.06 nL SEM) (Figures S1B–S1D). To
determine whether this approach enables
single
nucleus
droplet
encapsulation,
nuclei from human spinal cord were pooled with nuclei from
mouse spinal cord, and we examined how many beads con-
tained both human and mouse transcripts (Figure 1B). We found
that 2% of droplets with a mouse nucleus also contained a
human nucleus (4/196 mouse nuclei), which represents a calcu-
lated doublet rate of 4.1%. Thus, single nuclei can be obtained
from difﬁcult-to-dissociate and frozen human spinal cord tissue
and can be processed through Drop-Seq with a simple buffer
modiﬁcation.
Using this approach, we sequenced and analyzed 17,354
nuclei from adult mouse lumbar spinal cord. We found seven
major clusters that corresponded to the following cell types,
based on marker expression: neurons (52% of total nuclei), ol-
igodendrocytes (16% of total nuclei), a mixed population of
meningeal and Schwann cells (14% of total nuclei), astrocytes
(9% of total nuclei), vascular cells (5% of total nuclei), oligoden-
drocyte precursor cells (1% of total nuclei), and microglia
(1% of total nuclei) (Figure 1D; Figure S1E; Table S1). The diver-
sity of the RNA transcript yield that we obtained, reﬂected in
the number of genes per nucleus, varied among cell types
(Figure S1F).
Cell Reports 22, 2216–2225, February 20, 2018
2217

Census of Adult Spinal Cord Neuronal Populations
To identify and characterize neuronal classes within the adult
mouse spinal cord, 4,280 neuronal nuclei were analyzed and
partitioned into 43 clusters (Figure 2A; Figure S2A; Table S2).
We ﬁrst characterized the neurotransmitter status, a core feature
of neuronal identity, of each cluster by analyzing excitatory,
inhibitory, and cholinergic marker expression. We found that
53% of neuronal nuclei were in 23 predominantly excitatory clus-
ters (including 2 cholinergic clusters), 45% were in 18 predomi-
nantly inhibitory clusters, and 2.5% were in 2 clusters with
both excitatory and inhibitory markers (Figure S3A). Within this
latter group, only rare individual neuronal nuclei co-expressed
excitatory and inhibitory markers (n = 2/109), which may reﬂect
doublets and cannot account for the substantial fractions of
excitatory and inhibitory marker-expressing nuclei in these clus-
ters. Therefore, these two clusters contained separate excitatory
and inhibitory populations that share overall similar gene
expression.
Next, we analyzed relationships between clusters by per-
forming Euclidean-based hierarchical clustering on the mean
expression of each gene in each cluster (Figure 2B). A dendro-
gram presentation of these relationships revealed seven major
groupings, ﬁve of which shared a common neurotransmitter
status (groups 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7) (Figure 2B). To determine
what
other
parameters
are
major
organizing
features
of
neuronal populations, we compared all genes that signiﬁcantly
contributed to deﬁning any cluster with public gene expression
databases (Gong et al., 2003; Lein et al., 2007). This allowed us
to probe the cluster distribution of previously known marker
genes (Figure S3B) and to determine the spatial location of
each cluster. We found that 55% of neuronal nuclei were in
25 dorsal clusters, 34% were in 13 ventral clusters, and 11%
were in 5 clusters in the deep dorsal horn or intermediate
zone. Four of seven major dendrogram groupings each had a
common regional location within the spinal cord (groups 1, 2,
3, and 5) (Figure 2B). To further analyze neurotransmitter status
and spatial location across clusters, each population was
colored by these features and plotted by t-distributed stochas-
tic neighbor embedding (tSNE) analysis (Figure 2C). The struc-
ture of the tSNE distribution of neurons according to these
parameters supported the importance of location and neuro-
transmitter status as deﬁning features of spinal cord cell types.
Accordingly, clusters were named by their spatial location
(D, dorsal; V, ventral; or M, deep dorsal, intermediate, or
‘‘mid’’ cord) and their neurotransmitter status (E, excitatory;
I, inhibitory; M, mixed; C, cholinergic) (Figure 2).
A major difference in cluster organization was observed be-
tween dorsal and ventral clusters. tSNE visualization revealed
that dorsal clusters form an outer ring of discrete groups while
ventral clusters overlapped one another in the center of the
plot, with deep dorsal and intermediate clusters between (Fig-
ure 2C). Similarly, dorsal clusters were generally present as ho-
mogeneous blocks in a cell consensus matrix and had high
SC3 silhouette width consensus values (a measure that repre-
sents the diagonality of the matrix), while ventral clusters showed
inter-relatedness with other ventral clusters and had low silhou-
ette width consensus values (Figure S2). At a molecular level,
markers for ventral clusters were often shared across ventral
populations (as explained later). These differences were not
based on a failure to segregate ventral neurons due to low mo-
lecular information content, because the number of genes per
nucleus was 2,465 ± 202 in ventral neurons and 1,346 ± 33 in
dorsal neurons (mean ± SEM). This analysis suggests a general
principle that the dorsal horn of the spinal cord contains more
molecularly distinct populations while the ventral horn displays
overlapping gene expression patterns.
We next sought to determine what categories of genes drive
neuronal diversity. Gene ontology (GO) term analysis of the
Figure
2. Massively
Parallel
snRNA-Seq
Identiﬁed 43 Neuronal Populations in the
Adult Spinal Cord
(A) tSNE visualization plot and cluster key of 4,280
spinal cord neuronal nuclei, colored according to
membership in 43 SC3-deﬁned clusters. Cluster
names were assigned based on cluster location
(D, dorsal; M, mid; and V, ventral) and neuro-
transmitter
status
(E,
excitatory;
I,
inhibitory;
M, mixed; and C, cholinergic), as shown in the key
below the plot.
(B) Unrooted dendrogram depicting cluster re-
lationships based on mean gene expression for
each cluster. Units shown are Euclidean distance.
(C) tSNE visualization plots of spinal cord neuronal
nuclei, colored to depict neurotransmitter status
(green, excitatory; red, inhibitory; yellow, mixed;
cholinergic
clusters
were
also
predominantly
excitatory and are green) or location (blue, dorsal;
orange, ventral; purple, deep dorsal, intermediate
zone, or mid).
See also Figures S2 and S3 and Tables S2 and S3.
2218
Cell Reports 22, 2216–2225, February 20, 2018

top genes associated with each cluster was performed. We
found that neurotransmitter receptors and ion channels,
transcription factors, and cyclic AMP (cAMP) signal transduc-
tion components are signiﬁcantly over-represented among
the top genes that contribute to deﬁning these clusters (Fig-
ure 3A). Many genes within these molecular function families
were enriched or speciﬁcally expressed in particular popula-
tions or related groups (Figures S3C–S3E).
To identify candidate marker genes for the 43 clusters, and to
characterize their gene expression proﬁles, we further analyzed
all genes that signiﬁcantly contributed to deﬁning each cluster.
Many clusters were partially deﬁned by previously established
markers (Figure S3B) (Abraira et al., 2017; Bikoff et al., 2016;
Koch et al., 2017a; Lu et al., 2015; Todd, 2017), and in most of
these clusters, we identiﬁed new key genes (Figures 3B and 4).
In addition, we identiﬁed previously unrecognized cell popula-
tions (Figure 4). Table S3 is a searchable database of the mean
gene expression and the percent cluster membership for each
gene. This provides the opportunity to probe the molecular iden-
tity of each population or to search across clusters for a gene of
interest. A summary of each group of clusters with highlighted
ﬁndings follows.
Group 1 was composed of the dorsal excitatory (DE) clusters
DE-1–DE-3. These clusters shared expression of the tran-
scription factor Ebf2 (together with DE-4–DE-7) and the
g-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor Gabrg3. They were
peptidergic, expressing the enzyme Pam and the genes for
neuropeptides Grp and/or Sst. DE-1 expressed the mu opioid
receptor Oprm1, DE-2 expressed the peptide receptor
Npy1r, and DE-3 expressed Ntrk2/TrkB.
Group 2 was composed of the dorsal inhibitory (DI) clusters
DI-1–DI-3. These clusters shared expression of the peptide
receptor Sstr2, as well as the glutamate receptor Grik2 and
the potassium channel Kcnc2. DI-1 expressed Calb2/calreti-
nin, and DI-2 and DI-3 were peptidergic, expressing the
enzyme Pam and the genes for Gal (DI-2) and Pnoc/nocicep-
tion (DI-3), as well as Nos1 (DI-3).
Group 3 was composed of the DE clusters DE-4–DE-10.
There were two subgroups. DE-4–DE-7 expressed Ebf2
(together with DE-1–DE-3) and Calb1/calbindin and were
peptidergic, expressing Pam, as well as Sst/SOM (DE-4
and DE-5), Tac2/NeurokininA (DE-5), Calca/CGRP (DE-5),
Nts/neurotensin (DE-6), Penk/enkephalin (DE-6), and Cck
(DE-7). DE-4 also expressed Prkcg/PKCg. DE-8–DE-10 ex-
pressed the transcription factor Maf and were not peptider-
gic. DE-8 expressed Cbln2, DE-9 expressed Adarb2, and
DE-10 expressed enriched levels of Slc17a8/vGlut3.
Group 4 was composed of the ventral inhibitory (VI) clusters
VI-1–VI-5, ventral excitatory (VE) clusters VE-1–VE-4, ventral
mixed (VM) clusters VM-1 and VM-2, and mid inhibitory (MI)
deep dorsal clusters MI-1 and MI-2. Overall, this group
shared expression of the transcription factors Esrrg/ERRg
and Foxp2, as well as the sodium channel Scn1a, which
has been shown to correlate positively with maximum ﬁring
rate (Tripathy et al., 2017). Several ventral clusters (VI-1,
VI-4, VI-5, VE-3, and VE-4) and MI-2 also shared expression
of the peri-neuronal net components Acan and Bcan and
the link protein Hapln1. This is consistent with the observation
that peri-neuronal nets have been shown to surround many
previously unidentiﬁed ventral neurons (Galtrey et al., 2008).
Cluster VI-5 was also distinguished by being enriched for
nearly all genes associated with the mammalian target of ra-
pamycin (mTOR) complexes mTORC1 and mTORC2 that
Figure 3. Gene Expression that Deﬁned Spinal Cord Neuronal
Populations
(A) Summarized GO terms that were signiﬁcantly enriched (>1.3 enrichment
score) among the top genes associated with each cluster.
(B) Validation co-labeling for pairs of cluster-deﬁning genes using immuno-
ﬂuorescence (DE-4 and DE-7) or ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (DE-5, DI-1,
and DI-4). Images taken at 203, with the full image (scale bar, 200 mm) and
magniﬁcation (scale bar, 100 mm) shown in the left and right panels of each
pair, respectively.
See also Figure S3 and Table S3.
Cell Reports 22, 2216–2225, February 20, 2018
2219

play key roles in cell metabolism and survival (Laplante and
Sabatini,
2012),
including
Mtor/mTOR,
Rptor/RAPTOR,
Mlst8/GbL, Deptor, Rictor, and Mapkap1/SIN1, as well as
the mTOR pathway regulators Rheb, Tsc1, and Tsc2. Surpris-
ingly, many embryonic and early postnatal ventral cell fate
markers were found within these clusters and may provide
a link between the embryonic lineage-deﬁned identity and
the adult populations described here (Figure S3F) (Alvarez
et al., 2005; Bikoff et al., 2016; Catela et al., 2015; Lu
et al., 2015; Perry et al., 2015; Seredick et al., 2014). As
examples, VE-1–VE-3 were enriched for embryonic lineage
Figure
4. Summary
of
43
Spinal
Cord
Neuronal Populations
For each population, the cluster name, a putative
cell-type assignment, and key marker genes are
shown. Previously undescribed cell types and
markers are shown in bold. The expression of the
marker genes across clusters are shown as a
heatmap of normalized mean gene expression.
See also Table S3.
V2a markers, including Vsx2/Chx10,
Shox2, Lhx3, and Lhx4, and cluster
VI-4 was enriched for the embryonic
lineage dI6 markers Wt1 and Dmrt3
and the embryonic lineage V1-subtype
markers
Chrna2
(Renshaw),
Pvalb
(1a
inhibitory
interneurons),
and
Esrrb/Nr3b2. However, many of these
embryonically expressed genes had
very low expression levels in these
clusters, and even for the genes with
stronger expression, it is not certain
whether the same cells continue to ex-
press these genes from embryonic
through adult stages.
Group 5 was composed of the DE
clusters DE-11 and DE-12, which
shared expression of the transcription
factor Sox5 and the potassium chan-
nel Kcnd3. DE-11 was peptidergic,
expressing Pam, Penk, and Tac1/sub-
stance P, while DE-12 was not pepti-
dergic but expressed the peptide
receptor Grpr.
Group 6 was composed of a diverse
collection of clusters: DI-4, DE-13–
DE-16, MI-3, mid excitatory (ME) clus-
ter ME-1, and ventral cholinergic (VC)
clusters
VC-1 and VC-2.
Clusters
DI-4 and DE-13–DE-16 are peptider-
gic, expressing Npy (DI-4), Calca/
CGRP (DE-13), Cck and Tac1/sub-
stance
P
(DE-14),
Pdyn/dynorphin
(DE-15), and Penk/enkephalin (DE-
16). VC-1 expressed the embryonic
lineage V0c marker Pitx2. VC-2 ex-
pressed markers of spinal motoneurons, including Prph/pe-
ripherin, Isl1, Map1b, Nrg1, and Slit3, as well as Nkain1, which
has been shown to correlate positively with input resistance
(Tripathy et al., 2017).
Group 7 was composed of the DI clusters DI-5–DI-9 and the
deep dorsal cluster MI-4 that shared expression of the gluta-
mate receptor Grik2. These clusters expressed previously
described DI transcription factors Gbx1 (DI-5), Lhx1 (DI-7),
and Rorb (DI-9). DI-5 also expressed the estrogen receptor
Esr1, DI-6 expressed Cdh3 and Kcnip2, and DI-8 expressed
Nrgn/Neurogranin.
2220
Cell Reports 22, 2216–2225, February 20, 2018

Collectively, these 43 clusters establish an atlas of spinal cord
neuronal populations and their constituent molecules.
snRNA-Seq Following Behavior Identiﬁed Active
Neurons
Having characterized the spinal cord neuron populations, we
next considered that snRNA-seq could provide an unbiased,
cell-type based characterization of neurons that express imme-
diate-early genes following a behavioral paradigm. We found
that direct isolation of nuclei did not induce Fos RNA (Figure S1A)
but that detectable Fos expression in nuclei could be induced
Figure 5. snRNA-Seq Identiﬁed Active Neu-
rons Following Behavior
(A) Characteristic pattern of cFOS expression at
baseline, following rotarod locomotion or after
formalin injection in the hindpaw, at 60 min
following behavior.
(B) Fos RNA expression as detected by snRNA-
seq across clusters in baseline, rotarod, and
formalin samples, shown as normalized mean
gene expression per cluster.
(C) Experimental validation of clusters associated
with each behavior, as detected by snRNA-seq.
For each cluster, a marker gene was compared
with
cFOS
protein
expression
by
immuno-
ﬂuorescence
(En1:Cre;Ai9/Chx10,
Satb1,
and
Neurogranin) or Fos RNA by ﬂuorescent in situ
hybridization (Rorb and Npy) (scale bars, 100 mm).
(D) Summary of the set of neuronal populations
associated with each behavior, as identiﬁed by
snRNA-seq.
See also Figure S4.
5 min following a painful sensory stimulus
(formalin hindpaw injection) (Figure S4).
To determine whether Fos RNA can be
detected
at
the single
nucleus
level
following behavior, snRNA-seq was per-
formed following formalin injection or ro-
tarod locomotion. Fos was expressed in
a higher proportion of nuclei following ro-
tarod
locomotion
(1.6%)
or
formalin
administration
(1.9%)
compared
with
baseline
(0.48%),
and
the
level
of
Fos gene expression was signiﬁcantly
increased (0.0082 ± 0.0025 counts per
million (cpm) after rotarod, 0.0175 ±
0.0040 cpm after formalin, and 0.0024 ±
0.0009 cpm at baseline; mean ± SEM;
p < 0.001, ANOVA, corrected p value).
Thus,
massively
parallel
snRNA-seq
following behavior detected a transcrip-
tional signature of neuronal activity.
Next, we used the distribution of Fos
RNA expression to map neuronal activity
across clusters following rotarod locomo-
tion or formalin administration, because
these experimental paradigms produce
classic patterns of cFOS protein expres-
sion (Figure 5A) (Herdegen et al., 1994; Jasmin et al., 1994). Dur-
ing locomotion, each of the major ventral embryonic lineage
domains gives rise to neurons that are important for speciﬁc fea-
tures of locomotion, such as ﬂexor and extensor alternation (V1-
and V2b-derived cells) and left and right alternation (V2a-derived
cells) (Crone et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2014). In addition, cholin-
ergic interneurons express cFOS protein following locomotion in
cat, and these may correlate with V0c neurons (Huang et al.,
2000; Zagoraiou et al., 2009). However, the identities of locomo-
tor-associated intermediate and dorsal horn neurons are not well
established, with the exceptions of protein kinase C gamma
Cell Reports 22, 2216–2225, February 20, 2018
2221

(PKCg)-expressing neurons in the rat (Neumann et al., 2008) and
Rorb-expressing neurons (Koch et al., 2017b). We hypothesized
that the application of snRNA-seq following rotarod running
would help to reveal the set of adult neurons that are active dur-
ing locomotion.
Following locomotion, Fos RNA was detected in ventral clus-
ters VC-1 (which includes Pitx2-expressing V0c neurons), VC-2
(spinal motoneurons), VE-4 (which includes putative V2a neu-
rons) and VI-5 (which includes putative V1/V2b neurons), thereby
conﬁrming that these cell types are associated with locomotion
(Figure 5B). We used markers to validate this approach and
found that VE-4 (Chx10) and VI-5 cells (En1:Cre;Ai9) express
cFOS after rotarod locomotion (Figure 5C). Within the intermedi-
ate zone and dorsal horn, clusters ME-1, MI-1, DE-5, DI-6, and
DI-8 expressed Fos RNA, but we did not detect Fos RNA in clus-
ter DE-4 that expresses Prkcg/PKCg (Figure 5B). This may be
due to species differences or a technical false negative. Rorb
expression is highest in cluster DI-9, which was not detected us-
ing this approach, but it is also present in cluster DI-8, which did
express Fos after locomotion. Using markers for clusters ME-1
(Satb1) and DI-8 (Nrgn), we conﬁrmed that these newly deﬁned
clusters express cFOS protein after locomotion, thereby ex-
panding the known set of neuronal populations that are associ-
ated with this core behavior (Figure 5D).
Formalin administration is a well-established pain assay, and it
has previously been shown to activate predominantly dorsal
horn spinal cord neurons, including those that express Gal,
Sstr2, Nos1, Npy, Penk, and Tacr1/Nk1r, creating speciﬁc ex-
pectations for which clusters should be detected (Herdegen
et al., 1994; Hossaini et al., 2010; Lee et al., 1993; Polga´ r et al.,
2013). Following formalin injection, Fos RNA was observed in
clusters DI-2 (which includes Gal and Sstr2-expressing neurons),
DI-3 (which includes Nos1-expressing neurons), and DI-4 (which
includes Npy-expressing neurons), conﬁrming that these neu-
rons express Fos after formalin administration, as well as DI-8,
DI-9, DE-7, VI-4, VC-1, VC-2, and MI-2 (Figure 5C). Penk and
Tacr1/Nk1r are both distributed across several clusters. We
used markers for clusters DI-4 (Npy), DI-8 (Nrgn), and DI-9
(Rorb) to validate these ﬁndings and found that these popula-
tions express Fos RNA or cFOS protein following formalin
administration (Figure 5C). Thus, in both a sensory test and a
motor behavior, massively parallel snRNA-seq provided an unbi-
ased deﬁnition of cell types that displayed activity-induced tran-
scription and revealed new cell types that are associated with
each function.
DISCUSSION
The spinal cord plays essential roles in sensory processing and
motor control, but how the cells of the cord function together
in networks to mediate behavior is not well understood. Here,
we sought to identify spinal cord cell types and their contribu-
tions to behavior through single nucleus transcriptional proﬁling.
Massively parallel snRNA-seq was used to analyze more than
17,000 nuclei from the adult mouse spinal cord. We created an
atlas of spinal cord neuronal populations, characterizing 43 cell
types. By applying snRNA-seq following behavior, we detected
transcriptional signatures of neuronal activity and identiﬁed
neuronal populations associated with a sensory and a motor
function.
We have described 43 neuronal populations within the adult
mouse lumbar spinal cord, including previously unrecognized
cell types. This work establishes a cellular framework for the spi-
nal cord and facilitates the comparison and integration of prior
work that generally used single markers to deﬁne cell types.
We detected clusters that correspond to nearly all previously
described adult spinal cord neuronal populations, with the
primary exceptions being populations that were previously
described by a single marker gene that is expressed more
broadly within the spinal cord (such as Penk and Pvalb).
The perspective afforded by massively parallel single nucleus
sequencing also revealed an intriguing difference between dor-
sal and ventral neuronal populations. We found that dorsal
neuron types were more distinct from one another, forming
discrete clusters, while ventral neuron types were more closely
associated with one another. Previously, most analysis of spinal
cord cell types emphasized adult molecular markers in the dorsal
horn and embryonic lineage domain-deﬁned cell types in the
ventral horn. Together with our ﬁndings, this may reﬂect different
organizing principles for neuronal identity in the dorsal and
ventral spinal cord. It is possible that in the adult spinal cord,
cellular identity in the dorsal horn is governed by restricted and
ongoing expression of genes for speciﬁc cellular functions,
whereas in the ventral horn, it is governed by factors deﬁned dur-
ing development, such as cell location, axon guidance, and
genetically programmed synaptic speciﬁcity.
This work also reveals the molecular repertoire of each
neuronal population, providing a signiﬁcant extension of our un-
derstanding of spinal cord cell types. The searchable database
that is included here (Table S3) will allow researchers to probe
the complement of genes in cell types of interest and analyze
the expression of genes of interest across clusters. This will
serve as a powerful tool to advance our understanding of the
molecular mechanisms that mediate functional heterogeneity
among neuronal populations.
Despite the strengths of this work, three major limitations
must be noted. First, we detected a lower number of genes
per nucleus than is typically detected from whole cells or nuclei
(Grindberg et al., 2013; Habib et al., 2016, 2017; Lacar et al.,
2016; Lake et al., 2016; Macosko et al., 2015). This is likely
due to several factors, including the lower amount of RNA in
the nucleus compared with the whole cell, the trade-off be-
tween resolution and scale for low-throughput versus massively
parallel approaches, technical differences such as mRNA cap-
ture and reverse transcription efﬁciency, and cell-type differ-
ences. Despite this ﬁrst limitation, we obtained a sufﬁcient
number of genes per nucleus to permit successful clustering
of neuronal populations. A second major limitation is that this
work only characterized the cell types of the lumbar spinal
cord. Although the major classes of known cell types are pre-
sent along the full rostro-caudal axis of the spinal cord, work
has revealed that distinct subpopulations may vary at different
segmental levels (Francius et al., 2013; Hayashi et al., 2018;
Sweeney et al., 2018). Accordingly, future work is necessary
to fully characterize spinal cord cell types outside of the lumbar
region. A third major limitation is that the use of snRNA-seq for
2222
Cell Reports 22, 2216–2225, February 20, 2018

activity proﬁling can only identify cells that induced a transcrip-
tional response above a detection threshold. As a result, this
approach will not detect all neural activity, and negative results
must be interpreted with caution.
Massively parallel single nucleus transcriptional proﬁling has
the potential to reveal unprecedented knowledge about cell
types, the transcriptional programs of cell types, and gene
expression control in an array of in vivo settings in animal
models. With this resource in hand, single nucleus transcriptional
proﬁling can be used to probe spinal cord neuronal and non-
neuronal responses to disease or injury, to study how the molec-
ular and cellular composition of a tissue changes over time, and
to reveal the selective loss of cell types during degeneration or
gain of cell types during inﬂammation. Because nuclei are readily
obtained from human patient-derived and archived bio-bank
material, snRNA-seq can be applied to study human biology
as well (Habib et al., 2017; Lake et al., 2016; Matevossian and
Akbarian, 2008). We now have the tools to reach a new level in
our understanding of the molecular and cellular mechanisms
by which complex tissues mediate basic function, behavior,
and disease.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Mice and Behavior
All animal work was performed in accordance with a protocol approved by the
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Animal Care and Use
Committee. Balanced samples of male and female ICR/CD-1 wild-type
mice, between 8 and 12 weeks old, were used for all experiments except those
shown in Figure 5C, for which En1:Cre;Ai9 mice (Stock No. 007916 3 Stock
No. 007909, both from The Jackson Laboratory) were used. Formalin injection
was done by injecting 30–40 mL of 2% paraformaldehyde into the plantar sur-
face of the hindpaw. Rotarod testing was done with a standard program accel-
erating from 0 to 40 rotations per minute over 5 min.
Nuclei Preparation
This protocol was adapted from Halder et al. (2016). Animals were euthanized
by CO2 inhalation, the lumbar spinal cord was rapidly dissected, and dorsal
root ganglia were removed. The cords were dounced in 500 mL of sucrose
buffer (0.32 M sucrose, 10 mM HEPES [pH 8.0], 5 mM CaCl2, 3 mM Mg-ace-
tate, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT) with 0.1% Triton X-100 using ﬁve strokes with
the A pestle (Kontes Dounce Tissue Grinder) followed by ﬁve strokes with the B
pestle. The lysate was then diluted with 3 mL of sucrose buffer and was centri-
fuged at 3,200 3 g for 10 min. The supernatant was removed, and 3 mL of su-
crose buffer was added to the pellet and incubated for 1–2 min; the loosened
pellet was then transferred to an Oak Ridge centrifuge tube. The pellet was
then homogenized using Ultra-Turrax on setting 1 for 1 min. 12 mL of density
buffer (1 M sucrose, 10 mM HEPES [pH 8.0], 3 mM Mg-acetate, 1 mM DTT)
was then added carefully below the nuclei layer, and the tube was centrifuged
at 3,200 3 g for 20 min. The supernatant was then rapidly poured off, and the
nuclei on the walls of the tube were collected with 1 mL of PBS with 0.02% BSA
and spun at 3,200 3 g for 10 min. Nuclei were then resuspended in PBS with
0.02% BSA.
Drop-Seq and Analysis
Each Drop-Seq sample was produced from the lumbar cords of a pair of ICR
mice 8–12 weeks old. There were nine independent samples for baseline (four
male and ﬁve female), ﬁve independent samples for formalin treatment (three
male and two female), and ﬁve independent samples for rotarod behavior
(three male and two female).
The Drop-Seq method was performed as previously described (Macosko
et al., 2015) except that the following concentrations were used: 225 nuclei/mL,
250 beads/mL, and 0.7% sarkosyl in the lysis buffer; ﬂow rates were adjusted
accordingly. Clustering was performed using SC3 consensus clustering (Kise-
lev et al., 2017). All antibodies and in situ hybridization probes used for valida-
tion are listed in Table S4.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
The accession number for the raw sequencing data reported in this paper is
GEO: GSE103892.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
four ﬁgures, and four tables and can be found with this article online at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.02.003.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Human adult spinal cord tissues were procured by the National Disease
Research
Interchange
(NDRI)
with
support
from
NIH
grant
2
U42
OD011158 and the assistance of Dr. Christopher Grunseich and Dr. Ken-
neth Fischbeck. We thank Dr. Arnab Barik for expertise and assistance
with in situ hybridization, Dr. Alexander Chesler for sharing reagents, and
Dr. Yuesheng Li for expertise and assistance with sequencing. The Lbx1
antibody was a gift of Dr. Carmen Birchmeier. This research was supported
by NIH Intramural Research Program funding from the NINDS (1 ZIA
NS003153 02 to A.S., K.R.J., L.L., K.J.E.M., C.I.D., A.R.R., T.B.B., and
A.J.L.) and the NIDCD (1 ZIA DC000059 18 to M.C.K. and M.W.K.).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.S. and A.J.L. conceived the project. K.R.J. performed all bio-informatic anal-
ysis. K.J.E.M., M.C.K., and A.J.L. performed Drop-Seq experiments. A.S.,
L.L., A.R.R., T.B.B., and C.I.D. performed validation experiments. A.S.,
K.R.J.,
K.J.E.M.,
M.C.K.,
M.W.K.,
and
A.J.L.
analyzed
experiments.
A.S., K.R.J., and A.J.L. wrote the manuscript.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: September 13, 2017
Revised: December 19, 2017
Accepted: January 30, 2018
Published: February 20, 2018
REFERENCES
Abraira, V.E., Kuehn, E.D., Chirila, A.M., Springel, M.W., Toliver, A.A., Zimmer-
man, A.L., Oreﬁce, L.L., Boyle, K.A., Bai, L., Song, B.J., et al. (2017). The
cellular and synaptic architecture of the mechanosensory dorsal horn. Cell
168, 295–310.e19.
Alvarez, F.J., Jonas, P.C., Sapir, T., Hartley, R., Berrocal, M.C., Geiman, E.J.,
Todd, A.J., and Goulding, M. (2005). Postnatal phenotype and localization of
spinal cord V1 derived interneurons. J. Comp. Neurol. 493, 177–192.
Azim, E., Jiang, J., Alstermark, B., and Jessell, T.M. (2014). Skilled reaching re-
lies on a V2a propriospinal internal copy circuit. Nature 508, 357–363.
Bikoff, J.B., Gabitto, M.I., Rivard, A.F., Drobac, E., Machado, T.A., Miri, A.,
Brenner-Morton, S., Famojure, E., Diaz, C., Alvarez, F.J., et al. (2016). Spinal
inhibitory interneuron diversity delineates variant motor microcircuits. Cell
165, 207–219.
Bourane, S., Grossmann, K.S., Britz, O., Dalet, A., Del Barrio, M.G., Stam, F.J.,
Garcia-Campmany, L., Koch, S., and Goulding, M. (2015). Identiﬁcation of a
spinal circuit for light touch and ﬁne motor control. Cell 160, 503–515.
Campbell, J.N., Macosko, E.Z., Fenselau, H., Pers, T.H., Lyubetskaya, A.,
Tenen, D., Goldman, M., Verstegen, A.M.J., Resch, J.M., McCarroll, S.A.,
Cell Reports 22, 2216–2225, February 20, 2018
2223

et al. (2017). A molecular census of arcuate hypothalamus and median
eminence cell types. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 484–496.
Catela, C., Shin, M.M., and Dasen, J.S. (2015). Assembly and function of spinal
circuits for motor control. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 31, 669–698.
Chen, R., Wu, X., Jiang, L., and Zhang, Y. (2017). Single-cell RNA-seq reveals
hypothalamic cell diversity. Cell Rep. 18, 3227–3241.
Crone, S.A., Quinlan, K.A., Zagoraiou, L., Droho, S., Restrepo, C.E., Lundfald,
L., Endo, T., Setlak, J., Jessell, T.M., Kiehn, O., and Sharma, K. (2008). Genetic
ablation of V2a ipsilateral interneurons disrupts left-right locomotor coordina-
tion in mammalian spinal cord. Neuron 60, 70–83.
Dougherty, K.J., Zagoraiou, L., Satoh, D., Rozani, I., Doobar, S., Arber, S., Jes-
sell, T.M., and Kiehn, O. (2013). Locomotor rhythm generation linked to the
output of spinal shox2 excitatory interneurons. Neuron 80, 920–933.
Duan, B., Cheng, L., Bourane, S., Britz, O., Padilla, C., Garcia-Campmany, L.,
Krashes, M., Knowlton, W., Velasquez, T., Ren, X., et al. (2014). Identiﬁcation
of spinal circuits transmitting and gating mechanical pain. Cell 159, 1417–
1432.
Francius, C., Harris, A., Rucchin, V., Hendricks, T.J., Stam, F.J., Barber, M.,
Kurek, D., Grosveld, F.G., Pierani, A., Goulding, M., et al. (2013). Identiﬁcation
of multiple subsets of ventral interneurons and differential distribution along
the rosstrocaudal axis of the developing spinal cord. PLoS One 8, e70325.
Galtrey, C.M., Kwok, J.C.F., Carulli, D., Rhodes, K.E., and Fawcett, J.W.
(2008). Distribution and synthesis of extracellular matrix proteoglycans, hyalur-
onan, link proteins and tenascin-R in the rat spinal cord. Eur. J. Neurosci. 27,
1373–1390.
Gong, S., Zheng, C., Doughty, M.L., Losos, K., Didkovsky, N., Schambra, U.B.,
Nowak, N.J., Joyner, A., Leblanc, G., Hatten, M.E., and Heintz, N. (2003).
A gene expression atlas of the central nervous system based on bacterial arti-
ﬁcial chromosomes. Nature 425, 917–925.
Grindberg, R.V., Yee-Greenbaum, J.L., McConnell, M.J., Novotny, M.,
O’Shaughnessy, A.L., Lambert, G.M., Arau´ zo-Bravo, M.J., Lee, J., Fishman,
M., Robbins, G.E., et al. (2013). RNA-sequencing from single nuclei. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 19802–19807.
Habib, N., Li, Y., Heidenreich, M., Swiech, L., Avraham-Davidi, I., Trombetta,
J.J., Hession, C., Zhang, F., and Regev, A. (2016). Div-Seq: Single-nucleus
RNA-Seq reveals dynamics of rare adult newborn neurons. Science 353,
925–928.
Habib, N., Avraham-Davidi, I., Basu, A., Burks, T., Shekhar, K., Hofree, M.,
Choudhury, S.R., Aguet, F., Gelfand, E., Ardlie, K., et al. (2017). Massively par-
allel single-nucleus RNA-seq with DroNc-seq. Nat. Methods 14, 955–958.
Halder, R., Hennion, M., Vidal, R.O., Shomroni, O., Rahman, R.U., Rajput, A.,
Centeno, T.P., van Bebber, F., Capece, V., Garcia Vizcaino, J.C., et al. (2016).
DNA methylation changes in plasticity genes accompany the formation and
maintenance of memory. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 102–110.
Hayashi, M., Hinckley, C.A., Driscoll, S.P., Moore, N.J., Levine, A.J., Hilde,
K.L., Sharma, K., and Pfaff, S.L. (2018). Graded arrays of spinal and supraspi-
nal V2a interneuron subtypes underlie forelimb and hindlimb motor control.
Neuron, Published online February 1, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.
2018.01.023.
Herdegen, T., R€udiger, S., Mayer, B., Bravo, R., and Zimmermann, M. (1994).
Expression of nitric oxide synthase and colocalisation with Jun, Fos and Krox
transcription factors in spinal cord neurons following noxious stimulation of the
rat hindpaw. Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. 22, 245–258.
Hilde, K.L., Levine, A.J., Hinckley, C.A., Hayashi, M., Montgomery, J.M., Gullo,
M., Driscoll, S.P., Grosschedl, R., Kohwi, Y., Kohwi-Shigematsu, T., and Pfaff,
S.L. (2016). Satb2 is required for the development of a spinal exteroceptive
microcircuit that modulates limb position. Neuron 91, 763–776.
Hossaini, M., Duraku, L.S., Sarac¸ , C., Jongen, J.L.M., and Holstege, J.C.
(2010). Differential distribution of activated spinal neurons containing glycine
and/or GABA and expressing c-fos in acute and chronic pain models. Pain
151, 356–365.
Hrvatin, S., Hochbaum, D.R., Nagy, M.A., Cicconet, M., Robertson, K., Chea-
dle, L., Zilionis, R., Ratner, A., Borges-Monroy, R., Klein, A.M., et al. (2018).
Single-cell analysis of experience-dependent transcriptomic states in the
mouse visual cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 120–129.
Huang, A., Noga, B.R., Carr, P.A., Fedirchuk, B., and Jordan, L.M. (2000). Spi-
nal cholinergic neurons activated during locomotion: localization and electro-
physiological characterization. J. Neurophysiol. 83, 3537–3547.
Jaitin, D.A., Kenigsberg, E., Keren-Shaul, H., Elefant, N., Paul, F., Zaretsky, I.,
Mildner, A., Cohen, N., Jung, S., Tanay, A., and Amit, I. (2014). Massively par-
allel single-cell RNA-seq for marker-free decomposition of tissues into cell
types. Science 343, 776–779.
Jasmin, L., Gogas, K.R., Ahlgren, S.C., Levine, J.D., and Basbaum, A.I. (1994).
Walking evokes a distinctive pattern of Fos-like immunoreactivity in the caudal
brainstem and spinal cord of the rat. Neuroscience 58, 275–286.
Kiselev, V.Y., Kirschner, K., Schaub, M.T., Andrews, T., Yiu, A., Chandra, T.,
Natarajan, K.N., Reik, W., Barahona, M., Green, A.R., and Hemberg, M.
(2017). SC3: consensus clustering of single cell RNA-seq data. Nat. Methods
14, 483–486.
Koch, S.C., Acton, D., and Goulding, M. (2017a). Spinal circuits for touch, pain,
and itch. Annu. Rev. Physiol. Published online September 27, 2017. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev-physiol-022516-034303.
Koch, S.C., Del Barrio, M.G., Dalet, A., Gatto, G., G€unther, T., Zhang, J., Seid-
ler, B., Saur, D., Sch€ule, R., and Goulding, M. (2017b). RORb spinal interneu-
rons gate sensory transmission during locomotion to secure a ﬂuid walking
gait. Neuron 96, 1419–1431.e5.
Lacar, B., Linker, S.B., Jaeger, B.N., Krishnaswami, S.R., Barron, J.J., Kelder,
M.J., Parylak, S.L., Paquola, A.C., Venepally, P., Novotny, M., et al. (2016). Nu-
clear RNA-seq of single neurons reveals molecular signatures of activation.
Nat. Commun. 7, 1–12.
Lake, B.B., Ai, R., Kaeser, G.E., Salathia, N.S., Yung, Y.C., Liu, R., Wildberg, A.,
Gao, D., Fung, H.-L., Chen, S., et al. (2016). Neuronal subtypes and diversity
revealed by single-nucleus RNA sequencing of the human brain. Science
352, 1586–1590.
Lake, B.B., Codeluppi, S., Yung, Y.C., Gao, D., Chun, J., Kharchenko, P.V.,
Linnarsson, S., and Zhang, K. (2017). A comparative strategy for single-nu-
cleus and single-cell transcriptomes conﬁrms accuracy in predicted cell-
type expression from nuclear RNA. Sci. Rep. 7, 6031.
Laplante, M., and Sabatini, D.M. (2012). mTOR signaling in growth control and
disease. Cell 149, 274–293.
Lee, J.H., Price, R.H., Williams, F.G., Mayer, B., and Beitz, A.J. (1993). Nitric
oxide synthase is found in some spinothalamic neurons and in neuronal pro-
cesses that appose spinal neurons that express Fos induced by noxious stim-
ulation. Brain Res. 608, 324–333.
Lein, E.S., Hawrylycz, M.J., Ao, N., Ayres, M., Bensinger, A., Bernard, A., Boe,
A.F., Boguski, M.S., Brockway, K.S., Byrnes, E.J., et al. (2007). Genome-wide
atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse brain. Nature 445, 168–176.
Li, C.-L., Li, K.-C., Wu, D., Chen, Y., Luo, H., Zhao, J.-R., Wang, S.-S., Sun,
M.-M., Lu, Y.-J., Zhong, Y.-Q., et al. (2016). Somatosensory neuron types
identiﬁed by high-coverage single-cell RNA-sequencing and functional het-
erogeneity. Cell Res. 26, 83–102.
Lu, D.C., Niu, T., and Alaynick, W.A. (2015). Molecular and cellular develop-
ment of spinal cord locomotor circuitry. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 8, 25.
Macosko, E.Z., Basu, A., Satija, R., Nemesh, J., Shekhar, K., Goldman, M.,
Tirosh, I., Bialas, A.R., Kamitaki, N., Martersteck, E.M., et al. (2015). Highly par-
allel genome-wide expression proﬁling of individual cells using nanoliter drop-
lets. Cell 161, 1202–1214.
Matevossian, A., and Akbarian, S. (2008). Neuronal nuclei isolation from hu-
man postmortem brain tissue. J. Vis. Exp. 20, e914.
Mishra, S.K., and Hoon, M.A. (2013). The cells and circuitry for itch responses
in mice. Science 340, 968–971.
Neumann, S., Braz, J.M., Skinner, K., Llewellyn-Smith, I.J., and Basbaum, A.I.
(2008). Innocuous, not noxious, input activates PKCgamma interneurons
of the spinal dorsal horn via myelinated afferent ﬁbers. J. Neurosci. 28,
7936–7944.
2224
Cell Reports 22, 2216–2225, February 20, 2018

Peirs, C., Williams, S.-P.G., Zhao, X., Walsh, C.E., Gedeon, J.Y., Cagle, N.E.,
Goldring, A.C., Hioki, H., Liu, Z., Marell, P.S., and Seal, R.P. (2015). Dorsal horn
circuits for persistent mechanical pain. Neuron 87, 797–812.
Perry, S., Gezelius, H., Larhammar, M., Hilscher, M.M., Lamotte d’Incamps,
B., Leao, K.E., and Kullander, K. (2015). Firing properties of Renshaw cells
deﬁned by Chrna2 are modulated by hyperpolarizing and small conductance
ion currents Ih and ISK. Eur. J. Neurosci. 41, 889–900.
Polga´ r, E., Sardella, T.C.P., Tiong, S.Y.X., Locke, S., Watanabe, M., and Todd,
A.J. (2013). Functional differences between neurochemically deﬁned popula-
tions of inhibitory interneurons in the rat spinal dorsal horn. Pain 154, 2606–
2615.
Satoh, D., Pudenz, C., and Arber, S. (2016). Context-dependent gait choice eli-
cited by EphA4 mutation in Lbx1 spinal interneurons. Neuron 89, 1046–1058.
Seredick, S., Hutchinson, S.A., Van Ryswyk, L., Talbot, J.C., and Eisen, J.S.
(2014). Lhx3 and Lhx4 suppress Kolmer-Agduhr interneuron characteristics
within zebraﬁsh axial motoneurons. Development 141, 3900–3909.
Shin, J., Berg, D.A., Zhu, Y., Shin, J.Y., Song, J., Bonaguidi, M.A., Enikolopov,
G., Nauen, D.W., Christian, K.M., Ming, G.-L., and Song, H. (2015). Single-cell
RNA-seq with waterfall reveals molecular cascades underlying adult neuro-
genesis. Cell Stem Cell 17, 360–372.
Sun, Y.-G., Zhao, Z.-Q., Meng, X.-L., Yin, J., Liu, X.-Y., and Chen, Z.-F. (2009).
Cellular basis of itch sensation. Science 325, 1531–1534.
Sweeney, L.B., Bikoff, J.B., Gabitto, M.I., Brenner-Morton, S., Baek, M., Yang,
J.H., Tabak, E.G., Dasen, J.S., Kintner, C.R., and Jessell, T.M. (2018). Origin
and segmental diversity of spinal inhibitory interneurons. Neuron 97, 341–
355.e3.
Tasic, B., Menon, V., Nguyen, T.N., Kim, T.K., Jarsky, T., Yao, Z., Levi, B.,
Gray, L.T., Sorensen, S.A., Dolbeare, T., et al. (2016). Adult mouse cortical
cell taxonomy revealed by single cell transcriptomics. Nat. Neurosci. 19,
335–346.
Todd, A.J. (2017). Identifying functional populations among the interneurons in
laminae I–III of the spinal dorsal horn. Mol. Pain 13, 1744806917693003.
Tripathy, S.J., Toker, L., Li, B., Crichlow, C.-L., Tebaykin, D., Mancarci, B.O.,
and Pavlidis, P. (2017). Transcriptomic correlates of neuron electrophysiolog-
ical diversity. PLoS Comput. Biol. 13, e1005814.
Usoskin, D., Furlan, A., Islam, S., Abdo, H., Lo¨ nnerberg, P., Lou, D., Hjerling-
Lefﬂer, J., Haeggstro¨ m, J., Kharchenko, O., Kharchenko, P.V., et al. (2015).
Unbiased classiﬁcation of sensory neuron types by large-scale single-cell
RNA sequencing. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 145–153.
Villani, A.C., Satija, R., Reynolds, G., Sarkizova, S., Shekhar, K., Fletcher, J.,
Griesbeck, M., Butler, A., Zheng, S., Lazo, S., et al. (2017). Single-cell RNA-
seq reveals new types of human blood dendritic cells, monocytes, and pro-
genitors. Science 356, eaah4573.
Wu, Y.E., Pan, L., Zuo, Y., Li, X., and Hong, W. (2017). Detecting activated cell
populations using single-cell RNA-seq. Neuron 96, 313–329.e6.
Zagoraiou, L., Akay, T., Martin, J.F., Brownstone, R.M., Jessell, T.M., and
Miles, G.B. (2009). A cluster of cholinergic premotor interneurons modulates
mouse locomotor activity. Neuron 64, 645–662.
Zhang, J., Lanuza, G.M., Britz, O., Wang, Z., Siembab, V.C., Zhang, Y., Velas-
quez, T., Alvarez, F.J., Frank, E., and Goulding, M. (2014). V1 and v2b interneu-
rons secure the alternating ﬂexor-extensor motor activity mice require for
limbed locomotion. Neuron 82, 138–150.
Cell Reports 22, 2216–2225, February 20, 2018
2225

Cell Reports, Volume 22
Supplemental Information
Massively Parallel Single Nucleus Transcriptional
Proﬁling Deﬁnes Spinal Cord Neurons
and Their Activity during Behavior
Anupama Sathyamurthy, Kory R. Johnson, Kaya J.E. Matson, Courtney I. Dobrott, Li
Li, Anna R. Ryba, Tzipporah B. Bergman, Michael C. Kelly, Matthew W. Kelley, and Ariel J.
Levine

Figure S1. Characterization of the massively parallel single nucleus RNA-seq approach to identify spinal cord cell types. Related to Figure 1. 
Characterization of the massively parallel single nucleus RNA-seq approach to identify spinal cord cell types. (A) RT-qPCR detection of Fos RNA from 
whole spinal cord tissue, dissociated cells, and dissociated nuclei (normalized to Gapdh, performed from three independent biological samples for each). 
Mean ± s.e.m. are shown. (B) DNA visualized with DAPI stain from isolated nuclei in lysis buffer containing varying concentrations of the detergent 
sarkosyl. 0.7% sarkosyl was selected for further experiments. Scale bars are 500 μm. (C) Droplet volume with varying concentrations of sarkosyl. Mean 
± s.e.m. are shown. (D) Drop-Seq apparatus image showing bead inﬂow, nuclei inﬂow, and oil inﬂow, as well as the formation of droplets and the 
encapsulation of beads. (E) Pie chart showing the overall contribution of each major cell type to the total population of 17,354 nuclei: Neurons, 
Oligodendrocytes (Oligo), Meningeal/Schwann cells (Menin./Schw.), Astrocytes (Astro), Vascular cells (Vas), Oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPC), 
and Microglia. (F) Genes detected per nucleus, by major cell type. A violin plot distribution is shown, as well as the mean ± s.e.m.
0
0.2 0.5 0.7
1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Oligodendrocytes
6
5
1
2
3
4
0
Neurons
OPCs
Microglia
Astrocytes
Vascular cells
Schw./Menin.
Genes per nucleus
1431±10
x103
767±8
884±10
1065±20
812±10
734±31
625±23
7
A
No sarkosyl
0.2% sarkosyl
0.5% sarkosyl
0.7% sarkosyl
1% sarkosyl
F
Neurons
52%
Oligo
16%
Schw./
Menin. 
14%
Astro
 9%
Vas
   5%
OPC
1%
Microglia
1%
Sarkosyl 
concentration (%)
E
C
D
Nuclei
Oil
Bead
Encapsulated 
bead
hole tissue
Dissociated cells
Dissociated Nuclei
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
Volume (nanoliter)
Whole tissue
Dissociated cells
Dissociated Nuclei
Fold change (Fos)
B

D
V
V
D
M
M M
V
MV
V
V V
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
A
B
0
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Silhouette Value
DE-1
DE-2
DE-3
DI-1
DI-2
DI-3
DE-4
DE-5
DE-6
DE-7
DE-8
DE-9
DE-10
VI-1
VI-2
VI-3
MI-1
VM-1
VE-1
VE-2
VE-3
VI-4
MI-2
VM-2
VE-4
VI-5
DE-11
DE-12
DI-4
DE-13
DE-14
MI-3
ME-1
DE-15
DE-16
VC-1
VC-2
DI-5
MI-4
DI-6
DI-7
DI-8
DI-9
VM-2
VE-4
VI-5
VI-4
MI-2
VE-3
VC-1
VE-1
VM-1
VE-2
DI-8
DI-9
DE-11
DE-9
DE-10
DI-2
DI-3
DE-14
DI-7
DE-5
DE-15
DE-2
DE-4
DI-1
VC-2
DI-5
DI-4
DE-7
DE-6,DE-3,DE-16
DE-1
DI-6
DE-8
DE-12
DE-13
MI-3
ME-1
MI-1
MI-4
VI-1
VI-2
VI-3
Figure S2. Cluster consensus metrics. Related to Figure 2. (A) Nucleus-by-nucleus 
consensus matrix based on co-clustering within SC3. Consensus is measured on a scale 
from 0 (blue) to 1 (red). Fifty-two clusters are shown, including those that were discarded 
(see Experimental Procedures; black). Clusters DE-3, DE-6, and DE-16 were obtained by 
sub-clustering the indicated cluster. The spatial location of each cluster is shown on top 
(D – dorsal, V – ventral, M – intermediate zone/deep dorsal/”mid”). Note that the cluster 
order is distinct from other ﬁgures and is shown on the left. (B) Silhouette width 
consensus values, plotted by cluster for the ﬁnal set of forty-three clusters. This measure 
represents the “diagonality” of the consensus matrix.

Figure S3. Gene expression across clusters. Related to Figures 2 and 3. (A) 
Normalized mean gene expression for neurotransmitter markers using excitatory marker 
Slc17a6/vGlut2, inhibitory markers Slc6a5/GlyT2 (glycinergic), Gad1 (gaba-ergic), and 
Gad2 (gaba-ergic), and cholinergic markers Chat and Slc5a7/CHT. (B-F) Normalized 
mean gene expression across clusters for genes that are classic spinal cord markers (B), 
neurotransmitter receptors and channel proteins (C), transcription factors (D), cAMP 
pathway components (deﬁned by GO analysis) (E), and embryonic-lineage domain 
markers (F).

5 minutes
A
Fold change (Fos)
0
5
15
30
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Time (min)
B
Fos / DAPI
30 minutes
Figure S4. Fos mRNA detected in nuclei following formalin administration. Related to Figure 5. Fos mRNA detected in nuclei following formalin 
administration. (A) Fos mRNA as detected by RT-qPCR from bulk nuclei isolated following formalin administration at 0, 5, 15, or 30 minutes. mRNA 
levels are presented as fold-change from baseline, after normalization to Gapdh levels. Five independent biological samples were analyzed for each time 
point. Mean ± s.e.m are shown. (B) Fos mRNA as detected by ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization at 5 minutes (left) and 30 minutes (right) following 
formalin administration, showing sub-cellular distribution of mRNA. Scale bars are 10 μm.

Reagent
Source
Catalog
Antibody 
dilution/RNA
Usage Notes
Cacna1e
ACD
449211
RNA
cFOS-Gt
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
sc-52-G
1:500
cFOS-Rb
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
sc-52
1:500
Chx10
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
sc-8047
1:500
FOS
ACD
316921
RNA
Ebf1
EMDMillipore
AB10523
1:500
antigen retrieval
Ebf2
R&D Systems
AF7006
1:500
Grik3
ACD
493981 (HS)
RNA
Lbx1
gift of C. Birchmeier
N/A
1:10,000
Necab1
ACD
428541-C2
RNA
Nrgn
R&D Systems
MAB7947-SP
01:50
Npy
ACD
313321-C2
RNA
PKCg
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
sc-211
1:500
Rorb
ACD
444271
RNA
Satb1
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
sc-376096
1:500
Snca
ACD
313281
RNA
Syt1
ACD
491831
RNA
Table S1. Related to Figure 1. All genes significantly associated with non-neuronal clusters.
Table S2. Related to Figure 2. All genes significantly associated with neuronal clusters.
Table S3. Related to Main Text descriptions of clusters and Figures 2-4. Gene expression within each cluster for all 
detected genes, presented as the mean gene expression of each gene in each cluster and the percent of nuclei in each 
cluster that express the indicated gene.
SUPPLEMENTAL TABLES
Table S4. Related to Experimental Procedures. Antibodies and RNA probes used in validation.

SUPPLEMENTAL EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES 
 
Single Cell Dissociation. Cells were dissociated using the Miltenyi Neural Dissociation Kit (P) 
(130-092-628), with manual dissociation according to the manufacturer’s protocol. 
 
Bulk Nuclei RT-qPCR. Three samples (one animal each) were used for Figure S1A. Five samples 
(one animal each) were analyzed for each time point in Figure S4A. Nuclei or cells were 
prepared as above, then spun at 3,200xg for 10 minutes. The supernatant was removed and 
350 µl of buffer RLT (Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit) was used for lysis. Total RNA was then extracted 
using the Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit, including on-column DNase digestion. cDNA (and a no RT 
control) was prepared using SuperScript IV First-Strand Synthesis System and qPCR (with 
technical triplicates for each sample) was performed using the following primers. cFOS_F: 
CTGAGAAGACTGGATAGAGC; cFOS_R: CGTTGAAACCCGAGAACATC; Gapdh_F: 
AGGTCGGTGTGAACGGATTTG; Gapdh_R: GGGGTCGTTGATGGCAACA. 
 
Drop-Seq: For sample preparation, nuclei in 1mL of PBS with 0.02% BSA were counted with a 
hemocytometer and adjusted to a final concentration of 225 nuclei/µl. Beads (Chemgenes, 
Macosko-2011-10, lot 011717C) were prepared at a concentration of 250 beads/µl. Lysis buffer 
detergent concentration was adjusted to 0.7% sarkosyl. For the apparatus, a PDMS device from 
FlowJem was used (according to the Drop-Seq CAD design), CorSolutions pumps were used to 
replace syringe pumps for the cell and oil lines, and the flow was visually monitored using a 
Photronics High Speed camera (5000 frames per second). The following flow rates were used: 
beads (35µl/min), nuclei (35 µl/min), oil (200 µl/min). We analyzed individual droplets to 
characterize the bead occupancy and droplet size that result from these new parameters (n = 
581 droplets from 5 samples). We found that 5.7 ± 1% (s.e.m.) of droplets contained a bead, all 
droplets with beads had a single bead, and the calculated droplet size was 0.46 ± 0.08 nl 
(s.e.m.). Droplet volume was calculated as the % droplet occupancy divided by 125 beads/µl 
(which was one half of the initial bead concentration). 
 
For the cDNA amplification and library preparation, multiple PCR reactions were performed for 
each sample, pooled, purified with AMPure beads (0.6X), quantified with Qubit 3.0, and 
analyzed on a High Sensitivity DNA Bioanalyzer chip. Multiple tagmentation and library 
preparation reactions were performed for each sample, each with 600 pg input. Parallel 
reactions were then pooled, double purified with AMPure beads (0.8X), quantified with Qubit 
3.0, and analyzed on a High Sensitivity DNA Bioanalyzer chip. Libraries were sequenced at a 
minimum depth of 20,000 reads per nucleus using HiSeq 2500 Rapid Mode with the following 
parameters. Read 1: 25bp, index, custom primer; Read 2: 50bp, Illumina primer.  
 
snRNA-Seq Data Processing. Raw sequence reads (.fastq) per sample were pre-processed, 
mapped against MM10, and the number of mapped reads per gene enumerated (exon+intron) 
by cell barcode using commands described in the "Drop-seq Alignment Cookbook" 
(http://mccarrolllab.com/Drop-Seq/). Quality inspection and filtering of the count data 
returned was performed using functions supported in the "scater" package 
(https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/scater.html). First, metrics for 

mitochondrial (MT) genes per cell barcode were generated using the calculateQCMetrics() 
function then inspected using the hist() and scater::plotPhenoData() functions. Among the 
metrics generated per cell barcode was the percent total reads mapped to MT genes. This 
specific metric was next used to filter-discard nuclei with a percent total reads mapped to MT 
genes ³ 20%. For surviving cell barcodes/nuclei, MT read counts and immediate early genes 
were filter-removed and metrics generated for remaining genes by nuclei using the same 
calculateQCMetrics() function. Among these metrics generated was the total number of genes 
with mapped reads per nuclei and the total number of mapped reads across genes per 
nuclei. These two metrics were inspected using the same hist() and scater::plotPhenoData() 
functions used prior and threshold filters defined to discard outlier nuclei.  Specifically, nuclei 
having £ 200 genes per nucleus were discarded. During sub-clustering of the neuronal 
populations, nuclei having £ 500 genes per nucleus were discarded.  
 
snRNA-Seq Clustering and Analysis. For clustering, the "SC3" package 
(https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/SC3.html) was used on normalized 
expression for nuclei not discarded in these two successive steps. The normalization method 
used was "Counts Per Million"; also referred to as "CPM". All genes in ³ 3 nuclei were analyzed 
and the gene filter was set to “false”. The first clustering in SC3 step involved ten clusters, while 
seven clusters were considered further. One cluster was excluded because it was considered to 
contain low quality nuclei and was not defined by any cell-type specific genes, but rather by 
genes from a list of the twenty genes with the most mapped reads in the entire set. Two small 
clusters were discarded because they contained < 0.5% of the total nuclei. We verified that all 
clusters contained nuclei from at least three biological samples. To visualize SC3-derived 
clusters of nuclei by t-SNE scatterplot, CPM expression of detected genes expressed across 
nuclei were passed to the Rtsne() function under default settings and the results returned 
passed to the plot() function. The second-clustering step was performed on the neuronal nuclei 
(cluster 1) obtained by SC3 analysis of the total set of nuclei. Preliminary SC3 analysis identified 
a cluster of low quality nuclei and a cluster that represented doublets between nuclei from 
neurons and oligodendrocytes and both of these clusters were discarded from further analysis. 
SC3 analysis of the remaining nuclei then identified fifty-two clusters. The complete fifty-two 
cluster set can be seen in Figure S2A. This set of clusters was determined through an iterative 
process of clustering, followed by visual inspection of gene lists and comparison to established 
spinal cord markers. At this step, clusters that represented doublets, that did not have at least 
three significantly associated annotated genes, or that contained less than 0.7% of the total 
neuronal nuclei were discarded from further analysis. These discarded clusters are indicated by 
black bars in Figure S2A. After these exclusions, there were forty-one remaining clusters. One 
cluster (#30 in the original analysis) was further sub-clustered, following inspection of the tSNE 
plot and cell consensus matrix, which suggested three sub-groups that were not related to each 
other. Thus, a final list of forty-three clusters was analyzed. All of these clusters had nuclei from 
at least three independent biological samples. To assess relatedness of clustered nuclei, the 
mean expression per gene (with CPM expression > 0) per cluster was calculated in R and then 
passed to the dist() function to produce a Euclidean-based distance metric for each pair-wise 
combination of clusters.  These distance metrics were then used in the performance of 
hierarchical clustering using “complete” agglomeration via the hclust() function. The 

dendrogram describing the results of how clusters of nuclei are related was visualized via the 
as.phylo() function. GO term analysis was performed using GO David Functional Annotation 
Tool with the top ten most significant genes for each cluster, using functional annotation 
clustering on “molecular function” GO terms with low stringency. Functional annotation 
groupings with an enrichment score > 1.3 (-log of mean p-value) are presented. 
 
Immunofluorescence. Animals were euthanized with avertin either at baseline or one hour after 
behavior and perfused with PBS and 4% paraformaldehyde. Lumbar spinal cords were extracted 
and washed in PBS, incubated overnight in 30% sucrose, and embedded in OCT. Frozen sections 
of 50 µm were cut and stained, using a blocking buffer that contained 1% IgG-free BSA, 10% 
donkey serum, and 0.1% Triton-X 100 in PBS. Antibodies used are presented in Table S4. At 
least eight sections from at least two male and two female animals, ages 8-12 weeks old, were 
analyzed for expression patterns and a representative example was imaged by confocal 
microscopy (Zeiss 800 LSM).  
 
In Situ Hybridization. Animals were euthanized by cervical dislocation at baseline or thirty 
minutes after behavior and the lumbar spinal cords were extracted and fresh frozen in OCT. 
Frozen sections of 16-18 µm were cut and RNAscope (ACD) was used for in situ hydridization 
using the manufacturer’s protocol. Probes used are presented in Table S4. At least five sections 
from at least two male and two female animals, ages 8-12 weeks old, were analyzed for 
expression patterns and a representative example was imaged by confocal microscopy (Zeiss 
800 LSM).

===== Schaefer2020_Oncogene+SOX2 =====
Oncogene (2020) 39:278–292
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41388-019-0997-x
REVIEW ARTICLE
SOX2 protein biochemistry in stemness, reprogramming, and cancer:
the PI3K/AKT/SOX2 axis and beyond
Thorsten Schaefer1
●Claudia Lengerke
1,2
Received: 16 June 2019 / Revised: 20 July 2019 / Accepted: 9 August 2019 / Published online: 2 September 2019
© The Author(s) 2019. This article is published with open access
Abstract
Research of the past view years expanded our understanding of the various physiological functions the cell-fate determining
transcription factor SOX2 exerts in ontogenesis, reprogramming, and cancer. However, while scientiﬁc reports featuring
novel and exciting aspects of SOX2-driven biology are published in near weekly routine, investigations in the underlying
protein-biochemical processes that transiently tailor SOX2 activity to situational demand are underrepresented and have not
yet been comprehensively summarized. Largely unrecognizable to modern array or sequencing-based technology, various
protein secondary modiﬁcations and concomitant function modulations have been reported for SOX2. The chemical
modiﬁcations imposed onto SOX2 are inherently heterogeneous, comprising singular or clustered events of phosphorylation,
methylation, acetylation, ubiquitination, SUMOylation, PARPylation, and O-glycosylation that reciprocally affect each other
and critically impact SOX2 functionality, often in a tissue and species-speciﬁc manner. One recurring regulatory principle
though is the canonical PI3K/AKT signaling axis to which SOX2 relates in various entangled, albeit not exclusive ways.
Here we provide a comprehensive review of the current knowledge on SOX2 protein modiﬁcations, their proposed
relationship to the PI3K/AKT pathway, and regulatory inﬂuence on SOX2 with regards to stemness, reprogramming, and
cancer.
An introduction to SOX2 and underexplored
aspects of its molecular regulation
The SOX/Sox (SRY homology box) family of proteins
comprises 20 individual members in man and mouse [1], of
which SOX2/Sox2 is the most explored. SOX proteins are
principally deﬁned by a conserved DNA-binding element,
the so-called high mobility group (HMG) that relates to a
transcriptional master regulator of virility (i.e., SEX deter-
mining factor Y, SRY) and thus functionally qualiﬁes SOX/
Sox proteins as DNA-binders [2]. Accounting for HMG-
residue conservation, the SOX family branches into eight
sub-categories (SoxA-H), of which SoxB further divides
into SoxB1 and SoxB2 groups reﬂecting more recent gene
duplication events [3, 4]. While Sox proteins contribute to
various cellular functionalities, reprogramming capacity is
largely conﬁned to members of the SoxB1 group (i.e., Sox1,
Sox2, and Sox3) [5]. Early reporter assays involving
designed
plasmid-borne
promoter-reporter
constructs
assigned an expression co-modulatory activity to C-
proximal parts of SOX2, termed “trans-activating domain”
(TAD) [6]. However, while the HMG is an evolutionary
conserved folding unit deﬁned by cognate sequence ele-
ments and structurally resolved in considerable molecular
detail (see PDB deposits 1O4X and 2LE4), the TAD
remains
a
functional
concept
not
yet
supported
by
structural data.
Noteworthy, SOX2 imposes transcription modulatory
signiﬁcance often in conjunction with co-factors [7] such as
OCT3/4 in ES cells [8, 9] or PAX6 in the visual system
primordia [10]. Accordingly, while the well-resolved N-
terminus with its contained HMG-domain and super-
imposed nucleo-cytoplasmatic transport motifs (nuclear
localization sequence (NLS) [11] and nuclear export
sequence (NES) [12], respectively) provides for proper
subcellular distribution and DNA-binding, the C-terminus is
assumed to engage in interactions with co-factors. While
* Thorsten Schaefer
thorsten.schaefer@unibas.ch
1
University of Basel and University Hospital Basel, Department of
Biomedicine, Basel, Switzerland
2
University Hospital Basel, Division of Hematology,
Basel, Switzerland
1234567890();,:
1234567890();,:

this concept is compelling, the SOX2 C-terminus never-
theless lacks secondary structural elements classically
associated with protein–protein interactions such as ANK-
repeats, SH2-, WW-, Bromo-, or RING-domains (to name
but a view). Indeed, despite upward 6900 peer-reviewed
scientiﬁc contributions featuring various aspects of SOX2
biology (pubmed, status June 2019), the protein’s C-
terminus remained structurally enigmatic and eludes clas-
sical sequence motif prediction tools.
By
contrast,
the
HMG/DNA-interaction
has
been
resolved in considerable detail and a DNA recognition
consensus
long
been
deﬁned
for
SOX2/Sox2
(i.e.,
CCCATTGTTC in man and CTTTGTC in mouse) [13, 14].
However, with the central TTGT element being the pre-
ferred recognition motif of all SOX/Sox proteins and sev-
eral thousand copies of the extended consensus in the
human genome, SOX2 resembles a rather promiscuous
transcription factor. A certain degree of selectivity however
is imposed by co-factors (see above), although many of
which are likewise shared amongst Sox proteins [15, 16]. In
reality therefore, the current loading status of an individual
consensus site in a particular SOX2+ cell remains effectively
unpredictable. To give an example: While an in silico
search of the glioblastoma cancer genome identiﬁed 4883
potential SOX2 docking sites in advanced human glioma,
altered RNA expression was subsequently conﬁrmed for no
more but 489 protein coding genes and 105 pre-miRNAs by
Chip-seq [17]. Underscoring these numbers, 699 sig-
niﬁcantly modulated SOX2 downstream targets were more
recently identiﬁed in nasopharyngeal cancer cells by cDNA
microarray [18]. Nevertheless, also the mere occupation of a
binding site without concomitant expression modulation of
juxtapositioned genes may be a regulatory function, as
secondary effects amongst downstream targets may be
suppressed this way. Vice versa, expression changes faith-
fully assigned to SOX2 must not inevitably relate to its
presence at a given locus, but may reﬂect indirect effects. In
any case though, SOX2-driven phenotypes, often laid out to
the reader as linear causal narratives, are almost inevitably
multifactorial.
Interestingly, also the organization and regulation of the
SOX2 gene on chromosome locus 3q26.3-q27 are remark-
able and in their functional consequences not fully resolved
yet. Not only can SOX2 potentiate the expression of its own
gene as part of autoregulatory feed-forward mechanisms
[19], the single exon SOX2 moreover falls into the intron of
a much greater, superimposed genetic element called
SOX2OT (SOX2 overlapping transcript). This peculiar gene
arrangement is phylogenetically conserved between man
and mouse, where Sox2ot was recently shown to modulate
Sox2 expression in cortical neuronal progenitors, indeed
[20]. This ﬁnding may be of particular relevance, as near
every analysis of SOX2/Sox2 involves knock-down or
knock-out technology, whereas potential side-effects on
SOX2OT are rarely considered. Vice versa, an experimental
outcome faithfully assigned to SOX2 may further involve
SOX2OT functional contributions.
Functional roles of SOX2
SOX2 is probably best known for its technical application
in reprogramming where, in conjunction with co-factors
(e.g., OCT4, KLF4, and cMYC [21, 22] or subsets thereof
[5, 23]), SOX2 enables the derivation of human or murine
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from terminally
differentiated somatic cells. Although a milestone in present
day cell biology and clearly of unprecedented potential for
future biomedical application, the enforced overexpression
of a subset of exogenously introduced transcription factors
in otherwise terminally differentiated body cells remains an
artiﬁcial intervention, and (more relevant in the given
context) remains mechanistically not fully elucidated with
regard to speciﬁc contributions of SOX2.
More instructive in this sense are murine in vivo analyses
that illustrate a pivotal physiological signiﬁcance of Sox2
throughout the vertebrate life cycle, from early embry-
ogenesis to adult tissue homeostasis [24]. In particular:
Deletion of Sox2 in the zygote results in early embryonic
lethality with concomitant malformation of the epiblast
[25]. Throughout morulation, SOX2 expression coincides
with pluripotent embryonic stem (ES) cells that later loca-
lize to the inner cell mass of the blastula. Underscoring a
critical role in ES cell maintenance, both deletion and
overexpression of Sox2 impose ES cell differentiation
in vitro [8, 26]. In the developing embryo, Sox2 expression
is maintained in lineage committed, multipotent progenitor
cells mostly of neuronal or epithelial fate [24]. These
ontological paths are probably best resolved for the devel-
oping (central) nervous system. Here, Sox2 expression has
been traced from the cerebral tubing in early embryogenesis
to the ventricular layer of the neuronal cortex (where neural
stem/progenitor cells reside at mid-fetal development) and
ﬁnally to the subventricular zone of the lateral ventricle and
the granular zone lining the hippocampus (where Sox2
positive NSCs locate in the adult brain) [27]. Another well-
deﬁned ontological branch concerns the developing gastro-
intestinal tract, where Sox2 expression associates with the
engulﬁng foregut and derived endodermal structures from
which esophagus and anterior stomach evolve [28]. In the
developing skin, Sox2 positive cells are ﬁrst detected in the
mesenchymal condensates giving rise to the dermal sheath
and the dermal papilla [29], while at adulthood Sox2 marks
multipotent skin stem cells with multilineage differentiation
capacity [30, 31]. Sox2 is further instrumental for proper
dental development [32], while its expression in murine
SOX2 protein biochemistry in stemness, reprogramming, and cancer: the PI3K/AKT/SOX2 axis and beyond
279

optic cup [33] and retina [34] progenitors proved critical for
eye development. Underscoring conserved functions in
man, hereditary SOX2 haplo-insufﬁciency was associated
with syndromic microphthalmia type 3 (MCOPS3) [35], a
disease characterized by micro- or an-ophthalmia and con-
comitant cognitive and/or developmental impairment [36].
Noteworthy, a strong dependence on Sox2 expression also
persists in adulthood as illustrated by an inducible murine
Sox2 knock-out model [37] that shows enforced tissue cell
apoptosis and onset of lethality within two weeks of Sox2
depletion.
During the last decade, aberrant SOX2 expression has
been further associated with various forms of cancer, par-
ticularly of epithelial or neuronal origin [38–46], for review
see [47, 48]. In some but not all of these SOX2 has been
linked to cancer stemness. In patients with breast or ovarian
cancer for example, SOX2 induction is already observed at
early disease stages and further associates with disease
progression, metastasis, and relapse [40, 43, 45, 46]. In
glioblastoma as another example, elevated SOX2 expres-
sion associates with increased cell motility and tumor
spreading and is also detected amongst circulating CSC
islets [49–51]. Further involving SOX2 in cancer stemness,
elevated SOX2 expression associates with chemotherapy-
resistance effects [52], induces stemness and endothelial-to-
mesenchymal-transition gene signatures [17], and promotes
clonogenicity and in vivo tumorigenicity in respective
model systems [43, 52]. In sum, various lines of experi-
mental evidence underscore connectivity between SOX2
expression and CSCs in some cancers, although likely not
all SOX2-positive cancer cells are CSCs and vice versa.
Overall the CSC concept is controversially discussed in
solid tumors, and plasticity has been noted between stem
and non-stem cells [53].
Depending on disease entity and state, aberrant SOX2
expression may either result from gene duplication events or
dysregulated transcription of the endogenous locus [47, 48].
As a consequence, divergent focally restricted to ubiquitous
intra-tumoral distribution of SOX2 expression has been
reported. In cancers in which SOX2 expression associates
with stemness, SOX2 occurs mostly in the absence of gene
ampliﬁcation. By contrast, in squamous cell lung carci-
noma, SOX2 expression frequently coincides with ampli-
ﬁcations at its chromosomal locus, so that SOX2 stains
rather homogenously in tumor biopsies and has been
described as a lineage-survival factor [38, 54]. Here, SOX2
obviously cannot be considered a distinguishing marker of
the CSC compartment.
What is more, although near univocally described as an
oncogene and driver of transformation, in gastric and non-
small lung cell carcinoma SOX2 expression was in fact
reported as a favorable molecular prognostic factor [55–59].
This remains tissue speciﬁc and might relate to even more
aggressive phenotypes mediated by alternative pathways or
external stimuli. As such, Helicobacter pylori infections
was shown to inﬂuence SOX2 expression in gastric cancer
[60, 61], where SOX2 has been described as a trans-
activator of PTEN, thus inhibiting PI3K/AKT-driven cell
cycle progression and anti-apoptosis effects [55, 62, 63].
External inﬂuences also concern non-small cell lung cancer,
where a smoking-induced injury response [64] was shown
to trigger a premalignant state characterized by PI3K
induction and molecularly uncoupled SOX2 expression in
basal epithelial cells [64], while in dysplasia expression of
SOX2 may depend on FGF triggered MAPK/ERK signal-
ing [65].
Taken together, SOX2 is a cell-fate determining tran-
scription factor that has been functionally implicated in the
induction and maintenance of pluripotent iPS and ES cells,
multipotent lineage-committed progenitors, and tissue stem
cells of mostly epithelial or neural fate. Moreover, SOX2
has been recognized as a powerful oncogene in various
cancer types, where it regulates CSCs and functionally
relates to several other hallmarks (see Fig. 1 for schematic
overview of SOX2 functionality). While the cell biological
relevance of SOX2 thus appears clearly deﬁned, the mole-
cular understanding of SOX2 protein regulation remains
surprisingly fragmental and comprises various aspects of
effective uncertainty, as can be deduced from the examples
given above.
The PI3K/AKT signaling pathway
Key cell biological features such as growth, proliferation,
and survival are functional manifestations of highly inter-
twined underlying molecular networks probably best illu-
strated by systems biology approaches [66]. Although a
crude underestimation of cellular complexity, such cell-
biological features have been historically assigned to a
hand-full of major cognate signaling cascades or pathways,
amongst which the PI3K/AKT axis [67]. This molecular
module converts extracellular stimuli (mostly receptor/
ligand interaction or ligand-imposed receptor dimerization
events at the plasma membrane) via a phosphorylation
cascade into molecular downstream responses, and fur-
thermore relates to upward mTORC2 and downstream
mTORC1
complexes
as
associated
regulatory
relays.
Although a myriad of cell-type speciﬁc input and output
functions have been assigned to the pathway [67], an evo-
lutionary conserved primordial functionality of the PI3K/
AKT axis is that of a nutrient sensor. Triggered by insulin
or amino acid availability on the cell surface, the PI3K/AKT
axis converts information on the current bioavailability of
these metabolites into downstream effector functions within
the cell [68–72]. In response to insulin for example, PI3K/
280
T. Schaefer, C. Lengerke

AKT modulates cellular glucose uptake (more actually the
cell surface expression of individual glucose transporters,
GLUT) involving AS160, DGKzeta, and PIP5K proteins
[73, 74]. In response to amino acids such as glutamate,
PI3K/AKT stimulates mTORC1, the mammalian target of
rapamycin complex 1, that induces phospho-activation of
ribosomal protein S6 (RPS6) by S6 kinase (S6K1) [75, 76]
and a release of eIF4E from its inhibitor 4E-BP1 [77, 78] to
launch protein synthesis. Further prominent effector func-
tions to which PI3K/AKT signaling relates, either in direct
or indirect terms, comprise cell cycle progression, (anti)-
apoptosis, and more [67]. Accordingly, mechanisms that
overactivate the PI3K/AKT axis or impair its inactivation
(such as mutations in PIK3CA and/or PTEN genes, for
example) range amongst the most prominent molecular
aberrations in cancer and resemble mutational hot spots for
resistance development [79, 80].
Interestingly, cancers of immanent high SOX2 expres-
sion often show intrinsically high mutations rates in
PI3KCA or PTEN genes as well [50, 64], thus suggesting
functional connectivity between PI3K/AKT signaling and
stemness-inductory roles of SOX2.
Intertwined relationships between PI3K/AKT
signaling and SOX2 in stemness
Cell growth and cell proliferation are two phenotypically
entangled but mechanistically rather distinct processes.
While growth largely depends on PI3K/AKT/mTORC1-
imposed protein synthesis (see above), proliferation is a
principle reﬂection of cell-cycle progression and thus cyclin
kinase activities [81, 82]. Although these processes are
easily experimentally uncoupled in vitro (e.g., with the
mTORC1 selective inhibitor rapamycin or else with cyclin
kinase inhibitors), such distinction is much harder to make
in vivo. Classical examples however comprise arborization
(i.e., the outgrowth of dendritic and axonal connections
amongst central nervous cells in early postnatal develop-
ment) [83], which represents an extreme case of cell mass
enrichment (growth) at near persistent cellularity. By con-
trast, the initial stages of embryogenesis comprise a rapid
succession of cell division events that occur essentially
without size increase (i.e., the diameter of oocyte and
blastula is near invariant) [84]. Accordingly, in cells that
constitute the morula or the inner cell mass of the blastula
(i.e., ESCs), protein synthesis evidently is attenuated to a
degree that neither supports mass enrichment (growth) nor
differentiation. These adaptations appear conserved in
resting tissue stem cells, where tightly constrained protein
synthesis is likewise required to suppress differentiation and
thus sustain stemness. In line with these notions, somatic
stem cells are generally smaller (with size being an indicator
of protein synthesis) and show lower protein formation rates
than surrounding tissue cells [85, 86]. Noteworthy, while
the PI3K/AKT/mTORC1 axis clearly relates to protein
formation, also SOX2 has been implicated in these pro-
cesses, as a SOX2-imposed translation factor, eIF2A,
initiates protein synthesis from unconventional start sites
within
the
normally
untranslated
5′-UTR
of
proto-
oncogenes [87].
As growth and differentiation become inevitable, e.g., in
the developing embryo or injury settings, protein synthesis
must be enforced amongst stem cells or their derived pro-
geny. Consistently, PI3K activity has been further asso-
ciated also with cellular differentiation (e.g., the conversion
between luminal and basal layers of the mammary epithe-
lium) [88]. In cancer ﬁnally, such growth regulatory
mechanisms may be largely uncoupled and overruled by
mutations inducing and sustaining clonal expansion (e.g.,
involving aberrant PI3K/AKT/mTORC1 signaling). The
PI3K/AKT pathway has thus been long recognized as
potential target for therapeutic intervention in cancer
Fig. 1 The versatile roles of pluripotency factor SOX2 in stemness,
reprogramming, and cancer. The transcriptional master regulator
SOX2 (SEX determining region (SRY) homology box 2) relates to
various aspects of naturally occurring, healthy stem and progenitor
cells (green), pluripotency induction amongst terminally deﬁned
somatic cells (blue), and cancer stemness and progression (red). With
regards to stemness in healthy tissues, the protein sustains pluripotency
amongst embryonic stem cells (ESCs) in early embryogenesis, co-
segregates with lineage committed stem/progenitor cells of mostly
epithelial or neuronal fate in advanced ontogenesis, and ﬁnally co-
localizes with tissue-resident stem cells that warrant for tissue home-
ostasis and regeneration in adulthood (green). Moreover, SOX2 is an
indispensable reprogramming factor that in conjunction with co-factors
drives the conversion of terminally differentiated somatic cells into
induced pluripotent stem cell conditions (iPSCs, blue). Finally, SOX2
is a powerful oncogene that functionally relates to cancer stemness and
various further hallmark functionalities amongst which clonogenicity,
tumorigenicity, endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), cancer
cell mobility, tumor cell dissemination, metastasis, chemotherapy
resistance, and relapse (red)
SOX2 protein biochemistry in stemness, reprogramming, and cancer: the PI3K/AKT/SOX2 axis and beyond
281

[80, 89], and very recently, a combination of the PI3K-
alpha selective inhibitor BYL719 (alpelisib, Pigray®) with
the estrogen receptor antagonist Fulvestrant® was approved
for the treatment of advanced mammary carcinoma, as this
treatment nearly doubled the median progression-free sur-
vival
in
PIK3CA-positive
HR+/HER2+
breast
cancer
patients (SOLAR-1 trial, FDA approval: May 24th, 2019).
While these recent developments underscore the ther-
apeutic potential of PI3K/AKT inhibition in general, the
particular signiﬁcance of SOX2+ CSCs as a cellular reser-
voir of disease relapse has not been therapeutically
exploited thus far. This is remarkable, as several lines of
experimental evidence gathered in healthy and transformed
cell matter, clearly underscore an interdependence between
PI3K/AKT signaling on the one hand and SOX2-imposed
(cancer) stem cell characteristics on the other: Mutations in
PTEN for example support the outgrowth of healthy and
malignant mammary epithelium derived stem cells, which
can be antagonized by the PI3K/AKT cross-reactive inhi-
bitor perifosine [90]. Effectively separating these effects,
either inhibition of PI3 kinase or knock-down of down-
stream AKT1 were later shown to impair the survival of
tumor initiating supposed breast carcinoma stem cells [91].
An immediate molecular connectivity between Akt and
Sox2 however was ﬁrst established in mouse where Akt-
imposed phosphorylation supports Sox2 driven transcrip-
tion amongst ESCs [92] and functionally cooperates with
Oct4, Klf4, and c-Myc in the induction of iPSCs [93]. These
observations were further substantialized in man, where
AKT-driven phosphorylation was shown to sustain SOX2
protein stability, nuclear localization, and thereby regulate
in vitro clonogenicity and in vivo tumorigenicity of breast
carcinoma cells [52]. Similar results were reported for
nasopharyngeal cancer cells, albeit with a less well deﬁned
AKT-inhibitory reagent, DC120, that blocks AKT in its
Thr308 and Ser473 phosphorylated state [94]. Further
validating AKT as a conserved upstream regulator of SOX2
expression, AKT pathway inhibition or siRNA mediated
knock-down reduced SOX2 levels also in esophageal
squamous cells [95, 96]. While one report proposes nitro-
sylation of AKT as a regulatory principle in SOX2
expression [95], the other describes ubiquitin-ligase UBR5
as a mediator of SOX2 protein turnover in absence of AKT
kinase activity [96].
The dependencies between PI3K/AKT and SOX2 how-
ever are reciprocal, as probably best exempliﬁed in glio-
blastoma,
where
PI3K/AKT-imposed
phosphorylation
sustains nuclear SOX2 expression as a driving force of
tumor cell dissemination, while in turn SOX2 supports
PI3KCA gene expression (which actually locates in near
juxtaposition of the SOX2 locus on chromosome band
3q26-28) and subsequent downstream activation of AKT
[50]. Similarly, SOX2 and KLF4 jointly drive PIK3CA
expression in nasopharyngeal carcinoma, thus enhancing
PI3K/AKT
activity
and
tumorigenesis,
while
over-
expression of PI3KCA rescues growth inhibitory effects
imposed by SOX2 knock-down [18]. In Ewing’s sarcoma
ﬁnally, the disease characteristic EWS1/FLT1 gene fusion
has been identiﬁed as an inductor of SOX2 expression,
which functionally correlates with enforced cell prolifera-
tion, anti-apoptosis, and enhanced PI3K/AKT signaling
[97].
Interestingly, an interconnectivity between SOX2 and
PI3K/AKT is also evident in reprogramming settings,
despite the fact that iPS cell induction involves artiﬁcial
overexpression of exogenously introduced SOX2/Sox2.
While enforced SOX2 expression coincides with elevated
AKT activity during reprogramming [98], PI3K/AKT sig-
naling provides critical contributions to iPS cell survival
also thereafter [99]. The endogenous Sox2 locus however
seems to be the target of regulatory feedback inhibition, as
in reprogramming settings AKT1 displaces gene activatory
FoxO1 from Sox2, whereas FoxO1 is re-activated and
endogenous Sox2 expression restored upon inhibition of
AKT [98].
These various interdependencies between PI3K/AKT
and SOX2, detected across a spectrum of different malig-
nant and healthy (stem) cell types, have led to the notion of
an independent PI3K/AKT/SOX2 signaling branch that
diverges from the canonical PI3K/AKT/mTORC1 axis (see
refs. [100, 101] and Fig. 2 for schematic illustration). This
distinction is underscored by experimental evidence indi-
cating that various AKT or PI3K inhibitors, but not the
mTORC1 selective inhibitor rapamycin, affect SOX2 pro-
tein homeostasis in several tumor entities [50, 52]. How-
ever, inhibition of mTORC1 has also been described to
attenuate SOX2 and further downstream SOX9 expression
in glioma [102], and both PI3K inhibitors and rapamycin
reported to suppress SOX2-driven tumorigenicity from
esophageal squamous cells in a murine xenografts [103].
These discrepancies might be explained by the fact that the
PI3K/AKT
signaling
pathway
involves
various
feed-
forward and feed-backward mechanisms, so that rapamy-
cin may indeed regulate SOX2, albeit in indirect terms.
Putting these observations in an even greater context, a
mass spectrometry based systematic phosphorylation site
analysis identiﬁed several AKT-imposed modiﬁcations not
only in SOX2, but also in other pluripotency inducing
transcription factors [104]. Intriguingly, many of these sites
superimpose with DNA-binding elements or sequence
stretches functionally linked to nucleo-cytoplasmatic trans-
port (NLS, NES), thus suggesting AKT-imposed phosphor-
modiﬁcation as a shared regulatory principle of subcellular
distribution and chromatin binding amongst pluripotency
inducing TFs [104, 105]. Further supporting these notions, a
glycoproteomic analysis performed to identify surface
282
T. Schaefer, C. Lengerke

molecules associating with pluripotency, retrieved leucine-
rich repeat neuronal progenitor 1 (LRRN1) as a factor
critically regulating SOX2, OCT4, and NANOG protein
localization and turnover in hESCs [106]. Intriguingly,
shRNA-mediated knock-down of LRRN1 associated with
impaired AKT activity and thereby nuclear depletion and
proteasomal degradation of SOX2, OCT4, and NANOG
[106]. While these ﬁndings underscore AKT-imposed
phosphorylation as a common regulatory determinant of
pluripotency TFs, they moreover indicate that AKT-
dependent regulation of SOX2 protein turnover is a con-
served
functional
feature
shared
also
with
healthy
(ES) cells.
While the molecular regulation of most other SOX pro-
teins remains poorly deﬁned, further connectivity to the
PI3K/AKT axis has been proposed for SOX4. In mammary
carcinoma, elevated SOX4 expression promotes PI3K/AKT
signaling [107], while glioblastoma cell cycle progression
involves SOX4-dependent modulation of AKT and p53
[108]. Interestingly, SOX4 and SOX2 proteins only dis-
tantly relate within the SOX family [3], but the two proteins
show nearly overlapping occurrence in human cancers [48].
In mammary carcinoma and glioblastoma stem cells speci-
ﬁcally SOX4 has been implicated as a regulator of SOX2
[109, 110], suggesting that the observed connectivity of this
factor with PI3K/AKT signaling may also reﬂect an indirect
regulatory circuitry further involving SOX2.
Taken together, various lines of evidence elaborated in
mouse models, human cancer cells, reprogramming set-
tings,
and
clinical
datasets,
exemplify
a
functional
Fig. 2 The PI3K/AKT/SOX2 signaling axis is a conserved module in
stemness, reprogramming, and cancer. The PI3K/AKT pathway con-
verges extracellular stimuli conferred via respective receptors on the
plasma membrane into downstream effector functions within the cell.
Classical PI3K/AKT mediated phenotypes involve adapted sugar
metabolism in response to insulin receptor stimulation (maroon) and
aggravated protein synthesis in response to amino acid availability, as
sensed by e.g., the glutamate receptor and mediated by the mTORC1
complex (black). Noteworthy, both PI3 and AKT kinases relate to
various further cell biological features amongst which cell cycle
control, (anti)-apoptosis, DNA damage response, nitric oxide signal-
ing, and others (not depicted), while yet another functionality char-
acteristic of SOX2 positive cells has been identiﬁed in the PI3K/AKT/
SOX2 axis (blue). This signaling branch critically determines SOX2
protein stability, nuclear localization, and DNA regulation, and thus
functionally relates to sustained pluripotency amongst naturally
occurring embryonic stem cells (ESCs), the conversion of terminally
differentiated body cells into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs),
and furthermore critically contributes to cancer initiation, progression,
and relapse. SOX2 has been identiﬁed as a direct target of AKT-
imposed phosphorylation, and a functional dependence on PI3K/AKT
signaling
experimentally
validated
involving
various
inhibitory
reagents (green) directed against either AKT or further upstream PI3K.
By contrast, inhibition of downstream mTORC1 (rapamycin, red) does
not immediately affect SOX2 protein characteristics. However, the
PIK3/AKT pathway involves various feed-back and feed-forward
regulatory loops, amongst which SOX2 imposed transcriptional auto-
stimulation and a reciprocal induction of PI3KCA gene expression
(dotted blue lines)
SOX2 protein biochemistry in stemness, reprogramming, and cancer: the PI3K/AKT/SOX2 axis and beyond
283

cooperativity of SOX2 with the PI3K/AKT signaling
pathway. Although divergent in detail, two recurrent fea-
tures are noted: (i) nuclear localization and protein stabili-
zation of SOX2 depend on AKT kinase activity, and (ii)
transcription of PIK3CA, the gene encoding the catalytic
subunit of PI3Kα, is re-enforced by SOX2.
SOX2 secondary modiﬁcations
Throughout the past years, various examples of SOX2/Sox2
protein modiﬁcations have been identiﬁed, but not com-
prehensively summarized in standard protein data deposi-
tories such as UniProt/Swiss-Prot/ExPASy (status June
2019). Protein biochemical modiﬁcations reported for
SOX2/Sox2
comprise
phosphorylation,
acetylation,
methylation, ubiquitination, SUMOylation, PARPylation,
and O-GlcNAcylation events that are successively descri-
bed in the subsequent sections, systematically listed in
Table 1, and their relative localization and functional
implications schematically illustrated in Fig. 3.
SOX2 protein phosphorylation
Of all secondary modiﬁcation assigned to SOX2, phos-
phorylation is by far best documented. This modiﬁcation
primarily concerns residue Thr116 (alias Thr118 in mouse;
note that the murine protein is two residues longer than its
human orthologue) that is part of an AKT recognition motif
(RPRRX-S/T). This sequence stretch superimposes with the
nuclear-localization sequence (NLS) near the C-terminal
end of the HMG-domain [11], suggesting that phosphor-
ylation of Thr116 may modulate SOX2 subcellular dis-
tribution.
Interestingly,
the
RPRRX-T
signature
is
stringently conserved only amongst SoxB1 proteins (i.e.,
Sox2 and its closest paralogues Sox1 and Sox3) [3]. In other
Sox proteins by contrast the motif is either functionally
compromised by loss of a hydroxy acceptor chain (SoxF),
structurally distorted by insertion of proline residues
(SoxB2, SoxG, and SoxH classes), charge modiﬁed by
arginine to glutamine replacement (SoxE), or further deri-
vatized by exchange of the acceptor threonine for serine
(Sox12 and Sox15) thus modifying the steric context of the
phosphorylation site.
Underscoring
the
concept
of AKT-imposed
SOX2
modiﬁcation, a physical interaction between AKT/Akt and
SOX2/Sox2 proteins was independently demonstrated in
murine and human cells [52, 93]. However, while phos-
phorylation of mouse Thr118 sustains Sox2 driven tran-
scription in ES and iPS cells [93], alanine replacement
analysis revealed that Thr116 is not stringently required for
the nuclear localization of human SOX2 [52]. What is more,
also a mass spectrometry based systematic phosphorylation
site analysis involving heterologous expression of SOX2
and AKT in Sf9 cells, did not detect AKT imposed phos-
phorylation at residue Thr116 [104]. Instead, it uncovered a
further, hitherto unrecognized AKT-imposed phosphoryla-
tion at Ser83, the functional relevance of which however
remains to be determined.
In sum, AKT activity unquestionably sustains SOX2
nuclear localization, DNA binding, and prevents SOX2
from proteasomal decay in the cytosol [52, 96]. However,
while a phosphorylation of the indicated residues has been
repeatedly linked to AKT (see above), it remains a matter of
debate, if AKT imposed phosphorylation indeed regulates
SOX2 nuclear import (i.e., the association with a nuclear
import adapter or transporter) and if this functionality alone
has a decisive signiﬁcance in these regards. Noteworthy,
various further modiﬁcations have been associated with the
nucleo-cytoplasmatic
shuttling
of
SOX2,
and
residue
Thr116 furthermore linked to SOX2 protein turnover.
Phosphorylation-induced SUMOylation of
SOX2
Additional phosphorylation sites described for SOX2 com-
prise the residues Ser249, Ser250, and Ser251 originally
identiﬁed in a phospho-proteomic analysis of human ESCs
[111]. Of these, Ser251 was reconﬁrmed in a subsequent
independent phospho-proteomic analysis in the same cell type
[112]. Proposed as being functionally redundant [111], all
three phosphorylation sites relate to nearby Lys245/247 that is
a target of protein SUMOylation [113]. While a conservative
amino acid replacement at this position (i.e., K247R) has no
evident effect on Sox2 protein stability or localization,
SUMOylation at Lys247 coincides with reduced Sox2 bind-
ing to an Fgf4 enhancer element in the context of Oct3/4 co-
expression, so that a transcription modulatory signiﬁcantly
was proposed for this residue modiﬁcation [113].
Documenting functional connectivity of phosphorylation
and nearby SUMOylation events in this segment, a SOX2
(S249-251D) mutant mimicking constitutive phosphoryla-
tion at the indicated residues strongly induced SUMOyla-
tion of SOX2, whereas a phosphorylation incompetent
SOX2(S249-251A)
mutant
impairs
this
modiﬁcation.
SUMOylation was fully obstructed though only in a SOX2
(K245A) mutant, thus reconﬁrming Lys245 as the target site
for SOX2 SUMOylation [111]. These data jointly deﬁne a
phosphorylation-dependent SUMOylation motif (PDSM,
ΨKxExxSP) in SOX2, as previously described also for
SOX3, SOX8, and SOX9 [114], albeit in slightly different
forms (i.e., SOX2 contains an additional amino acid inser-
tion between SUMOylation and phosphorylation sites, so
that the motif was initially overseen).
284
T. Schaefer, C. Lengerke

Table 1 Compendium of the secondary modiﬁcations imposed onto SOX2/Sox2
Type of modiﬁcation Species
Site
Study matter
Functional signiﬁcance
References
Phosphorylation
Man/
Mouse
THR 116
Thr 118
Murine ESCs/iPSCs various human
cancer- derived cell types
AKT-dependent intra-nuclear SOX2 protein stabilization, as a
functional prerequisite of ESC maintenance & cancer cell
clonogenicity/tumorigenicity
Jeong et al. [93] Fang et al. [92]
Schaefer et al. [52] Qin et al. [94]
Man
SER 83
Heterologous expr. in Sf9
insect cells
Uncertain
Malak et al. [104]
Man
SER 249
SER 250
SER 251
Human ESCs
Phosphorylation-dependent SUMOylation (PDSM) of nearby
LYS 245
Van Hoof et al. [111] Rigbolt
et al. [112]
SUMOylation
Man/
Mouse
LYS 245
Lys 247
Human ESCs Murine ESCs
Modulation of target gene expression
Van Hoof et al. [111]
Tsuruzoe et al. [113]
Acetylation
Mouse
Lys 75
J1 mouse ESCs
Modulation of NES functionality and protein decay
Baltus et al. [12]
Lys 37, 60, 67,
75, 89, 97, 105,
111, 117,
119, 123
Unknown
- Lys 117ac may compete with LYS 115ub
- Lys 119ac may compete with Lys 119met
Methylation
Mouse
Arg 113
Murine embryonic carcinoma
P19 cells
Regulation of homo-dimerization and chromatin binding
Zhao et al. [117]
Mouse
Lys 119
Murine ESCs
Set7-imposed methylation fosters WWP2-driven ubiquitination
and decay
Fang et al. [92]
Ubiquitination
Man
LYS 115
Esophageal squamous cancer
cell lines
UBR5-imposed ubiquitination & protein turnover
Wang et al. [96]
PARPylation
Mouse
unknown
Murine ESCs
Modulation of target gene expression in ES cell differentiation
Gao et al. [118]
O-GlcNAcylation
Man/
Mouse
SER 246
Ser 248
Murine ESCs/iPSCs
S2VP10 human pancreatic
cancer cells
Implicated in ESC maintenance and tumorigenesis
Jang et al. [123] Myers et al. [119]
Sharma et al. [124, deposited]
Mouse
Thr 258
Ser 259
E14 murine ESCs
Uncertain
Jang et al. [123]
Systematic tabular compilation of the various protein secondary modiﬁcations hitherto described for pluripotency factor SOX2/Sox2 with indication of modiﬁcation site (human residue no.,
capitalized; murine reside no., regular), the cell type the particular modiﬁcation was identiﬁed in (ESC, iPSC, cell lines), its proposed functional signiﬁcance, and respective reference articles
SOX2 protein biochemistry in stemness, reprogramming, and cancer: the PI3K/AKT/SOX2 axis and beyond
285

Noteworthy, although AKT is a stereotype Ser/Thr
kinase and the PI3K/AKT pathway indeed activated in ES
cells [111], a functional involvement of AKT in PDSM
phosphorylation appears unlikely as no corresponding sig-
nature peptides were identiﬁed in an AKT/SOX2 co-
induction MS analysis [104] and none of the above
described mutants shown to impair nuclear localization
[111, 113]. While a cognate kinase thus remains to be
deﬁned, the phosphorylation status of Ser249, Ser250, and
Ser251 did not signiﬁcantly change upon addition of
differentiation-inducing BMP (bone morphogenic protein)
to hESCs, suggesting that the PDSM mechanism—although
a modulator of transcription [113]—may be overruled by
even more dominant regulatory elements [111].
Acetylation of the SOX2 NES motif
As p300/CBP-imposed protein acetylation and HDAC3-
related deacetylation had been implicated in the nucleo-
cytoplasmatic distribution of SRY [115], also the Sox2
protein was scanned for acetylation events in a two-armed
MS-based approach [12]. This analysis uncovered p300/
CBP-imposed in vitro acetylation on various Sox2 sites
including lysine residues K37, K60, K67, K75, K89, K97,
K105, K111, K117, K119, and K123 that all match the
HMG domain except for K123. While not all of these
modiﬁcations may occur in vivo—even more unlikely in
stringent coupling—residue K75 was noted to fall into the
nuclear export sequence (NES) of Sox2, and the functional
relevance of this site thus further examined. The Sox2 NES
motif was identiﬁed on basis of sequence homology to Sry
and Sox9 [12], where a nuclear export activity had ﬁrst been
identiﬁed and functionally validated by impaired sexual
differentiation in mice expressing NES-mutant alleles [116].
Interestingly, just as the NLS motif, also the NES sequence
locates to the HMG domain and is phylogenetically con-
served between SRY and SOX/Sox proteins [12]. Con-
ﬁrming functional relevance, an interaction with the nuclear
export receptor, Crm1, is impaired in NES mutant forms of
Sox2 thus causing their subcellular mislocalization [12].
Finally connecting these ﬁndings to acetylation events,
Fig. 3 SOX2/Sox2 is a molecular target of various secondary mod-
iﬁcations. Human (top) and murine (bottom) SOX2/Sox2 protein
sequences contain a N-terminal DNA-binding domain (high mobility
group, HMG, blue), a C-terminal trans-activation domain (TAD,
green), and (due to a slightly deviant glycine repeat near the proteins’
start) differ in length by two amino acids. Note that the TAD is a
functional concept, not a sequence- or structure-based domain sig-
nature, so that segments of variable length have been annotated as
such, with longest forms commencing right after the HMG. Conserved
functional elements are indicated: nuclear export signal (NES), nuclear
localization signal (NLS, red), AKT-recognition consensus (AKT),
and phosphorylation-dependent SUMOylation motif (PDSM). Note
that the NLS (red) comprises two separate stretches, of which the latter
superimposes with the AKT consensus motif near the C-terminal end
of the HMG domain. NES, NLS/AKT, and PDMS sequences are
further detailed below with indication of the particular chemical
modiﬁcations identiﬁed thereat: phosphorylation (P); acetylation (Ac);
methylation (Me); ubiquitination (UBI); SUMOylation (SUMO);
O-GlcNAcylation (Glc). Wherever known, corresponding functional
manifestations are indicated (arrows). Note that further putative acy-
lation sites (i.e., residues K37, K60, K67, K89, K97, K105, K111, and
K123) have been proposed for Sox2, but not functionally validated
thus far. Moreover, SOX2 is a target of PARPylation, while the spe-
ciﬁc site of this modiﬁcation remains to be determined
286
T. Schaefer, C. Lengerke

K75A (acetylation null) and K75Q (acetylation mimicry)
alleles were cloned and found to modulate Crm1-docking
and Sox2 nucleo-cytoplasmatic distribution, indeed [12].
Moreover, deacetylating reagents retain Sox2 in the nucleus
and sustain target gene expression, whereas elevated acet-
ylation enforces nuclear export resulting in increased Sox2
protein decay [12].
Methylation and methylation-imposed
ubiquitination of SOX2
A physical association of Sox2 with co-activator associated
arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1) has been reported
for murine embryonal carcinoma P19 cells, and CARM1-
imposed Sox2 methylation at residue Arg113 further
investigated in breast carcinoma MCF7 cells [117]. A
methylation at this site was proposed to enforce Sox2
homo-dimerization and functionally linked to the expres-
sion of Sox2 target genes, while chromatin binding blocks
methylation of arginine 113 [117].
Moreover, a phosphorylation/methylation switch has
been proposed to modulate Sox2 protein stability in murine
ESC maintenance and differentiation, and two E3-ligases,
WWP2
and
UBR5
implicated
in
the
ubiquitination-
dependent decay of Sox2/SOX2, albeit in a species- and
tissue-selective manner [92, 96]. Jointly, these reports
conﬁrm AKT/Akt as a driving force of SOX2/Sox2 nuclear
localization and cell-fate determination, and cytosolic pro-
teasomal degradation of SOX2/Sox2 in absence of AKT/
Akt activity. While these notions were ﬁrst elaborated in
murine ESCs [93] and human cancer cells (e.g., breast and
esophageal carcinoma cell lines) [52, 94], Wong and co-
workers embed these ﬁndings into following intriguing
regulatory concept: The aforementioned Thr116/118 phos-
phorylation site is ﬂanked by two lysine residues (one on
either side, see Fig. 3 for schematic illustration). The C-
proximal of these residues (Lys119) is subject to Set7
imposed protein methylation that fosters WWP2-driven
ubiquitination and cytosolic proteasomal decay of Sox2.
These processes emerge during ESC differentiation, but
compete with stemness sustaining Akt1-driven phosphor-
ylation of neighboring Thr118 [92]. While the exact ubi-
quitination site was initially not resolved, it may have been
identiﬁed in a more recent publication by Wong and co-
workers in human esophageal cancer cells [96]. Here, the
authors describe a competition between AKT1 imposed
phosphorylation on Thr116 (the human paralogue of murine
Thr118) and UBR5-driven ubiquitination of its N-proximal
Lys115. While both lines of evidence have been elaborated
in different species and tissue/cell backgrounds, they
nevertheless merge in proposing residue Thr116/118 as the
central mediator of SOX2/Sox2 protein stability and decay.
According to this model, AKT imposed phosphorylation
of Thr116/118 stabilizes SOX2/Sox2 by prevention of its
ubiquitination, while AKT-enforced nuclear accumulation
of SOX2/Sox2 may be a secondary effect. This distinction
may indeed help resolve the uncertainties associated with
this site (see paragraph: Phosphorylation of SOX2). More-
over, while K115 may be a target of ubiquitination in
human SOX2, this very residue has also been associated
with acetylation in murine ESCs (i.e., K117ac), similarly to
nearby K119 that has been proposed as a target of Set7
imposed methylation [12, 92]. These ﬁndings suggest that
acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation, and ubiquitina-
tion events imposed onto or nearby the AKT recognition
consensus
(RPRRK-T116/118)
in
fact
compete
with
each other.
PARPylation of SOX2
Sox2 has furthermore been proposed as a target of PARP1
imposed poly(ADP)ribosylation (so-called PARPylation)
[118]. In murine ESCs, a competitive association of either
PARP1 or Sox2 with the enhancer element of FGF4, a gene
classically associated with Sox2/Oct4 mediated expression
regulation, was described. Furthermore, poly(ADP)ribosy-
lation of Sox2—but not of Oct4—was indicated to causally
contribute to its molecular displacement from the enhancer
[118]. Although a speciﬁc poly(ADP)ribosylation site was
not identiﬁed, a physical association of SOX2 and PARP1
has been independently conﬁrmed in murine ESCs and
human glioma cells [119, 120]. More recently, PARP1 was
proposed to assist Sox2 in its target site recognition within
densely
compacted
nucleosomal
DNA
[121].
These
genetically silenced regions are accessible only to so-called
pioneer transcription factors, amongst which SOX2 [122],
but
this
cooperativity
occurs
independent
of
ADP-
ribosylation activity [121].
Accordingly, while a connectivity of SOX2 and PARP1
has been repeatedly observed and appears highly plausible in
the context of DNA-activity modulation, and while PARP
proteins clearly can transfer poly(ADP) moieties onto neigh-
boring factors, the regulatory signiﬁcance of SOX2 PARPy-
lation awaits more comprehensive examination.
O-Glycosylation of SOX2
Finally, SOX2/Sox2 is subject to protein O-glycosylation
(O-GlcNAcylation, more speciﬁcally) at residue Ser246/248
as shown in the human pancreatic cancer cell line S2VP10,
as well as in murine ESCs and iPSCs [119, 123]. Glyco-
sylation at this site decreased with differentiation [123]
along with modulation of PARP1 binding [119]. The
SOX2 protein biochemistry in stemness, reprogramming, and cancer: the PI3K/AKT/SOX2 axis and beyond
287

enzyme imposing this secondary modiﬁcation has been
identiﬁed in O-GlcNAc transferase and an inhibition thereof
proposed as a novel mode of therapeutic intervention in
pancreatic cancer, where small inhibitory compounds of the
glycosyl transferase machinery (e.g., OSMI) were shown to
suppress tumorigenesis in xenograft models [113]. As with
the aforementioned PI3K/AKT imposed phosphor-regula-
tion, protein O-glycosylation also likely represents a
recurring molecular theme amongst pluripotency inducing
TFs since related modiﬁcations were identiﬁed in Oct4 and
further potential O-GlcNAcylation sites proposed for Sox2
(i.e., Thr258 and Ser259) [123].
Concluding remarks and perspectives
Taken together, research of the past 25 years near uni-
vocally describes SOX2 as a transcriptional modulator that
—in association with co-factors—imposes cell-fate deter-
mining expression patterns. The molecular understanding of
SOX2 nevertheless contains various aspect of effective
uncertainty. This involves amongst others how target-site
speciﬁcity is achieved, relations to the SOX2 overlapping
transcript
SOX2OT,
and
ﬁnally
also,
the
protein-
biochemical ﬁne tuning of SOX2 itself.
Indeed, various secondary modiﬁcations have been
described for SOX2 (involving phosphorylation, methyla-
tion, acetylation, ubiquitination, SUMOylation, PARPyla-
tion, and O-GlcNAcylation), but their relevance remains
largely underexplored. Identiﬁed either in murine or human
protein, healthy or transformed cells, native or induced
settings, and further obstructed by a somewhat unfortunate
residue number shift that distinguishes the otherwise near-
identical human and murine orthologues, the various
protein-biochemical modiﬁcations imposed onto SOX2
were not comprehensively cataloged before.
Our review ﬁlls this gap and—as a result of synoptic
evaluation—comes to two main conclusions (Fig. 3).
Firstly, chemical modiﬁcation sites described for SOX2 do
not randomly scatter throughout the protein’s primary
sequence, but cluster in particularly conserved stretches of
regulatory signiﬁcance (i.e., nuclear export sequence (NES),
nuclear
localization
sequence
(NLS),
and
a
phosphorylation-dependent SUMOylation motif (PDSM)).
Secondly, despite their heterogeneous chemical nature, near
all secondary modiﬁcations imposed onto SOX2 relate to
principally just three functional aspects: DNA-binding,
nucleo-cytoplasmatic transport, and protein turnover, which
are at the very basis of SOX2 imposed phenotypes. In
ignorance of these underlying mechanisms, the biological
signiﬁcance of SOX2 may be described but remains
mechanistically unresolved. Even more so as many further
but
less
prominent
secondary
modiﬁcations
(e.g.,
neddylation, urmylation, nitrosylation, or thiolation) have
not even been investigated yet, but will complement these
concepts with near certainty in the future.
Prospectively, the ﬁeld would certainly beneﬁt from
stringent serial analyses assessing the prevalence of a given
secondary modiﬁcation across multiple cell types on an
automated, high-throughput scale. Such endeavor may help
assign signiﬁcance scores to individual site change mod-
iﬁcations, deﬁne conditions where this regulation is most
relevant, and (through the identiﬁcation of outliers) fur-
thermore indicate compensatory mechanisms. This knowl-
edge could add an important perspective to personalized
treatment strategies in patients with SOX2 positive cancers.
Finally, a comprehensive molecular understanding of
SOX2 would require a wholistic structural model to enable
interpretations of individual covalent side chain modiﬁca-
tions in 3-dimensional context, so that steric effects can be
assessed and resolved in their functional consequence. Such
structural information may guide rational-based drug design
against SOX2-driven cancer or improve reprogramming
efﬁcacy through molecular ﬁne-tuning of SOX2.
Acknowledgements We acknowledge funding assigned to TS through
the University of Basel Forschungsfonds (Grant No. DMS-2351) and
apologize to authors whose work could not be cited or laid out in
further detail due to reference or space limitations.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of
interest.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Schepers GE, Teasdale RD, Koopman P. Twenty pairs of sox:
extent, homology, and nomenclature of the mouse and human
sox transcription factor gene families. Dev Cell. 2002;3:167–70.
2. Bowles J, Schepers G, Koopman P. Phylogeny of the SOX
family of developmental transcription factors based on sequence
and structural indicators. Dev Biol. 2000;227:239–55.
288
T. Schaefer, C. Lengerke

3. Kamachi Y, Kondoh H. Sox proteins: regulators of cell fate spe-
ciﬁcation and differentiation. Development. 2013;140:4129–44.
4. Guth SI, Wegner M. Having it both ways: Sox protein function
between conservation and innovation. Cell Mol Life Sci.
2008;65:3000–18.
5. Nakagawa M, Koyanagi M, Tanabe K, Takahashi K, Ichisaka T,
Aoi T, et al. Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells without
Myc from mouse and human ﬁbroblasts. Nat Biotechnol.
2008;26:101–6.
6. Nowling TK, Johnson LR, Wiebe MS, Rizzino A. Identiﬁcation
of the transactivation domain of the transcription factor Sox-2
and an associated co-activator. J Biol Chem. 2000;275:3810–8.
7. Kamachi Y, Uchikawa M, Kondoh H. Pairing SOX off: with
partners in the regulation of embryonic development. Trends
Genet. 2000;16:182–7.
8. Masui S, Nakatake Y, Toyooka Y, Shimosato D, Yagi R,
Takahashi K, et al. Pluripotency governed by Sox2 via regulation
of Oct3/4 expression in mouse embryonic stem cells. Nat Cell
Biol. 2007;9:625–35.
9. Hori N, Yamane M, Kouno K, Sato K. Induction of DNA
demethylation depending on two sets of Sox2 and adjacent Oct3/
4 binding sites (Sox-Oct motifs) within the mouse H19/insulin-
like growth factor 2 (Igf2) imprinted control region. J Biol Chem.
2012;287:44006–16.
10. Kamachi Y, Uchikawa M, Tanouchi A, Sekido R, Kondoh H.
Pax6 and SOX2 form a co-DNA-binding partner complex that
regulates
initiation
of
lens
development.
Genes
Dev.
2001;15:1272–86.
11. Li J, Pan G, Cui K, Liu Y, Xu S, Pei D. A dominant-negative
form of mouse SOX2 induces trophectoderm differentiation and
progressive polyploidy in mouse embryonic stem cells. J Biol
Chem. 2007;282:19481–92.
12. Baltus GA, Kowalski MP, Zhai H, Tutter AV, Quinn D, Wall D,
et al. Acetylation of sox2 induces its nuclear export in embryonic
stem cells. Stem Cells. 2009;27:2175–84.
13. Hou L, Srivastava Y, Jauch R. Molecular basis for the genome
engagement
by
Sox
proteins.
Semin
Cell
Dev
Biol.
2017;63:2–12.
14. Yesudhas D, Anwar MA, Panneerselvam S, Kim HK, Choi S.
Evaluation of Sox2 binding afﬁnities for distinct DNA patterns
using steered molecular dynamics simulation. FEBS Open Bio.
2017;7:1750–67.
15. Wilson M, Koopman P. Matching SOX: partner proteins and co-
factors of the SOX family of transcriptional regulators. Curr
Opin Genet Dev. 2002;12:441–6.
16. Wissmuller S, Kosian T, Wolf M, Finzsch M, Wegner M. The
high-mobility-group domain of Sox proteins interacts with DNA-
binding domains of many transcription factors. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2006;34:1735–44.
17. Fang X, Yoon JG, Li L, Yu W, Shao J, Hua D, et al. The SOX2
response program in glioblastoma multiforme: an integrated
ChIP-seq, expression microarray, and microRNA analysis. BMC
Genom. 2011;12:11.
18. Tang J, Zhong G, Wu J, Chen H, Jia Y. SOX2 recruits KLF4 to
regulate nasopharyngeal carcinoma proliferation via PI3K/AKT
signaling. Oncogenesis. 2018;7:61.
19. Boyer LA, Lee TI, Cole MF, Johnstone SE, Levine SS, Zucker
JP, et al. Core transcriptional regulatory circuitry in human
embryonic stem cells. Cell. 2005;122:947–56.
20. Knauss JL, Miao N, Kim SN, Nie Y, Shi Y, Wu T, et al. Long
noncoding RNA Sox2ot and transcription factor YY1 co-regulate
the differentiation of cortical neural progenitors by repressing
Sox2. Cell Death Dis. 2018;9:799.
21. Takahashi K, Yamanaka S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells
from mouse embryonic and adult ﬁbroblast cultures by deﬁned
factors. Cell. 2006;126:663–76.
22. Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, Narita M, Ichisaka T,
Tomoda K, et al. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult
human ﬁbroblasts by deﬁned factors. Cell. 2007;131:861–72.
23. Mao J, Zhang Q, Ye X, Liu K, Liu L. Efﬁcient induction of
pluripotent stem cells from granulosa cells by Oct4 and Sox2.
Stem Cells Dev. 2014;23:779–89.
24. Feng R, Wen J. Overview of the roles of Sox2 in stem cell and
development. Biol Chem. 2015;396:883–91.
25. Avilion AA, Nicolis SK, Pevny LH, Perez L, Vivian N, Lovell-
Badge R. Multipotent cell lineages in early mouse development
depend on SOX2 function. Genes Dev. 2003;17:126–40.
26. Kopp JL, Ormsbee BD, Desler M, Rizzino A. Small increases in
the level of Sox2 trigger the differentiation of mouse embryonic
stem cells. Stem Cells. 2008;26:903–11.
27. Zhao S, Nichols J, Smith AG, Li M. SoxB transcription factors
specify neuroectodermal lineage choice in ES cells. Mol Cell
Neurosci. 2004;27:332–42.
28. Que J, Okubo T, Goldenring JR, Nam KT, Kurotani R, Morrisey
EE, et al. Multiple dose-dependent roles for Sox2 in the pat-
terning and differentiation of anterior foregut endoderm. Devel-
opment. 2007;134:2521–31.
29. Driskell RR, Giangreco A, Jensen KB, Mulder KW, Watt FM.
Sox2-positive dermal papilla cells specify hair follicle type in
mammalian epidermis. Development. 2009;136:2815–23.
30. Fernandes KJ, McKenzie IA, Mill P, Smith KM, Akhavan M,
Barnabe-Heider F, et al. A dermal niche for multipotent adult
skin-derived precursor cells. Nat Cell Biol. 2004;6:1082–93.
31. Biernaskie J, Paris M, Morozova O, Fagan BM, Marra M, Pevny L,
et al. SKPs derive from hair follicle precursors and exhibit prop-
erties of adult dermal stem cells. Cell Stem Cell. 2009;5:610–23.
32. Juuri E, Jussila M, Seidel K, Holmes S, Wu P, Richman J, et al.
Sox2 marks epithelial competence to generate teeth in mammals
and reptiles. Development. 2013;140:1424–32.
33. Matsushima D, Heavner W, Pevny LH. Combinatorial regulation
of optic cup progenitor cell fate by SOX2 and PAX6. Devel-
opment. 2011;138:443–54.
34. Taranova OV, Magness ST, Fagan BM, Wu Y, Surzenko N,
Hutton SR, et al. SOX2 is a dose-dependent regulator of retinal
neural progenitor competence. Genes Dev. 2006;20:1187–202.
35. Williamson KA, Hever AM, Rainger J, Rogers RC, Magee A,
Fiedler Z, et al. Mutations in SOX2 cause anophthalmia-
esophageal-genital
(AEG)
syndrome.
Hum
Mol
Genet.
2006;15:1413–22.
36. Schneider A, Bardakjian T, Reis LM, Tyler RC, Semina EV.
Novel SOX2 mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation in
anophthalmia and microphthalmia. Am J Med Genet A.
2009;149A:2706–15.
37. Arnold K, Sarkar A, Yram MA, Polo JM, Bronson R, Sengupta
S, et al. Sox2(+) adult stem and progenitor cells are important
for tissue regeneration and survival of mice. Cell Stem Cell.
2011;9:317–29.
38. Bass AJ, Watanabe H, Mermel CH, Yu S, Perner S, Verhaak
RG, et al. SOX2 is an ampliﬁed lineage-survival oncogene in
lung and esophageal squamous cell carcinomas. Nat Genet.
2009;41:1238–42.
39. Maier S, Wilbertz T, Braun M, Scheble V, Reischl M, Mikut R,
et al. SOX2 ampliﬁcation is a common event in squamous cell
carcinomas
of
different
organ
sites.
Hum
Pathol.
2011;42:1078–88.
40. Pham DL, Scheble V, Bareiss P, Fischer A, Beschorner C, Adam
A, et al. SOX2 expression and prognostic signiﬁcance in ovarian
carcinoma. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2013;32:358–67.
41. Schrock A, Bode M, Goke FJ, Bareiss PM, Schairer R, Wang H,
et al. Expression and role of the embryonic protein SOX2 in head
and
neck
squamous
cell
carcinoma.
Carcinogenesis.
2014;35:1636–42.
SOX2 protein biochemistry in stemness, reprogramming, and cancer: the PI3K/AKT/SOX2 axis and beyond
289

42. Schrock A, Goke F, Wagner P, Bode M, Franzen A, Braun M,
et al. Sex determining region Y-box 2 (SOX2) ampliﬁcation is an
independent indicator of disease recurrence in sinonasal cancer.
PLoS ONE. 2013;8:e59201.
43. Bareiss PM, Paczulla A, Wang H, Schairer R, Wiehr S, Kohl-
hofer U, et al. SOX2 expression associates with stem cell state in
human ovarian carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2013;73:5544–55.
44. Boumahdi S, Driessens G, Lapouge G, Rorive S, Nassar D, Le
Mercier M, et al. SOX2 controls tumour initiation and cancer
stem-cell
functions
in
squamous-cell
carcinoma.
Nature.
2014;511:246–50.
45. Lengerke C, Fehm T, Kurth R, Neubauer H, Scheble V, Muller
F, et al. Expression of the embryonic stem cell marker SOX2 in
early-stage breast carcinoma. BMC Cancer. 2011;11:42.
46. Leis O, Eguiara A, Lopez-Arribillaga E, Alberdi MJ, Hernandez-
Garcia S, Elorriaga K, et al. Sox2 expression in breast tumours
and
activation
in
breast
cancer
stem
cells.
Oncogene.
2012;31:1354–65.
47. Wuebben EL, Rizzino A. The dark side of SOX2: cancer—a
comprehensive overview. Oncotarget. 2017;8:44917–43.
48. Grimm D, Bauer J, Wise P, Kruger M, Simonsen U, Wehland M,
et al. The role of SOX family members in solid tumours and
metastasis. Semin Cancer Biol. 2019; pii: S1044-579X(18)
30141-X. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcancer.2019.03.004.
49. Mansouri S, Nejad R, Karabork M, Ekinci C, Solaroglu I,
Aldape KD, et al. Sox2: regulation of expression and contribu-
tion to brain tumors. CNS Oncol. 2016;5:159–73.
50. Schaefer T, Ramadoss A, Leu S, Tintignac L, Tostado C, Bink
A, et al. Regulation of glioma cell invasion by 3q26 gene pro-
ducts
PIK3CA,
SOX2
and
OPA1.
Brain
Pathol.
2019;29:336–50. https://doi.org/10.1111/bpa.12670.
51. Krol I, Castro-Giner F, Maurer M, Gkountela S, Szczerba BM,
Scherrer R, et al. Detection of circulating tumour cell clusters in
human glioblastoma. Br J Cancer. 2018;119:487–91.
52. Schaefer T, Wang H, Mir P, Konantz M, Pereboom TC, Paczulla
AM, et al. Molecular and functional interactions between AKT
and SOX2 in breast carcinoma. Oncotarget. 2015;6:43540–56.
53. Wahl GM, Spike BT. Cell state plasticity, stem cells, EMT, and
the generation of intra-tumoral heterogeneity. NPJ Breast Can-
cer. 2017;3:14.
54. Cancer Genome Atlas Research N. Comprehensive genomic
characterization
of
squamous
cell
lung
cancers.
Nature.
2012;489:519–25.
55. Carrasco-Garcia E, Santos JC, Garcia I, Brianti M, Garcia-Puga
M, Pedrazzoli J Jr., et al. Paradoxical role of SOX2 in gastric
cancer. Am J Cancer Res. 2016;6:701–13.
56. Luo J, Yan R, He X, He J. SOX2 inhibits cell proliferation and
metastasis, promotes apoptotic by downregulating CCND1 and
PARP in gastric cancer. Am J Transl Res. 2018;10:639–47.
57. Sarkar A, Huebner AJ, Sulahian R, Anselmo A, Xu X, Flattery
K, et al. Sox2 suppresses gastric tumorigenesis in mice. Cell
Rep. 2016;16:1929–41.
58. Wilbertz T, Wagner P, Petersen K, Stiedl AC, Scheble VJ, Maier
S, et al. SOX2 gene ampliﬁcation and protein overexpression are
associated with better outcome in squamous cell lung cancer.
Mod Pathol. 2011;24:944–53.
59. Velcheti V, Schalper K, Yao X, Cheng H, Kocoglu M, Dho-
dapkar K, et al. High SOX2 levels predict better outcome in non-
small cell lung carcinomas. PLoS ONE. 2013;8:e61427.
60. Asonuma S, Imatani A, Asano N, Oikawa T, Konishi H, Iijima
K, et al. Helicobacter pylori induces gastric mucosal intestinal
metaplasia through the inhibition of interleukin-4-mediated
HMG box protein Sox2 expression. Am J Physiol Gastrointest
Liver Physiol. 2009;297:G312–322.
61. Matsuda K, Yamauchi K, Matsumoto T, Sano K, Yamaoka Y,
Ota H. Quantitative analysis of the effect of Helicobacter pylori
on the expressions of SOX2, CDX2, MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6,
TFF1, TFF2, and TFF3 mRNAs in human gastric carcinoma
cells. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2008;43:25–33.
62. Wang S, Tie J, Wang R, Hu F, Gao L, Wang W, et al. SOX2, a
predictor of survival in gastric cancer, inhibits cell proliferation
and
metastasis
by
regulating
PTEN.
Cancer
Lett.
2015;358:210–9.
63. Otsubo T, Akiyama Y, Yanagihara K, Yuasa Y. SOX2 is fre-
quently downregulated in gastric cancers and inhibits cell growth
through
cell-cycle
arrest
and
apoptosis.
Br
J
Cancer.
2008;98:824–31.
64. Kim BR, Van de Laar E, Cabanero M, Tarumi S, Hasenoeder S,
Wang D, et al. SOX2 and PI3K cooperate to induce and stabilize
a squamous-committed stem cell injury state during lung squa-
mous
cell
carcinoma
pathogenesis.
PLoS
Biol.
2016;14:
e1002581.
65. Wang K, Ji W, Yu Y, Li Z, Niu X, Xia W, et al. FGFR1-ERK1/
2-SOX2 axis promotes cell proliferation, epithelial-mesenchymal
transition, and metastasis in FGFR1-ampliﬁed lung cancer.
Oncogene. 2018;37:5340–54.
66. Gunawardena J. Systems biology. Biological systems theory.
Science. 2010;328:581–2.
67. Manning BD, Toker A. AKT/PKB signaling: navigating the
network. Cell. 2017;169:381–405.
68. Siddle K. Signalling by insulin and IGF receptors: supporting
acts and new players. J Mol Endocrinol. 2011;47:R1–10.
69. Boucher J, Kleinridders A, Kahn CR Insulin receptor signaling
in normal and insulin-resistant states. Cold Spring Harb Perspect
Biol. 2014;6: pii: a009191. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.
a009191.
70. Mackenzie RW, Elliott BT. Akt/PKB activation and insulin
signaling: a novel insulin signaling pathway in the treatment of
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 2014;7:55–64.
71. Liao XH, Majithia A, Huang X, Kimmel AR. Growth control via
TOR kinase signaling, an intracellular sensor of amino acid and
energy availability, with crosstalk potential to proline metabo-
lism. Amino Acids. 2008;35:761–70.
72. Nicoletti F, Arcella A, Iacovelli L, Battaglia G, Giangaspero F,
Melchiorri D. Metabotropic glutamate receptors: new targets for
the
control
of
tumor
growth?
Trends
Pharm
Sci.
2007;28:206–13.
73. Miinea CP, Sano H, Kane S, Sano E, Fukuda M, Peranen J, et al.
AS160, the Akt substrate regulating GLUT4 translocation, has a
functional Rab GTPase-activating protein domain. Biochem J.
2005;391:87–93.
74. Liu T, Yu B, Kakino M, Fujimoto H, Ando Y, Hakuno F, et al. A
novel IRS-1-associated protein, DGKzeta regulates GLUT4
translocation in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Sci Rep. 2016;6:35438.
75. Meyuhas O. Ribosomal protein S6 phosphorylation: Four dec-
ades of research. Int Rev Cell Mol Biol. 2015;320:41–73.
76. Ruvinsky I, Meyuhas O. Ribosomal protein S6 phosphorylation:
from protein synthesis to cell size. Trends Biochem Sci.
2006;31:342–8.
77. Gingras AC, Kennedy SG, O’Leary MA, Sonenberg N, Hay N.
4E-BP1, a repressor of mRNA translation, is phosphorylated and
inactivated by the Akt(PKB) signaling pathway. Genes Dev.
1998;12:502–13.
78. Josse L, Xie J, Proud CG, Smales CM. mTORC1 signalling and
eIF4E/4E-BP1 translation initiation factor stoichiometry inﬂu-
ence recombinant protein productivity from GS-CHOK1 cells.
Biochem J. 2016;473:4651–64.
79. Martini M, De Santis MC, Braccini L, Gulluni F, Hirsch E.
PI3K/AKT signaling pathway and cancer: an updated review.
Ann Med. 2014;46:372–83.
80. Porta C, Paglino C, Mosca A. Targeting PI3K/Akt/mTOR sig-
naling in cancer. Front Oncol. 2014;4:64.
290
T. Schaefer, C. Lengerke

81. van den Heuvel S, Harlow E. Distinct roles for cyclin-dependent
kinases in cell cycle control. Science. 1993;262:2050–4.
82. Grana X, Reddy EP. Cell cycle control in mammalian cells: role
of cyclins, cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs), growth suppressor
genes and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CKIs). Oncogene.
1995;11:211–9.
83. Semple BD, Blomgren K, Gimlin K, Ferriero DM, Noble-
Haeusslein LJ. Brain development in rodents and humans:
Identifying benchmarks of maturation and vulnerability to injury
across species. Prog Neurobiol. 2013;106-107:1–16.
84. Foulk RA. From fertilization to implantation. Early Pregnancy.
2001;5:61–62.
85. Signer RA, Magee JA, Salic A, Morrison SJ. Haematopoietic
stem cells require a highly regulated protein synthesis rate.
Nature. 2014;509:49–54.
86. Blanco S, Bandiera R, Popis M, Hussain S, Lombard P, Aleksic
J, et al. Stem cell function and stress response are controlled by
protein synthesis. Nature. 2016;534:335–40.
87. Sendoel A, Dunn JG, Rodriguez EH, Naik S, Gomez NC,
Hurwitz B, et al. Translation from unconventional 5’ start sites
drives tumour initiation. Nature. 2017;541:494–9.
88. Koren S, Reavie L, Couto JP, De Silva D, Stadler MB, Roloff T,
et al. PIK3CA(H1047R) induces multipotency and multi-lineage
mammary tumours. Nature. 2015;525:114–8.
89. Martelli AM, Evangelisti C, Follo MY, Ramazzotti G, Fini M,
Giardino R, et al. Targeting the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/
Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin signaling network in cancer
stem cells. Curr Med Chem. 2011;18:2715–26.
90. Korkaya H, Paulson A, Charafe-Jauffret E, Ginestier C, Brown
M, Dutcher J, et al. Regulation of mammary stem/progenitor
cells by PTEN/Akt/beta-catenin signaling. PLoS Biol. 2009;7:
e1000121.
91. Gargini R, Cerliani JP, Escoll M, Anton IM, Wandosell F.
Cancer stem cell-like phenotype and survival are coordinately
regulated
by
Akt/FoxO/Bim
pathway.
Stem
Cells.
2015;33:646–60.
92. Fang L, Zhang L, Wei W, Jin X, Wang P, Tong Y, et al. A
methylation-phosphorylation switch determines Sox2 stability
and function in ESC maintenance or differentiation. Mol Cell.
2014;55:537–51.
93. Jeong CH, Cho YY, Kim MO, Kim SH, Cho EJ, Lee SY, et al.
Phosphorylation of Sox2 cooperates in reprogramming to plur-
ipotent stem cells. Stem Cells. 2010;28:2141–50.
94. Qin J, Ji J, Deng R, Tang J, Yang F, Feng GK, et al. DC120, a
novel AKT inhibitor, preferentially suppresses nasopharyngeal
carcinoma cancer stem-like cells by downregulating Sox2.
Oncotarget. 2015;6:6944–58.
95. Asanuma K, Huo X, Agoston A, Zhang X, Yu C, Cheng E, et al.
In
oesophageal
squamous
cells,
nitric
oxide
causes
S-
nitrosylation of Akt and blocks SOX2 (sex determining region
Y-box 2) expression. Gut. 2016;65:1416–26.
96. Wang Z, Kang L, Zhang H, Huang Y, Fang L, Li M, et al. AKT
drives SOX2 overexpression and cancer cell stemness in eso-
phageal cancer by protecting SOX2 from UBR5-mediated
degradation. Oncogene. 2019;38:5250–64.
97. Ren C, Ren T, Yang K, Wang S, Bao X, Zhang F, et al. Inhi-
bition of SOX2 induces cell apoptosis and G1/S arrest in
Ewing’s sarcoma through the PI3K/Akt pathway. J Exp Clin
Cancer Res. 2016;35:44.
98. Ormsbee Golden BD, Wuebben EL, Rizzino A. Sox2 expression
is regulated by a negative feedback loop in embryonic stem cells
that involves AKT signaling and FoxO1. PLoS ONE. 2013;8:
e76345.
99. Hossini AM, Quast AS, Plotz M, Grauel K, Exner T, Kuchler J,
et al. PI3K/AKT signaling pathway is essential for survival of
induced pluripotent stem cells. PLoS ONE. 2016;11:e0154770.
100. Jeong HC, Park SJ, Choi JJ, Go YH, Hong SK, Kwon OS, et al.
PRMT8 controls the pluripotency and mesodermal fate of human
embryonic stem cells by enhancing the PI3K/AKT/SOX2 axis.
Stem Cells. 2017;35:2037–49.
101. Tripathi SC, Fahrmann JF, Celiktas M, Aguilar M, Marini KD,
Jolly MK, et al. MCAM mediates chemoresistance in small-cell
lung cancer via the PI3K/AKT/SOX2 signaling pathway. Cancer
Res. 2017;77:4414–25.
102. Garros-Regulez L, Aldaz P, Arrizabalaga O, Moncho-Amor V,
Carrasco-Garcia E, Manterola L, et al. mTOR inhibition
decreases SOX2-SOX9 mediated glioma stem cell activity and
temozolomide
resistance.
Exp
Opin
Ther
Targets.
2016;20:393–405.
103. Gen Y, Yasui K, Nishikawa T, Yoshikawa T. SOX2 promotes
tumor growth of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma through
the AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 signaling
pathway. Cancer Sci. 2013;104:810–6.
104. Malak PN, Dannenmann B, Hirth A, Rothfuss OC, Schulze-
Osthoff K. Novel AKT phosphorylation sites identiﬁed in the
pluripotency factors OCT4, SOX2 and KLF4. Cell Cycle.
2015;14:3748–54.
105. Schaefer T, Lengerke C. AKT-driven phospho-patterns of plur-
ipotency. Cell Cycle. 2015;14:3784–5.
106. Liao CH, Wang YH, Chang WW, Yang BC, Wu TJ, Liu WL,
et al. Leucine-rich repeat neuronal protein 1 regulates differ-
entiation of embryonic stem cells by post-translational mod-
iﬁcations of pluripotency factors. Stem Cells. 2018;36:1514–24.
107. Mehta GA, Parker JS, Silva GO, Hoadley KA, Perou CM, Gatza
ML. Ampliﬁcation of SOX4 promotes PI3K/Akt signaling in
human breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2017;162:439–50.
108. Zhang J, Jiang H, Shao J, Mao R, Liu J, Ma Y, et al. SOX4
inhibits GBM cell growth and induces G0/G1 cell cycle arrest
through Akt-p53 axis. BMC Neurol. 2014;14:207.
109. Zhang J, Liang Q, Lei Y, Yao M, Li L, Gao X, et al. SOX4
induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and contributes to
breast cancer progression. Cancer Res. 2012;72:4597–608.
110. Ikushima H, Todo T, Ino Y, Takahashi M, Saito N, Miyazawa K,
et al. Glioma-initiating cells retain their tumorigenicity through
integration of the Sox axis and Oct4 protein. J Biol Chem.
2011;286:41434–41.
111. Van Hoof D, Munoz J, Braam SR, Pinkse MW, Linding R, Heck
AJ, et al. Phosphorylation dynamics during early differentiation
of human embryonic stem cells. Cell Stem Cell. 2009;5:214–26.
112. Rigbolt KT, Prokhorova TA, Akimov V, Henningsen J, Johan-
sen PT, Kratchmarova I, et al. System-wide temporal char-
acterization of the proteome and phosphoproteome of human
embryonic stem cell differentiation. Sci Signal. 2011;4:rs3.
113. Tsuruzoe S, Ishihara K, Uchimura Y, Watanabe S, Sekita Y,
Aoto T, et al. Inhibition of DNA binding of Sox2 by the SUMO
conjugation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006;351:920–6.
114. Hietakangas V, Anckar J, Blomster HA, Fujimoto M, Palvimo
JJ, Nakai A, et al. PDSM, a motif for phosphorylation-dependent
SUMO modiﬁcation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006;103:45–50.
115. Thevenet L, Mejean C, Moniot B, Bonneaud N, Galeotti N,
Aldrian-Herrada G, et al. Regulation of human SRY subcellular
distribution
by
its
acetylation/deacetylation.
EMBO
J.
2004;23:3336–45.
116. Gasca S, Canizares J, De Santa Barbara P, Mejean C, Poulat F,
Berta P, et al. A nuclear export signal within the high mobility
group domain regulates the nucleocytoplasmic translocation of
SOX9 during sexual determination. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2002;99:11199–204.
117. Zhao HY, Zhang YJ, Dai H, Zhang Y, Shen YF. CARM1
mediates modulation of Sox2. PLoS ONE. 2011;6:e27026.
118. Gao F, Kwon SW, Zhao Y, Jin Y. PARP1 poly(ADP-ribosyl)
ates Sox2 to control Sox2 protein levels and FGF4 expression
SOX2 protein biochemistry in stemness, reprogramming, and cancer: the PI3K/AKT/SOX2 axis and beyond
291

during embryonic stem cell differentiation. J Biol Chem.
2009;284:22263–73.
119. Myers SA, Peddada S, Chatterjee N, Friedrich T, Tomoda K,
Krings
G,
et
al.
SOX2
O-GlcNAcylation
alters
its
protein–protein interactions and genomic occupancy to modulate
gene expression in pluripotent cells. Elife. 2016;5:e10647.
120. Fang X, Yoon JG, Li L, Tsai YS, Zheng S, Hood L, et al.
Landscape of the SOX2 protein-protein interactome. Proteomics.
2011;11:921–34.
121. Liu Z, Kraus WL. Catalytic-independent functions of PARP-1
determine Sox2 pioneer activity at intractable genomic loci. Mol
Cell. 2017;65:589–603 e589.
122. Gaullier G, Luger K. PARP1 and Sox2: an unlikely team of
pioneers
to
conquer
the
nucleosome.
Mol
Cell.
2017;65:581–2.
123. Jang H, Kim TW, Yoon S, Choi SY, Kang TW, Kim SY, et al.
O-GlcNAc
regulates
pluripotency
and
reprogramming
by
directly acting on core components of the pluripotency network.
Cell Stem Cell. 2012;11:62–74.
124. Sharma NS, Gupta VK, Dauer P, Kesh K, Hadad R, Giri B et al.
O-GlcNAc modiﬁcation of oncogenetic transcription factor Sox2
promotes protein stability and regulates self-renewal in pan-
creatic cancer.https://doi.org/10.1101/345223 (deposited June
12, 2018)
292
T. Schaefer, C. Lengerke

===== Schuller2007_MolCellBiol+FoxM1 =====
MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOLOGY, Dec. 2007, p. 8259–8270
Vol. 27, No. 23
0270-7306/07/$08.000
doi:10.1128/MCB.00707-07
Copyright © 2007, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.
Forkhead Transcription Factor FoxM1 Regulates Mitotic Entry and
Prevents Spindle Defects in Cerebellar Granule
Neuron Precursors†
Ulrich Schu¨ller,1,4‡ Qing Zhao,1‡ Susana A. Godinho,1 Vivi M. Heine,2 Rene´ H. Medema,3
David Pellman,1 and David H. Rowitch1,2*
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts1;
Department of Pediatrics and Institute for Regeneration Medicine, UCSF, San Francisco, California2;
Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands3; and
Center for Neuropathology, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany4
Received 23 April 2007/Returned for modiﬁcation 1 June 2007/Accepted 7 September 2007
The forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 has been reported to regulate, variously, proliferation and/or
spindle formation during the G2/M transition of the cell cycle. Here we deﬁne speciﬁc functions of FoxM1
during brain development by the investigation of FoxM1 loss-of-function mutations in the context of Sonic
hedgehog (Shh)-induced neuroproliferation in cerebellar granule neuron precursors (CGNP). We show that
FoxM1 is expressed in the cerebellar anlagen as well as in postnatal proliferating CGNP and that it is
upregulated in response to activated Shh signaling. To determine the requirements for FoxM1 function, we
used transgenic mice carrying conventional null alleles or conditionally targeted alleles in conjunction with
speciﬁc Cre recombinase expression in CGNP or early neural precursors driven by Math1 or Nestin enhancers.
Although the overall cerebellar morphology was grossly normal, we observed that the entry into mitosis was
postponed both in vivo and in Shh-treated CGNP cultures. Cell cycle analysis and immunohistochemistry with
antibodies against phosphorylated histone H3 indicated a signiﬁcant delay in the G2/M transition. Consistent
with this, FoxM1-deﬁcient CGNP showed decreased levels of the cyclin B1 and Cdc25b proteins. Furthermore,
the loss of FoxM1 resulted in spindle defects and centrosome ampliﬁcation. These ﬁndings indicate that the
functions of FoxM1 in Shh-induced neuroproliferation are restricted to the regulation of the G2/M transition
in CGNP, most probably through transcriptional effects on target genes such as those coding for B-type cyclins.
The cerebellum, derived from the embryonic midhindbrain
region, serves critical roles in the coordination of movement
and some higher-order functions. Cerebellar granule neuron
precursors (CGNP) are initially formed in rhombomere 1 of
the embryonic neural tube. They then migrate dorsally where
a second phase of postnatal proliferation takes place in the
external granular cell layer (EGL), which in mice lasts for
approximately 2 weeks. Subsequently, CGNP differentiate and
migrate from the EGL into deeper parts of the cortex (1).
While granule neurons represent the most abundant neuronal
cell type in the entire nervous system, relatively little is known
about the mediators and mechanisms that regulate the prolif-
eration and differentiation of these neurons.
Activation of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway is required for
the expansion of speciﬁc neural precursor populations during
normal development of the central nervous system (CNS). In
granule cells, Shh acts on the transmembrane protein Patched
(Ptc) to relieve inhibition of the Smoothened receptor and to
upregulate target genes (13). Shh has furthermore been impli-
cated in a variety of human cancers including cerebellar medul-
loblastoma, the most frequently found malignant brain tumor of
childhood, which is believed to derive from granule cell precur-
sors (34, 41). Proliferative effects of Shh have been especially well
characterized in the EGL of the cerebellum, where the expansion
of CGNP is dependent upon Shh signaling (42). The transcription
factors known to mediate Shh mitogenic signaling within this
system include the Gli proteins and the proto-oncogene product
N-myc (5, 15). Indirect transcriptional targets of Shh signaling
that are integral to the cell cycle machinery include the cyclins A2,
B1, B2, D1, and D2 (16, 36, 45).
A novel candidate that has recently been implicated as a tran-
scriptional target of hedgehog signaling in neural precursors (33)
as well as in human colorectal cancer (7) and basal cell carcino-
mas (38) is the forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 (also known
as Trident, HFH-11, and WIN). The role of FoxM1 in normal
development was ﬁrst reported in the myocardium. FoxM1 null
mice die around birth and are found with disorganized and
polyploid cardiomyocytes that lead to circulatory failure (20). A
similar signiﬁcance has been reported for mice with FoxM1-de-
ﬁcient liver, where diminished DNA replication and a failure to
enter mitosis result in a reduced number of hepatoblasts and
severe developmental abnormalities (21). Finally, mice with
FoxM1-deﬁcient lungs exhibit severe hypertrophy of arteriolar
smooth muscle cells and a signiﬁcant reduction of lung mesenchyme
proliferation (18). However, the function of FoxM1 in the CNS and
especially in the cerebellum, a model system used to study Shh
mitogenic effects, has not been characterized. In particular, we asked
whether FoxM1 function is required for (i) overall rates of Shh-
* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Department of Pediatrics
and Institute for Regeneration Medicine, UCSF, 533 Parnassus Ave-
nue, U503, San Francisco, CA 94143. Phone: (415) 476-7242. Fax:
(415) 476-9976. E-mail: rowitchd@peds.ucsf.edu.
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Supplemental material for this article may be found at http://mcb
.asm.org/.
 Published ahead of print on 24 September 2007.
8259
 on February 20, 2021 by guest
http://mcb.asm.org/
Downloaded from 

induced neuroproliferation, (ii) mitotic entry of CGNP, and/or (iii)
mitotic spindle formation during the G2/M transition.
We show that FoxM1 is speciﬁcally expressed in granule cell
precursors of the developing cerebellar cortex and that it is up-
regulated after the activation of the Shh pathway. While FoxM1-
deﬁcient CGNP from conditional knockout mice maintain their
responsiveness to Shh with respect to DNA synthesis during S
phase, they express decreased levels of cyclin B1 and Cdc25b
protein expression, and their ability to enter mitosis is disturbed,
as shown by a signiﬁcantly elevated number of cells in G2 or
prophase. We show, moreover, that FoxM1 is crucial for the
spindle apparatus and centrosome duplication in CGNP. To-
gether, these ﬁndings suggest a restricted role for FoxM1 in the
G2/M transition in CGNP.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Transgenic animals and genotyping. Generation and characterization of Nes-
tin-cre [B6.Cg-Tg(Nes-cre)1Kln/J], FoxM1/, FoxM1Fl/Fl, and Wnt1/GAL4 UAS-
FIG. 1. Expression of FoxM1 during normal cerebellar development and in response to activation of the Shh signaling pathway. Panels A and B and
the inset in panel D show results from immunohistochemistry analysis, while all other images are from in situ hybridizations. Expression of FoxM1 in the
cerebellum is detectable at E13.5 (panel A, arrows) and covers the entire EGL from E15.5 onward (panel B, arrows). It is restricted to granule cell
precursors in the EGL as shown in sagittal sections of P7 cerebella (D) and is downregulated when granule cell precursors start to differentiate. No more
expression is observable at P15 (E). Note that FoxM1 is expressed in the same regions as Math1 (C) and cyclin D1 (F), as shown in E15.5 and P7 cerebella,
respectively. Western blotting analysis from protein extracts of cultured granule cell precursors shows an upregulation of FoxM1 levels after a 24-h
treatment with Shh (G). In situ hybridization for FoxM1 in a cerebellar tumor from an adult Ptc/ animal with a strong signal in the tumor tissue, but
not in adjacent cerebellar tissue (H). FoxM1 is expressed as a consequence of ectopic Shh expression in the dorsal neural tube of E12.5 Wnt1/GAL4
UAS-Shh animals (I and J). CB, cerebellum; CC, cerebellar cortex; CI, colliculus inferior; PC, plexus choroideus; WM, white matter.
8260
SCHU¨ LLER ET AL.
MOL. CELL. BIOL.
 on February 20, 2021 by guest
http://mcb.asm.org/
Downloaded from 

Shh animals have been described previously (20, 32, 39, 40). Math1-cre transgenic
animals, which carry bacteriophage P1 cre recombinase under the control of a
1.4-kb upstream Math1 enhancer element (11), have also been described previ-
ously (26). Embryos were obtained from timed pregnancies, with the plug date
deﬁned as embryonic day 0.5 (E0.5). For all animals, genotyping was done by
PCR using genomic DNA which was extracted from mouse tail tissue. Primers
have been published previously. Cre expression was further veriﬁed by immuno-
histochemistry, and global or cell-type-speciﬁc knockout of FoxM1 was veriﬁed by
Western blotting or by in situ hybridization.
Histology. For hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and for immunohisto-
chemical procedures, mouse embryos and brains were ﬁxed in a 4% paraformal-
dehyde-phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution overnight at 4°C. Tissue for
frozen sections was equilibrated in 20% glucose-PBS (pH 7.4) and embedded in
optimal-cutting-temperature compound. Twelve-micrometer parasagittal sec-
tions were prepared on Superfrost Plus slides (Fisher). Tissue for parafﬁn wax-
embedded sections was dehydrated, embedded, and cut into 5-m-thick sections,
according to standard protocols. Overall morphology was assessed by H&E
staining. All photomicrographs, including those from immunohistochemical ex-
periments, were taken digitally, using a Zeiss Axioskop microscope and an
Axiocam imaging system.
Immunohistochemistry. Tissue sections were subjected to heat-induced anti-
gen retrieval at 99°C in a 10 mM sodium citrate buffer for 20 min for all
antibodies. Staining was performed using an HRP (horseradish peroxidase)-
DAB (3,3-diaminobenzidine)-based Envision staining system (Dako) accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s speciﬁcations, except that incubation times were in-
creased for primary antibodies (overnight at 4°C) and secondary antibodies (1 h
at room temperature). Counterstaining was performed using Harris hematoxylin
(Sigma). Cultured CGNP were immunolabeled using ﬂuorescence-coupled sec-
ondary antibodies (Alexa 488 and Alexa 546, 1:500; Molecular Probes) and
counterstained with DAPI (4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; Sigma). The primary
antibodies used were anti-phospho-histone H3 (6G3 and polyclonal, 1:100; Cell
Signaling), anti-8-bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) (B44, 1:100; Becton-Dickinson),
anti-cleaved caspase 3 (Asp175, 1:100; Cell Signaling), anti-FoxM1 (polyclonal,
1:50; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-Cre (polyclonal, 1:1,500; Covance), anti-
green ﬂuorescent protein (anti-GFP) (polyclonal, 1:500; Abcam), anti--tubulin
(B-5-1-2, 1:1,000; Sigma), and anti--tubulin (GTU88, 1:500; Sigma).
Preparation of protein extracts and Western blotting. Protein lysates were
prepared and quantiﬁed as described previously (16). One hundred micrograms
of each sample was separated on 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide
gels and then transferred to Immobilon polyvinylidene diﬂuoride (Millipore)
membranes. The primary antibodies used were anti-FoxM1 (polyclonal, 1:500;
Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-cyclin B1 (polyclonal, 1:200; Santa Cruz Bio-
technology), anti-Cdc25b (polyclonal, 1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-N-
myc (monoclonal, 1:500; BD; a kind gift from W. Weiss, San Francisco, CA), and
anti--tubulin (TUB 2.1, 1:5,000; Sigma). Peroxidase-conjugated secondary an-
tibodies included donkey anti-mouse (1:5,000; Jackson Immunoresearch Labo-
ratories) and goat anti-rabbit (1:10,000; Pierce) antibodies. Blots were developed
using enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham-Pharmacia), according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Chemiluminescent immunoreactivity was detected
using Kodak X-Omat X-ray ﬁlm.
Probe synthesis and in situ hybridization. Gene fragments were ampliﬁed
directly from plasmids, using ready-made T7, T3, or SP6 primers (Integrated
DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA). Digoxigenin-labeled antisense RNA
probes were made by using ampliﬁed DNA as the template and SP6, T3, or
T7 as the RNA polymerase (Roche). In situ hybridization with frozen sections
was performed according to standard protocols. Brieﬂy, brain sections were
hybridized overnight with labeled RNA probes at 65°C, washed twice in 0.2
SSC (1 SSC is 0.15 M NaCl plus 0.015 M sodium citrate), pH 4.5, and 0.1%
Tween 20 at 65°C, washed twice in MBST buffer, pH 7.5, containing 100 mM
maleic acid, 150 mM NaCl2, 2 mM levamisole, and 0.1% Tween 20, blocked
in MBST with 2% BM blocking agent (Roche) and 20% lamb serum, and
incubated with alkaline phosphatase-labeled antidigoxigenin antibodies (1:
2,500 in 2% serum; Roche) for 2 h. Sections were washed, and color was
visualized using BM purple (Roche) (a detailed protocol is available from the
author upon request).
Primary cell culture and virus production. Primary cultures of P5/P6 mouse
granule cell precursors were established as previously described (15). For im-
munohistochemical experiments, cells were plated on polyornithine-plated glass
coverslips. For experiments including virus infection of cultured granule cell
precursors, cells were maintained in serum-free medium containing Shh (3 g/
ml) for 24 h prior to virus infection. For virus preparation, 293 EBNA (Invitro-
gen) packaging cells were cotransfected with the gag-pol gene fusion, with vesic-
ular stomatitis virus G glycoprotein plasmids, and with retroviral constructs
carrying either internal ribosome entry site (IRES)-GFP alone, Cre-IRES-GFP,
or FoxM1-IRES-GFP sequences, using Fugene 6 transfection reagent (Roche).
Packaging cells were re-fed at 12 h after transfection. Retroviral supernatants (4
ml) were harvested every 12 h for 72 h and kept at 4°C until they were pooled,
ﬁltered through 0.45-mm syringe ﬁlters, aliquoted, and stored at 80°C until use.
For the infection of granule cell precursors, conditioned medium was removed
and saved, and cells were exposed to freshly thawed retroviral supernatants for
2 to 3 h. Supernatants were removed, and conditioned medium was replaced.
For proliferation assays, granule cell precursors plated on coverslips were
pulsed with 25 mg/ml BrdU for 2 h prior to ﬁxation in 4% paraformaldehyde.
Cells were washed in PBS, treated for 10 min with 4 N HCl, and neutralized for
5 min with 0.1 M sodium borate buffer (pH 8.5) before being processed for
immunocytochemistry.
Cell cycle analysis. For ﬂow cytometry, cells were ﬁxed in ethanol, immuno-
stained with antibodies against phospho-histone H3, treated with 500 units/ml
RNase (Sigma) for 15 min at 37°C, and afterwards stained with propidium iodine
(25 g/ml; Sigma). Cell cycle analysis and immunoﬂuorescence detection were
performed using a FACScan (Becton Dickinson) and CellQuest software (Bec-
ton Dickinson) for data acquisition. Data shown in Fig. 6 and described in the
accompanying text are representative of results from experiments performed in
triplicate.
Quantitation and statistics. All in situ hybridizations, as well as conventional
and immunohistochemical staining, were carried out at least three times with at
least two different wild-type and mutant mice from separate litters. In vivo
counting of phospho-histone H3-positive granule cells was performed by aver-
aging the total number of immunolabeled cells per section by the total length of
the EGL. Counts were taken from three parasagittal sections of two wild-type
and two mutant animals by an unbiased observer. To assess the percentage of
cultured granule cells that incorporated BrdU, 10 ﬁelds of 100 cells were ana-
lyzed per condition, using DAPI staining to select homogeneously distributed
and dispersed (as opposed to clumped) cell ﬁelds. M-phase analysis of cul-
tured granule cell precursors was performed by counting at least 100 cells in
M phase from at least three independent experiments. Statistical signiﬁcance
was calculated using a two-tailed t test (Excel software) in which P values of
	0.05 were considered signiﬁcant. Error bars represent standard deviations
of the means.
RESULTS
FoxM1 is expressed in proliferating granule cell precursors
and is responsive to Sonic hedgehog signaling. We ﬁrst char-
acterized FoxM1 expression in the developing mouse mid-
brain-hindbrain region during embryonic development. As
shown in Fig. 1, the expression of FoxM1 is detected in the
FIG. 2. FoxM1/ animals die around birth but develop cerebella
that are indistinguishable from those of the wild type at E18.5. Sagittal
sections from E18.5 cerebella show a normal overall morphology and
expression of granule cell markers Math1 and cyclin D1.
VOL. 27, 2007
FoxM1 IN CEREBELLAR DEVELOPMENT
8261
 on February 20, 2021 by guest
http://mcb.asm.org/
Downloaded from 

cerebellar anlagen as early as E13.5 in a population of cells that
also expresses Math1, a marker of granule cell precursors.
Although FoxM1 continues to show expression on into the
postnatal stages of cerebellar development, with a peak at P7
(Fig. 1D), its expression is restricted to a rapidly proliferating
population of EGL cells that also expresses the cyclin genes
such as cyclin D1 (Fig. 1F), a regulator of G1 progression, and
cyclin B1 (not shown), which regulates the G2/M transition (15,
45). FoxM1 is rapidly downregulated thereafter and is unde-
tectable at P15 (Fig. 1E).
The temporal and spatial expression of FoxM1 in the EGL
suggested that FoxM1 might be responsive to the activation of
FIG. 3. Cerebella from Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl animals appear grossly normal at P7 and P21 (A). Insets of H&E-stained sections show parts of
the cerebellar EGL with proliferating granule cell precursors that, in P7 wild-type mice, express FoxM1, as shown in panel B. As expected, FoxM1
is lost in cerebella from P7 Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl mice (B). Western blots show the levels of FoxM1 expression, and normalized quantities are given
in percentages. In situ hybridization for mutant mice reveals no FoxM1 expression in the cerebellum but clear signals in the forebrain subventricular
zone (SVZ) and rostral migratory stream (RMS), where Math1-cre is not expressed (inset in panel B, arrows). The Sonic hedgehog target genes
Gli1 and Nmyc as well as Math1 are properly expressed in FoxM1-deﬁcient granule cell precursors (C).
8262
SCHU¨ LLER ET AL.
MOL. CELL. BIOL.
 on February 20, 2021 by guest
http://mcb.asm.org/
Downloaded from 

Shh signaling. We therefore treated CGNP in vitro with re-
combinant Shh protein or vehicle and analyzed FoxM1 expres-
sion by Western blotting. As shown in Fig. 1G, FoxM1 protein
expression levels are upregulated at 24 h posttreatment with
Shh, similar to the upregulation of N-myc protein expression
levels. Since the genes directly targeted by Hedgehog signaling,
such as N-myc (15), usually show robust upregulation after 3 h,
we also assessed FoxM1 expression levels at the corresponding
early time points. However, the absence of FoxM1 upregula-
tion at that time suggests that FoxM1 is probably an indirect
Shh target.
Further evidence for the upregulation by Shh in vivo is
provided by strong expression in cerebellar tumors that form in
Ptc/ mice due to constitutive activation of Hedgehog signal-
ing (8) (Fig. 1H) and by analysis of Wnt1/GAL4 UAS-Shh mice,
in which Shh is ectopically expressed in the dorsal spinal cord
(32) (Fig. 1I and J). While these data collectively show that Shh
can upregulate FoxM1 expression, they do not show that
FoxM1 is a speciﬁc target of Shh signaling. Indeed, the expres-
sion of FoxM1 is widespread in precursor cells during devel-
opment, clearly indicating that its activity can be recruited by
additional mitogens.
FoxM1 function is dispensable for overall cerebellar mor-
phogenesis. To analyze roles for FoxM1 in cerebellar develop-
ment, we ﬁrst studied mice carrying a conventional null allele
of FoxM1 (20). As shown in Fig. 2, we did not detect any
obvious abnormalities in cerebellar development at E17.5, just
prior to birth, the latest time point we could study. Mice that
are homozygous for null alleles of FoxM1 have limited viability
due to cardiac defects (20). Indeed, we failed to detect any
surviving FoxM1 null pups out of 69 tested.
To circumvent this problem and to study FoxM1 functions at
postnatal stages of cerebellar development, we employed a
conditional allele of FoxM1 (39). In order to achieve condi-
tional knockout of FoxM1 speciﬁcally in granule cell precur-
sors, we used transgenic animals that expressed Cre recombi-
nase under the control of Math1 regulatory sequences (26).
The speciﬁcity of such regulatory sequences within the cere-
bellar cortex has been shown previously (11, 25).
We then crossed the Math1-cre mice with the FoxM1Fl/Fl
mice and analyzed conditional knockout animals at postnatal
stages. As shown in Fig. 3, we found that the deletion of
FoxM1 in granule cell precursors failed to produce a gross
morphological phenotype at P7 and P21, and we did not ob-
serve neurological abnormalities. Analysis by in situ hybridiza-
tion and Western blotting conﬁrmed signiﬁcant downregula-
tion of FoxM1 expression in the conditional knockout animals
(Fig. 3B). As expected, expression of the Hedgehog transcrip-
FIG. 4. Morphology of Nestin-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl cerebella appears normal in H&E-stained sagittal sections of P7 and P21 cerebella. Insets in P7
images show higher magniﬁcations of the cerebellar EGL, which is morphologically indistinguishable in wild-type and mutant mice. FoxM1 is
strongly reduced in P7 cerebella from Nestin-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl animals, as shown by in situ hybridization and Western blotting. Despite the broad
expression of Nestin-cre outside the cerebellum, gross examination of Nestin-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl mice did not reveal any obvious developmental defects
in other parts of the CNS (data not shown).
VOL. 27, 2007
FoxM1 IN CEREBELLAR DEVELOPMENT
8263
 on February 20, 2021 by guest
http://mcb.asm.org/
Downloaded from 

FIG. 5. (A) S-phase response to Shh, as measured by BrdU uptake, is not affected in CGNP from Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl animals. The CGNP
from both the wild-type and the mutant animals showed an approximately threefold increase of BrdU uptake after treatment with Shh. Double
labeling of CGNP from Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl animals using antibodies against BrdU and Cre proved that the response to Shh was indeed occurring
8264
SCHU¨ LLER ET AL.
MOL. CELL. BIOL.
 on February 20, 2021 by guest
http://mcb.asm.org/
Downloaded from 

tional targets Gli1 and N-myc as well as Math1, a marker for
granule cell precursor cells, was unaffected (Fig. 3C), indicat-
ing that the FoxM1 function is dispensable for Shh signal trans-
duction. Furthermore, apoptosis was measured by immunohis-
tochemistry and Western blotting by using antibodies against
cleaved caspase 3, but no signiﬁcant differences were detect-
able between the wild-type and the mutant mice (see Fig. S1 in
the supplemental material).
To rule out the possibility that Math1 gene-driven Cre ac-
tivity might have failed to target granule cell precursors at a
key stage in the developmental sequence, we sought to conﬁrm
our ﬁndings by using an independent conditional knockout
strategy. Because Nestin-cre has been used previously to show
requirements for N-myc during granule cell and cerebellar
development
(19),
we
crossed
Nestin-cre
animals
with
FoxM1Fl/Fl mice to generate conditional null mice and het-
erozygous controls. As shown in Fig. 4, the cerebellar pheno-
type of the Nestin-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl mice was indistinguishable
from that of the Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl animals. Moreover, we
did not detect any obvious histological phenotype in the Nestin-
cre FoxM1Fl/Fl animals (U. Sc¨uller. and D. H. Rowitch, unpub-
lished data), although FoxM1 was expressed in the forebrain
subventricular zone and rostral migratory stream (Fig. 3B,
inset).
FoxM1-deﬁcient CGNP show a normal S-phase response to
Shh. Although the results described above indicated that
FoxM1 function was not required for achieving the ultimate
cerebellar size, they did not rule out more subtle roles for
FoxM1 in CGNP cell cycle regulation. To more precisely char-
acterize this, we ﬁrst turned to an in vitro culture system that
has been established to show mitogenic responses to Shh sig-
naling. As shown in Fig. 5A, the treatment of P5 to P6 wild-
type CGNP with Shh produces a threefold increase in prolif-
eration as measured by BrdU incorporation during DNA
synthesis (42). Identical results were found with FoxM1-deﬁ-
cient cells. The absence of abnormalities with respect to BrdU
incorporation in FoxM1 knockout granule cells raised the pos-
sibility that Cre recombinase activity was affecting only a frac-
tion of the present granule cell neurons. Therefore, we per-
formed colabeling with antibodies against Cre recombinase
and BrdU, which is incorporated into DNA during S phase. As
shown in Fig. 5A, we detected normal BrdU incorporation
levels in the Cre-expressing cells themselves that are very prob-
ably deleted the FoxM1Fl/Fl mutant alleles. In addition, we
infected the FoxM1Fl/Fl mutant CGNP with retroviruses carry-
ing Cre recombinase and counted infected proliferating cells.
As shown in Fig. 5B, Cre recombinase-carrying retroviruses
had only insigniﬁcant effects on BrdU incorporation compared
to that of GFP retrovirus controls. Together, these data show
that FoxM1 is not required for DNA synthesis of CGNP in
response to Shh signaling in vitro.
We next tested whether the forced expression of FoxM1
alters BrdU uptake in cultured wild-type CGNP. However, as
shown in Fig. 5C, we failed to detect any positive impact of
FoxM1 overexpression in this regard. Thus, FoxM1 is neither
necessary nor sufﬁcient for the regulation of S phase in re-
sponse to Shh treatment.
FoxM1 is required for the regulation of G2/M transition in
CGNP. The results described above were consistent with pre-
vious analyses of FoxM1, which is a known regulator of a later
phase of the cell cycle, the G2/M transition (6). In order to
analyze the G2/M transition in FoxM1-deﬁcient CGNP, we
used antibodies against phosphorylated histone H3. Phosphor-
ylation of histone H3 at its amino terminus (serine 10), which
is tightly correlated with expression of the FoxM1 target Au-
rora B (37) is initiated by the Msk1 and Rsk2 kinases in late G2
interphase (31), and the expression of phosphorylated histone
H3 is maximal in M phase (12). We observed a signiﬁcant
increase for the number of phospho-histone H3-positive
CGNP in FoxM1-deﬁcient cerebella in vivo as well as in vitro,
using immunohistochemistry and ﬂow cytometry (Fig. 6A and
B), indicating an increased population of mutant cells in late
G2 interphase and/or M phase.
To deﬁne the cell cycle alterations more precisely, we per-
formed immunohistochemistry with cultured granule cells and
found that the proportion of CGNP in late G2 interphase was
signiﬁcantly increased. Such late G2 cells are characterized by
a weak immunopositivity for phospho-histone H3 (12) and
account for some 2.7% of the cells in wild-type animals as
opposed to 6.7% of the cells in Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl CGNP
(P 	 0.01; Fig. 6C). These ﬁndings indicate that FoxM1 is
crucial for timely mitotic entry.
In order to identify mechanisms that may lead to the G2/M
defects described above, we focused on cell cycle-regulating
genes that have been described to have roles downstream of
FoxM1. Among the previously published FoxM1 target genes,
we found that cyclin A2, cyclin B1, cyclin B2, and Cdc25b were
expressed by CGNP in the cerebellar EGL. While we did not
detect any signiﬁcant differences between the levels of cyclin
A2 and cyclin B2 protein expression in the wild-type and that
of the mutant mice (data not shown), Western blotting analysis
and in situ hybridization showed a clear decrease in the cyclin
B1 and Cdc25b expression levels of FoxM1-deﬁcient granule
cells compared to that of wild-type cells (Fig. 7). This is con-
sistent with the role of cyclin B1 and Cdc25b for normal mitotic
entry that has been described for other systems (for a review,
see reference 3).
Formation of the normal mitotic spindle is regulated by
FoxM1. To further characterize the phenotype caused by the loss
of FoxM1, we analyzed the formation of the spindle apparatus
and the separation of the centrosomes, both of which are mech-
anisms that have been associated with the function of cyclin B1 (4,
in mutant CGNP. (B) Acute removal of FoxM1 in CGNP from FoxM1Fl/Fl animals by adding retroviruses carrying Cre-IRES-GFP sequences did
not result in signiﬁcant alterations of BrdU uptake compared to that of cells transduced with IRES-GFP sequences only. This was shown by
determining the percentage of cells positive for BrdU and GFP within the population of GFP-positive cells. (C) Overexpression of FoxM1 using
retroviruses carrying FoxM1-IRES-GFP sequences in wild-type CGNP does not signiﬁcantly alter BrdU uptake, compared to wild-type cells
transduced with IRES-GFP sequences only. The histogram shows percentages of cells positive for BrdU and GFP within the population of
GFP-positive cells.
VOL. 27, 2007
FoxM1 IN CEREBELLAR DEVELOPMENT
8265
 on February 20, 2021 by guest
http://mcb.asm.org/
Downloaded from 

FIG. 6. Delay in G2/M transition in Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl granule cells. Immunohistochemistry of sections of P7 cerebella, using antibodies
against phospho-histone H3, reveals a signiﬁcantly elevated number of labeled cells in the EGL of Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl animals (A). Cell cycle
analysis and immunolabeling of freshly dissected granule cell precursors show a higher proportion of cells in G2/M phase, as well as more
phospho-histone H3-positive cells in the mutant as opposed to the wild-type mice (B). Immunohistochemistry of tissue cultures from dissociated
granule cell precursors indicates that mutant cells accumulate in late G2, where they express low levels of phospho-histone H3 (panel C, arrows).
Asterisks mark granule cells in M phase, which show strong expression of phosphorylated histone H3.
8266
SCHU¨ LLER ET AL.
MOL. CELL. BIOL.
 on February 20, 2021 by guest
http://mcb.asm.org/
Downloaded from 

43). Thus, we ﬁrst performed double labeling using antibodies
against phospho-histone H3 and -tubulin, which labels the spin-
dle apparatus of CGNP (36). The distribution of mutant cells in
prophase, metaphase, anaphase, or telophase was not obviously
different from that of wild-type cells (data not shown). However,
as shown in Fig. 8A, 12.3% of the mutant cells in prometaphase/
metaphase showed an abnormal formation of the spindle appa-
ratus, a highly signiﬁcant increase compared to that of the wild-
type cells (P 
 0.01). Additionally, immunostaining using
antibodies against -tubulin, a core component of the centro-
some, revealed signiﬁcantly more mutant cells with multiple cen-
trosomes than wild-type cells (13.2% versus 5.2%, respectively;
P 	 0.01; Fig. 8B). These ﬁndings suggest that the loss of FoxM1
results in defects of the spindle apparatus and centrosome ampli-
ﬁcation in cerebellar granule cell precursors.
DISCUSSION
Recent reports have suggested roles for FoxM1 in develop-
ment and tumorigenesis downstream of Shh signaling. Here we
have analyzed the expression and function of FoxM1 in devel-
oping CGNP, a population that depends on the mitogenic
activity of Shh. We provide evidence that FoxM1 is needed for
efﬁcient mitotic entry, both in vivo and in vitro, and that in its
absence, there are abnormalities in spindle assembly which
likely engender aneuploidy. However, ultimate cerebellar mor-
phogenesis is grossly unaffected, and rates of Shh-induced neu-
roproliferation are normal in FoxM1 mutants, suggesting that
its functions in the cell cycle are limited to regulation of the
G2/M transition. The implications of these ﬁndings and the
regulation of aneuploidy during normal development and tu-
morigenesis are discussed further.
FoxM1 is an indirect downstream transcriptional target of
Hedgehog signaling in proliferating CGNP. A recent screening
study identiﬁed FoxM1 among a number of transcription factors
that are expressed at postnatal stages of cerebellar granule neu-
ron development (9). We extended this analysis to antenatal
stages and tested more directly the role of Shh signaling in FoxM1
regulation. While we gathered clear evidence that FoxM1 expres-
sion is indeed controlled by Shh signaling in CGNP, FoxM1 ex-
pression levels were elevated only at 24 h after treatment. This is
in contrast to the direct targets of Shh signaling, such as D-type
cyclins and N-myc, that show upregulation after a short 3-h treat-
ment with Shh. We conclude from this that FoxM1 is most prob-
ably an indirect transcriptional target of Shh.
Previous work shows that Shh treatment of CGNP results in
the upregulation of G1 targets such as cyclin D1, cyclin D2, and
N-myc, as well as G2/M targets such as A- and B-type cyclins
FIG. 7. In situ hybridization (A and B) and Western blotting analysis (C) reveal that the expression of Cdc25b (A and C) and cyclin B1 (B and
C) is decreased in P7 Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl cerebella compared to those of wild-type littermates.
VOL. 27, 2007
FoxM1 IN CEREBELLAR DEVELOPMENT
8267
 on February 20, 2021 by guest
http://mcb.asm.org/
Downloaded from 

(16, 36, 45). Based on our observations of decreased cyclin B1
expression levels, we propose that FoxM1 acts downstream of
Shh primarily by regulating gene targets that control the G2/M
transition such as Cdc25b and cyclin B1 (Fig. 9). Consistent
with this proposed model, the expression of G1 effectors of Shh
signaling (e.g., cyclin D1 and N-myc) is unperturbed in FoxM1-
deﬁcient animals.
Gross cerebellar morphogenesis is unaffected in FoxM1 mu-
tants. Granule cells are the most abundant cell type in the
cerebellum, and adequate proliferation of those cells takes
place over a protracted period in the mammalian brain (e.g.,
about 3 weeks in rodents and up to 18 months in humans) (1).
FoxM1 is required for the proliferation of hepatocytes in the
liver (40), mesenchyme cells in the lung (18), and cardiac
FIG. 8. Defects of the spindle apparatus and centrosome ampliﬁcation in Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl CGNP. (A) Representative mitotic CGNP
cultured from Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/ and Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl animals are labeled with antibodies against phospho-histone H3 (M-phase marker)
and against -tubulin which marks the microtubules of the cell. While the wild-type cell shows regular alignment of the chromosomes, the mutant
cell reveals clear abnormalities of the spindle apparatus with multiple apparent spindle poles throughout the cell. Such spindle cell aberrations
occurred signiﬁcantly more often in mutant cells than in wild-type CGNP. (B) Multiple centrosomes, as visualized by using antibodies against the
centrosome core component -tubulin, are visible signiﬁcantly more often in cultured Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl CGNP than in wild-type cells.
8268
SCHU¨ LLER ET AL.
MOL. CELL. BIOL.
 on February 20, 2021 by guest
http://mcb.asm.org/
Downloaded from 

precursors (20). The lack of obvious behavioral deﬁcits and
detectable gross abnormalities at various stages of cerebellar
morphogenesis in the FoxM1/, Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl, and
Nestin-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl mice in vivo provides strong evidence
that FoxM1 function is dispensable for the overall rates of
CGNP proliferation. However, our data do show delayed mi-
totic entry and spindle abnormalities. Despite abnormalities in
the G2/M transition, proliferation rates are unaffected, a situ-
ation characteristic of many cancers that demonstrate high
rates of cell division and aneuploidy (27).
Restricted roles for FoxM1 in the G2/M transition of the cell
cycle regulation in CGNP. We set out to resolve speciﬁc roles
for FoxM1 during the cell cycle, with a well-characterized pri-
mary CGNP model system of Shh-induced proliferation.
FoxM1 function has been shown in other organ systems to be
a transcriptional regulator of both G1/S progression and G2/M
transition (6). G1/S progression is thought to be regulated by
diminishing nuclear levels of the inhibitory cell-cycle regulators
p21Cip1 and p27Kip1 and by activating Cdc25a transcription
(40). In distinction, G2/M transition is mediated by the upregu-
lation of cyclin B1 and Cdc25b (22). Our results show that in
the cerebellum, FoxM1 functions are restricted to the G2/M
transition. First, BrdU uptake studies indicated that G1/S pro-
gression is not signiﬁcantly affected by a deﬁciency of FoxM1 in
CGNP (Fig. 5). Second, Cdc25a protein levels are not altered
in Math1-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl cerebella (data not shown). Third,
overall cerebellar morphogenesis is unaffected (see description
above), which also argues against widespread mitotic catastro-
phe or apoptosis. In contrast, mitotic entry is affected in
FoxM1-deﬁcient granule cells. We found a signiﬁcantly ele-
vated number of cells in late stages of G2. Those cells are
characterized by a weak but clearly detectable immunoreactiv-
ity for phospho-histone H3, which reﬂects the initiation of
histone H3 phosphorylation in late G2 (31) (Fig. 6).
One possible explanation for this phenomenon is the down-
regulation of cyclin B1 and Cdc25b that we observed in
FoxM1-deﬁcient CGNP (Fig. 7). Cyclin B1 null mice are not
viable, and it is therefore unclear whether the growth of the
cerebellum is dependent on cyclin B1 (3). Expression of
Cdc25b phosphatase has recently been tightly linked to Hedge-
hog activity (2), in keeping with the possibility of roles for
FoxM1 in this pathway (Fig. 9). However, Cdc25b null mice are
viable and did not display any obvious cerebellar phenotype
(23), indicating that this axis is not required for overall cere-
bellar morphogenesis. Taken together, these ﬁndings suggest
the existence of a synergistic and/or compensatory pathway in
proliferating CGNP that is FoxM1 independent.
Although our results are remarkably similar to those de-
scribed by Wonsey and Follettie (44), the frequency of mitotic
defects was much lower. Therefore, a compensatory mecha-
nism in FoxM1 mutant CGNP might exist that maintains nor-
mal mitosis in most of the cells. Further work is needed to
understand precisely the relationship between the delay in
mitotic entry and the spindle abnormalities that we observed.
However, one possibility is that cells entering mitosis with
compromised cyclin B/cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) ac-
tivity might have chromosome segregation defects. Chromo-
some segregation defects can lead to the failure of cytokinesis,
polyploidy, and cells with multiple centrosomes (35). In this
context, it seems noteworthy that, as we know from cancer
biology, aneuploidy is not necessarily coupled to apoptosis
which is unaffected in FoxM1 mutant mice (see Fig. S1 in the
supplemental material) (29).
Roles for FoxM1 in brain cancer. A variety of human can-
cers, such as prostate, lung, and breast cancer, require FoxM1
for growth and tumor progression both in vitro (44) and in vivo
(14, 17). Intriguingly, this is also true for gliomas (24), although
we have learned from the Nestin-cre FoxM1Fl/Fl mice analyzed
in this study that FoxM1 is dispensable for the overall growth
of the CNS, including the glial compartment (U. Sch¨uller and
D. H. Rowitch, unpublished observations).
The loss of FoxM1 in breast cancer cells has a dramatic effect
on mitosis, leading to mitotic catastrophe due to an increase of
multipolar spindles and overduplicated centrosomes (44). There
are several potential mechanisms by which the loss of FoxM1
could promote cell division failure and centrosome ampliﬁcation.
One likely mechanism is through failed cytokinesis. Failed cyto-
kinesis produces tetraploid cells with extra centrosomes. At least
in the absence of p53, this leads to aneuploidy and promotes
tumorigenesis. One FoxM1 transcriptional target is the spindle
midzone kinesin Kif20a. Kif20a is required for normal cytokine-
sis, and diminished expression is thus expected to increase the
rate at which cytokinesis errors occur. Furthermore, the reduced
levels of cyclin B/Cdk1 activity in FoxM1 cells are expected to
impair
chromosome
segregation.
Chromosome
segregation
errors, especially if they lead to chromatin blocking the cleavage
furrow, can inhibit cytokinesis. Additionally, the loss of FoxM1
through undeﬁned mechanisms could cause centrosome overrep-
lication or centriole splitting, contributing to spindle multipolar-
ity. Medulloblastoma, a highly malignant cerebellar childhood
tumor that is thought to arise from granule cell precursors (34),
expresses high levels of FoxM1 (30). Thus, it is possible that FoxM1
has critical roles in the context of medulloblastoma genesis, and
research is under way to explore such potential functions.
FIG. 9. A model for the possible regulatory mechanisms of Shh sig-
naling on cell cycle progression in CGNP, based on present and published
results. Previous work suggests that N-myc is a direct target of Shh sig-
naling and the activity of Gli transcription factors (most probably Gli2),
which regulates G1-phase cell cycle progression via D/E-type cyclins (5, 10,
15, 16, 28). In contrast, FoxM1 activates gene targets such as the cyclin B1
and Cdc25b genes encoding regulators of G2/M progression. While our
ﬁndings suggest that FoxM1 upregulation by Shh in CGNP may be indirect,
previous studies have suggested this could occur through Gli proteins (38).
VOL. 27, 2007
FoxM1 IN CEREBELLAR DEVELOPMENT
8269
 on February 20, 2021 by guest
http://mcb.asm.org/
Downloaded from 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jason Ling, Dongin Yuk, and Sovann Kaing for excellent
technical assistance. We also thank the late Robert Costa (University
of Illinois, Chicago, IL) for contributing FoxM1Fl/Fl mice, Jane Johnson
(University of Texas, Dallas, TX) for providing the Math1 plasmid, and
Fabienne Pituello (Universite´ P. Sabatier, Toulouse, France) for pro-
viding the Cdc25b plasmid.
U.S. is a scholar of the Mildred-Scheel-Stiftung fu¨r Krebsforschung.
This work was supported by grants (to D.H.R.) from the NINDS (NS
047527), the James S. McDonnell Foundation, and the Pediatric Brain
Tumor Foundation of the United States.
REFERENCES
1. Altmann, J., and S. A. Bayer. 1997. Development of the cerebellar system in
relation to its evolution, structure and functions. CRC Press, New York, NY.
2. Benazeraf, B., Q. Chen, E. Peco, V. Lobjois, F. Medevielle, B. Ducommun, and
F. Pituello. 2006. Identiﬁcation of an unexpected link between the Shh pathway
and a G2/M regulator, the phosphatase CDC25B. Dev. Biol. 294:133–147.
3. Ciemerych, M. A., and P. Sicinski. 2000. Cell cycle in mouse development.
Oncogene 24:2877–2898.
4. Clute, P., and J. Pines. 1999. Temporal and spatial control of cyclin B1
destruction in metaphase. Nat. Cell Biol. 1:82–87.
5. Corrales, J. D., G. L. Rocco, S. Blaess, Q. Guo, and A. L. Joyner. 2004.
Spatial pattern of sonic hedgehog signaling through Gli genes during cere-
bellum development. Development 131:5581–5590.
6. Costa, R. H. 2005. FoxM1 dances with mitosis. Nat. Cell Biol. 7:108–110.
7. Douard, R., S. Moutereau, P. Pernet, M. Chimingqi, Y. Allory, P. Manivet,
M. Conti, M. Vaubourdolle, P. H. Cugnenc, and S. Loric. 2006. Sonic hedge-
hog-dependent proliferation in a series of patients with colorectal cancer.
Surgery 139:665–670.
8. Goodrich, L. V., L. Milenkovic, K. M. Higgins, and M. P. Scott. 1997. Altered
neural cell fates and medulloblastoma in mouse patched mutants. Science
277:1109–1113.
9. Gray, P. A., H. Fu, P. Luo, Q. Zhao, J. Yu, A. Ferrari, T. Tenzen, D. i. Yuk,
E. F. Tsung, Z. Cai, J. A. Alberta, L. p. Cheng, Y. Liu, J. M. Stenman, M. T.
Valerius, N. Billings, H. A. Kim, M. E. Greenberg, A. P. McMahon, D. H.
Rowitch, C. D. Stiles, and Q. Ma. 2004. Mouse brain organization revealed
through direct genome-scale TF expression analysis. Science 306:2255–2257.
10. Hallikas, O., K. Palin, N. Sinjushina, R. Rautiainen, J. Partanen, E. Ukkonen,
and J. Taipale. 2006. Genome-wide prediction of mammalian enhancers based
on analysis of transcription-factor binding afﬁnity. Cell 124:47–59.
11. Helms, A. W., A. L. Abney, N. Ben Arie, H. Y. Zoghbi, and J. E. Johnson.
2000. Autoregulation and multiple enhancers control Math1 expression in
the developing nervous system. Development 127:1185–1196.
12. Hendzel, M. J., Y. Wei, M. A. Mancini, A. Van Hooser, T. Ranalli, B. R.
Brinkley, D. P. Bazett-Jones, and C. D. Allis. 1997. Mitosis-speciﬁc phos-
phorylation of histone H3 initiates primarily within pericentromeric hetero-
chromatin during G2 and spreads in an ordered fashion coincident with
mitotic chromosome condensation. Chromosoma 106:348–360.
13. Ho, K. S., and M. P. Scott. 2002. Sonic hedgehog in the nervous system:
functions, modiﬁcations and mechanisms. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 12:57–63.
14. Kalin, T. V., I. C. Wang, T. J. Ackerson, M. L. Major, C. J. Detrisac, V. V.
Kalinichenko, A. Lyubimov, and R. H. Costa. 2006. Increased levels of the
FoxM1 transcription factor accelerate development and progression of pros-
tate carcinomas in both TRAMP and LADY transgenic mice. Cancer Res.
66:1712–1720.
15. Kenney, A. M., M. D. Cole, and D. H. Rowitch. 2003. Nmyc upregulation by
sonic hedgehog signaling promotes proliferation in developing cerebellar
granule neuron precursors. Development 130:15–28.
16. Kenney, A. M., and D. H. Rowitch. 2000. Sonic hedgehog promotes G1 cyclin
expression and sustained cell cycle progression in mammalian neuronal
precursors. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20:9055–9067.
17. Kim, I. M., T. Ackerson, S. Ramakrishna, M. Tretiakova, I. C. Wang, T. V.
Kalin, M. L. Major, G. A. Gusarova, H. M. Yoder, R. H. Costa, and V. V.
Kalinichenko. 2006. The forkhead box m1 transcription factor stimulates the
proliferation of tumor cells during development of lung cancer. Cancer Res.
66:2153–2161.
18. Kim, I. M., S. Ramakrishna, G. A. Gusarova, H. M. Yoder, R. H. Costa, and
V. V. Kalinichenko. 2005. The forkhead Box M1 transcription factor is
essential for embryonic development of pulmonary vasculature. J. Biol.
Chem. 280:22278–22286.
19. Knoepﬂer, P. S., P. F. Cheng, and R. N. Eisenman. 2002. N-myc is essential
during neurogenesis for the rapid expansion of progenitor cell populations
and the inhibition of neuronal differentiation. Genes Dev. 16:2699–2712.
20. Korver, W., M. W. Schilham, P. Moerer, M. J. van den Hoff, K. Dam, W. H.
Lamers, R. H. Medema, and H. Clevers. 1998. Uncoupling of S phase and
mitosis in cardiomyocytes and hepatocytes lacking the winged-helix tran-
scription factor Trident. Curr. Biol. 8:1327–1330.
21. Krupczak-Hollis, K., X. Wang, V. V. Kalinichenko, G. A. Gusarova, I. C.
Wang, M. B. Dennewitz, H. M. Yoder, H. Kiyokawa, K. H. Kaestner, and
R. H. Costa. 2004. The mouse forkhead Box m1 transcription factor is
essential for hepatoblast mitosis and development of intrahepatic bile ducts
and vessels during liver morphogenesis. Dev. Biol. 276:74–88.
22. Laoukili, J., M. R. H. Kooistra, A. Bras, J. Kauw, R. M. Kerkhoven, A.
Morrison, H. Clevers, and R. H. Medema. 2005. FoxM1 is required for
execution of the mitotic programme and chromosome stability. Nat. Cell
Biol. 7:126–136.
23. Lincoln, A. J., D. Wickramasinghe, P. Stein, R. M. Schultz, M. E. Palko,
M. P. D. De Miguel, L. Tessarollo, and P. J. Donovan. 2002. Cdc25b phos-
phatase is required for resumption of meiosis during oocyte maturation. Nat.
Genet. 30:446–449.
24. Liu, M., B. Dai, S. H. Kang, K. Ban, F. J. Huang, F. F. Lang, K. D. Aldape,
T. X. Xie, C. E. Pelloski, K. Xie, R. Sawaya, and S. Huang. 2006. FoxM1B is
overexpressed in human glioblastomas and critically regulates the tumorige-
nicity of glioma cells. Cancer Res. 66:3593–3602.
25. Machold, R., and G. Fishell. 2005. Math1 is expressed in temporally discrete
pools of cerebellar rhombic-lip neural progenitors. Neuron 48:17–24.
26. Matei, V., S. Pauley, S. Kaing, D. Rowitch, K. W. Beisel, K. Morris, F. Feng,
K. Jones, J. Lee, and B. Fritzsch. 2005. Smaller inner ear sensory epithelia
in Neurog1 null mice are related to earlier hair cell cycle exit. Dev. Dyn.
234:633–650.
27. Nakagawa, S., M. Watanabe, and Y. Inoue. 1996. Altered gene expression of
the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor channel subunits in Purkinje cells of the
staggerer mutant mouse. Eur. J. Neurosci. 8:2644–2651.
28. Oliver, T. G., L. L. Grasfeder, A. L. Carroll, C. Kaiser, C. L. Gillingham,
S. M. Lin, R. Wickramasinghe, M. P. Scott, and R. Wechsler-Reya. 2003.
Transcriptional proﬁling of the Sonic hedgehog response: a critical role for
N-myc in proliferation of neuronal precursors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
100:7331–7336.
29. Pellman, D. 2007. Aneuploidy and cancer. Nature 446:38–39.
30. Pomeroy, S. L., P. Tamayo, M. Gaasenbeek, L. M. Sturla, M. Angelo, M. E.
McLaughlin, J. Y. Kim, L. C. Goumnerova, P. M. Black, C. Lau, J. C. Allen,
D. Zagzag, J. M. Olson, T. Curran, C. Wetmore, J. A. Biegel, T. Poggio, S.
Mukherjee, R. Rifkin, A. Califano, G. Stolovitzky, D. N. Louis, J. P. Mesirov,
E. S. Lander, and T. R. Golub. 2002. Prediction of central nervous system
embryonal tumour outcome based on gene expression. Nature 415:436–442.
31. Prigent, C., and S. Dimitrov. 2003. Phosphorylation of serine 10 in histone
H3, what for? J. Cell Sci. 116:3677–3685.
32. Rowitch, D. H., B. St.Jacques, S. M. K. Lee, J. D. Flax, E. Y. Snyder, and
A. P. McMahon. 1999. Sonic hedgehog regulates proliferation and inhibits
differentiation of CNS precursor cells. J. Neurosci. 19:8954–8965.
33. Sanai, N., A. Alvarez-Buylla, and M. S. Berger. 2005. Neural stem cells and
the origin of gliomas. N. Engl. J. Med. 353:811–822.
34. Schu¨ller, U., A. T. Kho, Q. Zhao, Q. Ma, and D. H. Rowitch. 2006. Cerebellar
“transcriptome” reveals cell-type and stage-speciﬁc expression during post-
natal development and tumorigenesis. Mol. Cell Neurosci. 33:247–259.
35. Shi, Q., and R. W. King. 2005. Chromosome nondisjunction yields tetraploid
rather than aneuploid cells in human cell lines. Nature 437:1038–1042.
36. Sjostro¨m, S. K., G. Finn, W. C. Hahn, D. H. Rowitch, and A. M. Kenney.
2005. The Cdk1 complex plays a prime role in regulating N-Myc phosphor-
ylation and turnover in neural precursors. Dev. Cell 9:327–338.
37. Tanaka, J., S. Nakagawa, E. Kushiya, M. Yamasaki, M. Fukaya, T. Iwanaga,
M. I. Simon, K. Sakimura, M. Kano, and M. Watanabe. 2000. Gq protein
alpha subunits galphaq and galpha11 are localized at postsynaptic extra-
junctional membrane of cerebellar Purkinje cells and hippocampal pyrami-
dal cells. Eur. J. Neurosci. 12:781–792.
38. Teh, M. T., S. T. Wong, G. W. Neill, L. R. Ghali, M. P. Philpott, and A. G.
Quinn. 2002. FOXM1 is a downstream target of Gli1 in basal cell carcino-
mas. Cancer Res. 62:4773–4780.
39. Tronche, F., C. Kellendonk, O. Kretz, P. Gass, K. Anlag, P. C. Orban, R. Bock, R.
Klein, and G. Schu¨tz. 1999. Disruption of the glucocorticoid receptor gene in the
nervous system results in reduced anxiety. Nat. Genet. 23:99–103.
40. Wang, X., H. Kiyokawa, M. B. Dennewitz, and R. H. Costa. 2002. The
forkhead box m1b transcription factor is essential for hepatocyte DNA
replication and mitosis during mouse liver regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 99:16881–16886.
41. Wechsler-Reya, R., and M. P. Scott. 2001. The developmental biology of
brain tumors. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 24:385–428.
42. Wechsler-Reya, R. J., and M. P. Scott. 1999. Control of neuronal precursor
proliferation in the cerebellum by sonic hedgehog. Neuron 22:103–114.
43. Wolf, F., C. Wandke, N. Isenberg, and S. Geley. 2006. Dose-dependent
effects of stable cyclin B1 on progression through mitosis in human cells.
EMBO J. 25:2802–2813.
44. Wonsey, D. R., and M. T. Follettie. 2005. Loss of the forkhead transcription
factor FoxM1 causes centrosome ampliﬁcation and mitotic catastrophe. Can-
cer Res. 65:5181–5189.
45. Zhao, Q., A. Kho, A. M. Kenney, D. D. Yuk, I. Kohane, and D. H. Rowitch.
2002. Identiﬁcation of genes expressed with temporal-spatial restriction to
developing cerebellar neuron precursors by a functional genomic approach.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99:5704–5709.
8270
SCHU¨ LLER ET AL.
MOL. CELL. BIOL.
 on February 20, 2021 by guest
http://mcb.asm.org/
Downloaded from

===== Scott2021_bioRxiv_ZebrafishpMN =====
Title: Temporal single-cell transcriptomes of zebrafish spinal cord pMN progenitors reveal distinct 
neuronal and glial progenitor populations 
 
Authors: Kayt Scott1,2, Rebecca O’Rourke1, Caitlin C. Winkler1,3, Christina A. Kearns1 and Bruce 
Appel1,4 
 
Affiliations: 1Department of Pediatrics, Section of Developmental Biology, 2Cell Biology, Stem Cells 
and Development Training Program, 3RNA Bioscience Initiative and Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Genetics, 4Children’s Hospital Colorado, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, Colorado, United States of America, 80045 
 
Author for correspondence: Bruce Appel, bruce.appel@cuanschutz.edu   
 
 
 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

Highlights 
• Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals the developmental trajectories of neurons and glia that arise 
from spinal cord pMN progenitor cells in zebrafish embryos 
• Transcriptionally distinct subpopulations of pMN progenitors are the apparent sources of 
neurons or oligodendrocytes, consistent with fate mapping data 
• gsx2 expression marks pMN progenitors that produce oligodendrocyte lineage cells  
Abstract 
Ventral spinal cord progenitor cells, which express the basic helix loop helix transcription factor Olig2, 
sequentially produce motor neurons and oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs). Following 
specification some OPCs differentiate as myelinating oligodendrocytes while others persist as OPCs. 
Though a considerable amount of work has described the molecular profiles that define motor neurons, 
OPCs, and oligodendrocytes, less is known about the progenitors that produce them. To identify the 
developmental origins and transcriptional profiles of motor neurons and OPCs, we performed single-
cell RNA sequencing on isolated pMN cells from embryonic zebrafish trunk tissue at stages that 
encompassed motor neurogenesis, OPC specification, and initiation of oligodendrocyte differentiation. 
Downstream analyses revealed two distinct pMN progenitor populations: one that appears to produce 
neurons and one that appears to produce OPCs. This latter population, called Pre-OPCs, is marked by 
expression of GS Homeobox 2 (gsx2), a gene that encodes a homeobox transcription factor. Using 
fluorescent in situ hybridizations, we identified gsx2-expressing Pre-OPCs in the spinal cord prior to 
expression of canonical OPC marker genes. Our data therefore reveal heterogeneous gene expression 
profiles among pMN progenitors, supporting prior fate mapping evidence. 
 
Introduction  
The vertebrate central nervous system (CNS) is composed of intricately organized arrays of distinct 
neurons and glia, which allow organisms to perceive and interact with their environment. Before these 
functional networks are established, neural progenitors are first spatially organized into distinct 
progenitor populations. This process, known as patterning, occurs as neural progenitors receive 
discrete positional cues created by combinatorial gradients of morphogens. For example, the ventral 
spinal cord is patterned by a ventral-to-dorsal gradient of the morphogen Shh (Briscoe and Ericson, 
2001; Briscoe et al., 1999; Dessaud et al., 2008). Following CNS patterning, neural progenitors first 
produce neuronal cell types and then switch to producing glial cell types later in development (Kessaris 
et al., 2001; Miller and Gauthier, 2007). This change in fate is accompanied by alterations in intercellular 
and extracellular signaling that lead to the inhibition of neurogenesis and activation of gliogenesis 
(Kessaris et al., 2001; Miller and Gauthier, 2007).  
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

An example of these events occurs in the ventral spinal cord, where high levels of Shh ligand 
secreted by cells in the notochord and floor plate are required to specify pMN progenitors, which 
express the basic helix loop helix transcription factor Olig2 (Dessaud et al., 2007; Dessaud et al., 2010; 
Echelard et al., 1993; Marti et al., 1995; Roelink et al., 1994). After specification pMN progenitors first 
produce motor neurons and then oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs), some of which differentiate 
into myelinating oligodendrocytes (Lu et al., 2000; Noll and Miller, 1993; Novitch et al., 2001; Warf et 
al., 1991; Zhou and Anderson, 2002; Zhou et al., 2000). Notably, the switch from motor neuron to OPC 
specification requires a transient increase in ventral Shh signaling activity (Danesin and Soula, 2017). 
Though we understand many of the signaling pathways and transcription factors required for motor 
neuron and OPC specification, it is less clear how pMN progenitors are assigned to neuronal or glial 
fates.  
Numerous lineage tracing studies have shown that most clonally related cells consist either of 
neurons or glia but not both (Luskin et al., 1988; Luskin et al., 1993; McCarthy et al., 2001), suggesting 
that neurons and glia are produced by different progenitors. Consistent with this interpretation, our fate 
mapping and time-lapse imaging studies in zebrafish revealed that motor neurons and OPCs arise from 
different pMN progenitor cells that initiate olig2 expression at different times (Ravanelli and Appel, 
2015). These results imply that different neural progenitors express genes that specify them for either 
neuronal or glial fates, but our knowledge of the gene functions that determine these distinct fates 
remains incomplete.  
Here, we set out to identify transcriptional profiles of oligodendrocyte and motor neuron 
progenitors in the developing zebrafish spinal cord. We utilized single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-
seq) of isolated pMN cells, which allowed us to characterize genes expressed by pMN cells at key 
developmental time points. These data revealed two distinct populations of pMN progenitors: one that 
expressed genes characteristic of neuronal fates and another, called Pre-OPCs, that appeared fated 
to give rise to OPCs. Fluorescent in situ RNA hybridization experiments confirmed the presence of 
neuronal progenitors and Pre-OPCs in the spinal cord prior to formation of OPCs. Our data indicate 
that pMN progenitors are allocated to distinct glial and neuronal lineages prior to the onset of OPC 
specification and reveal new genes that might be important for the earliest steps in formation of 
oligodendrocyte lineage cells.  
 
Results  
A developmental single-cell RNA expression atlas of zebrafish pMN progenitors and their 
derivative cell types  
In zebrafish embryos, pMN progenitors produce the majority of spinal cord motor neurons by 25 hours 
post fertilization (hpf) (Myers et al., 1986) and most spinal cord oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

between approximately 28 and 42 hpf (Ravanelli and Appel, 2015) (Fig. 1A). Some OPCs then undergo 
differentiation into pre-oligodendrocytes (Pre-OL), denoted by expression of myrf, a transcript that 
encodes the transcription factor Myelin regulatory factor (Myrf). By 72 hpf a majority of the Pre-OLs 
mature into myelinating oligodendrocytes, marked by expression of mbpa, which encodes Myelin basic 
protein (MBP) (Brösamle and Halpern, 2002). To gain insight to the identity of neuronal and glial 
progenitors and gene expression changes that accompany formation of neurons and glia, we sorted 
olig2:EGFP+ cells obtained from 24, 36 and 48 hpf transgenic embryos to capture periods of neuron 
production, OPC production, and initiation of OPC differentiation, respectively (Fig. 1B).  At each stage, 
we removed cranial tissue from our samples and combined the trunks and tails for subsequent cell 
dissociation, FACS and sequencing (Fig. 1B). Using unsupervised Seurat clustering we uncovered 28 
distinct clusters and determined cell population identity within an integrated data set containing cells 
from all collected stages by assessing genetic markers within each cluster (Fig. 2; Fig. S1). Mapping 
the developmental timepoint origin of each cell within the integrated data set showed that some clusters 
included cells from only 24 hpf or 48 hpf embryos, indicative of unique progenitor populations present 
at 24 hpf and differentiated cell populations at 48 hpf (Fig. 2B). Most cells expressing markers 
characteristic of S, G2 and M phases of the cell cycle were isolated at 24 hpf and 36 hpf stages whereas 
most cells in G1 phase were from 48 hpf embryos (Fig. 2B,C). Together, these observations indicate 
that our experimental design captured cells representing a progression from neural progenitors to 
differentiated cells.   
Fig 
1. 
Zebrafish 
pMN 
cell 
development and cell isolation 
and scRNA-seq strategy  
(A) 
Schematic 
of 
transverse 
sections of the zebrafish spinal 
cord depicting p3 and pMN ventral 
progenitor domains. The pMN 
domain is marked by expression of 
olig2 and first produces motor 
neurons. Following a transient 
increase in Shh activity, nkx2.2a 
(red) is co-expressed (orange) with 
olig2 by ventral pMN progenitors 
that 
subsequently 
develop 
as 
OPCs. (B) Schematic of the 
experimental design by which the 
posterior tissue of 24, 36 and 48 
hpf Tg(olig2:EGFP) embryos were 
collected to isolate olig2:EGFP+ 
cells 
via 
FACS, 
followed 
by 
scRNA-seq 
using 
collected 
olig2:EGFP+ cells. 
 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
Within the integrated dataset the majority of cells could be classified as neural progenitors, 
committed neuronal precursors, and neurons, with fewer cells belonging to glial lineages (Fig. 2D). 
Notably, our dataset included numerous cell clusters that did not express olig2 (Fig. 2E). Most 
of these olig2– cells expressed elavl4, which marks post-mitotic neurons (Fig. 2F). We attribute the 
presence of olig2– cells to the long perdurance of EGFP, which has a half-life of approximately 15 hours 
(Danhier et al., 2015). Thus, olig2– cells likely represent cells that previously expressed olig2 transcripts 
but then terminated transcription during neuronal differentiation. These data also included cells that we 
identified as cranial motor neuron (CMN) precursors, CMNs and Retinal Progenitors denoted by 
phox2bb expression (Pattyn et al., 2000), which likely were among the sorted cell populations due to 
imprecision in our cranial dissections (Fig. S1F). Within the original integrated data clustering, CMN 
precursors were grouped together with Motor Exit Point (MEP) glia (Fig. S2A,B).  However, within this 
cluster there were distinct expression profiles that led us to sub-cluster this group, splitting it into CMN 
precursors marked by sox19a and phox2bb (Pattyn et al., 2000) and MEP glia, which expressed sox10 
and foxd3 (Fig. S2C-F) (Fontenas and Kucenas, 2021; Smith et al., 2014). The additional sub-clusters 
within the CMN precursor group were based on differences in cell cycle and temporal origins (Fig. S2G-
I). Of the cells that expressed olig2, a majority also expressed sox19a and pcna, indicative of cells with 
a neural progenitor identity, or sox19a but not pcna, indicative of neural precursors (Fig. 2G,H). Notably, 
whereas progenitors and precursors closely aligned with differentiating neurons expressed neurog1, 
which encodes a pro-neuronal transcription factor (Cau et al., 1997; Kim et al., 1997), progenitors more 
closely related to oligodendrocyte lineage cells (marked by expression of olig2 and sox10) did not 
express neurog1 (Fig. 2E-J). These data suggest that pMN cells include two different progenitor 
populations: sox19a+ neurog1+ pMN neuronal progenitors and sox19a+ neurog1– Pre-OPC progenitors.  
 
OPCs and pre-myelinating oligodendrocytes form distinct clusters at 48 hpf 
To begin teasing apart the origins of pMN progenitor population heterogeneity in the zebrafish spinal 
cord, we used unsupervised Seurat clustering to identify temporally specific cell populations within each 
collected time point. We again determined cluster identities and unique markers by top differentially 
expressed genes within each population (Figs. 2-5; Figs. S3-S5).  
Fig 2. pMN cell diversity through embryonic zebrafish development 
(A) Unsupervised UMAP of integrated scRNA-seq data from olig2:EGFP+ spinal cord cells obtained from 24, 36 and 48 hpf 
Tg(olig2:EGFP) embryos. Seurat analysis identifies 28 clusters composed either uniquely of or as a combination of cells 
from each collected time point. Each point represents one cell (n=6489). (B) Distribution of cells from each time point. (C) A 
majority of clusters contained cells in G1 phase and a few populations, likely representing progenitors, were in S and G2M 
phase. (D) Proportions of pMN gross cell type identities at all time points. A majority of isolated pMN cells are neurons or 
neuronal precursors; ~24% are progenitors and ~10% belong to glial lineages. (E-J) UMAP feature plots of selected 
transcripts. Cells are colored by expression level (gray is low, purple is high). olig2– elav4+ cells represent post-mitotic 
neuronal populations (E,F). Co-expression of olig2, sox19a and pcna designate pMN progenitors (G-H) and expression of 
neurog1 in a subset of olig2+ sox19+ and/or pcna+ cells represent neuronal progenitors and precursors (I). sox10 expression 
denotes glial cells (J). 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

At 48 hpf the majority of the cells were olig2– post-mitotic neurons with few olig2+ progenitor cells 
and glia (Fig. 3A-C). Most of the elavl4+ neurons (Fig. 3D) consisted of isl1+ chodl+ mnx1+ motor neurons 
(Enjin et al., 2010; Ericson et al., 1992; William et al., 2003) (Fig. S3D,E,G). There were two progenitor 
Fig 3. Cell type clustering and markers of pMN cells at 48 hpf  
(A) Unsupervised UMAP of scRNA-seq data from olig2:EGFP+ spinal cord cells obtained from 48 hpf Tg(olig2:EGFP) embryos 
identifies 19 clusters. Each point represents one cell (n=2394). (B) Proportions of pMN gross cell type identities at 48 hpf. A 
majority of isolated pMN cells are post-mitotic neurons; ~12% are progenitors and ~12% are glial lineages. (C-N) UMAP 
feature plots of selected transcripts. Cells are colored by expression level (gray is low, purple is high). olig2– elav4+ cells 
represent post-mitotic neuronal populations (C,D). Co-expression of olig2, sox19a and pcna designate a small population of 
pMN progenitors and radial glia (RG) (E,F). sox10 expression signifies MEP glia and the oligodendrocyte lineage (G). 
Expression of sox5, sox9a/b and olig1 represent OPCs (H-K), whereas tcf7l2 and myrf expression mark Pre-OLs. (L-M). 
neurog1 represents neuronal progenitors and precursors (N).   
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

clusters we identified as sox19a+ pcna+ gfap– pMN1 cells and sox19a+ pcna– gfap+ radial glia (RG) (Fig. 
3E,F; Fig. S3C). RG persist as dividing cells into larval and adult stages and can produce new neurons 
following spinal cord injury (Briona and Dorsky, 2014; Johnson et al., 2014; Johnson et al., 2016; Park 
et al., 2007). Three clusters of 48 hpf cells expressed sox10, a canonical marker of oligodendrocyte 
lineage cells (Fig. 3G) (Britsch et al., 2001; Kuhlbrodt et al., 1998; Park et al., 2002). One group of cells 
expressed foxd3 (Fig. S3F) identifying these cells as MEP glia, which emerge from the ventral spinal 
cord at motor exit points (Fontenas and Kucenas, 2021; Kucenas et al., 2008a; Smith et al., 2014). A 
second group of sox10+ cells expressed sox5, sox9a, sox9b and olig1, them as OPCs (Baroti et al., 
2016; Schebesta and Serluca, 2009; Stolt et al., 2006; Zhou and Anderson, 2002) (Fig. 3H-K), whereas 
the third cluster expressed tcf7l2 and myrf (Fig. 3L,M), indicating a population of pre-myelinating 
oligodendrocytes (Pre-OLs) (Emery et al., 2009; Hammond et al., 2015). Consistent with the integrated 
dataset, oligodendrocyte lineage cells were separated from the neuronal lineage denoted by differential 
neurog1 expression (Fig. 3N). Further, cells with gene expression characteristic of Pre-OPCs (sox19a+ 
neurog1–) were absent, indicating that these cells must arise earlier in development but are then 
depleted following OPC formation.  
 
pMN cells express genes characteristic of Pre-OPCs at 24 and 36 hpf  
To identify progenitors that initially give rise to the oligodendrocyte lineage we assessed populations of 
pMN cells at 36 and 24 hpf (Figs. 4 and 5). Our 36 hpf dataset included fewer elavl4+ differentiated 
neurons and more presumptive progenitors and neuronal precursors than the 48 hpf dataset (Fig. 4A-
C). In addition to pMN1 progenitors, we identified distinct olig2+ sox19a+ neurog1+ progenitor clusters 
that we labeled as pMN2 and pMN3 (Fig. 4A,D-F). pMN2 cells were marked by relatively high 
expression of plk1 and aspm, indicative of cells undergoing mitosis (M-Phase), whereas pMN3 cells 
had relatively high levels of hells expression characteristic of DNA replication in S-Phase (Avides and 
Glover, 1999; Barr et al., 2004; Fish et al., 2006; Mjelle et al., 2015) (Figs. S4 and S5C,D). RGs were 
not evident, indicating that cells with radial glia characteristics emerge between 36 and 48 hpf. Notably, 
few cells expressed appreciable levels of sox10 at 36 hpf, suggesting that OPCs were not yet specified 
(Fig. S4). However, we identified a cluster consisting of sox19a+ olig2+ cells that also expressed 
nkx2.2a, most of which were neurog1– (Fig. 4D-G). Spinal cord OPCs arise from olig2+ nkx2.2a+ 
progenitors (Agius et al., 2004; Fu et al., 2002; Kessaris et al., 2001; Kucenas et al., 2008b; Soula et 
al., 2001; Zhou et al., 2001) raising the possibility that this population is the source of OPCs. Consistent 
with this possibility, a subset of these cells also expressed low levels of olig1 (Fig. 4H). These cells also 
expressed genes that have been used to characterize a Pre-OPC cell type, including ascl1a and gsx2 
(Fig. 4I,J) (Parras et al., 2007; Sugimori et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2020). Therefore, ascl1a+ gsx2+ cells 
may represent a population of pMN cells transitioning to OPCs at 36 hpf. 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

Cell clusters within the 24 hpf dataset were analogous to the 36 hpf dataset, consisting of 
neuronal progenitors, committed neuronal precursors and differentiating motor neurons and 
interneurons (Fig. 5A-E). Similar to the 36 hpf data, we identified cells with characteristics of Pre-OPCs, 
but these were subdivided into two clusters that we designated as Pre-OPC1 and Pre-OPC2 (Fig. 5A,D-
K). Pre-OPC1 cells expressed low levels of olig2, olig1 and nkx2.2 but higher levels of genes associated 
Fig 4. Cell type clustering and markers of pMN cells at 36 hpf  
(A) Unsupervised UMAP of scRNA-seq data from olig2:EGFP+ spinal cord cells obtained from 36 hpf Tg(olig2:EGFP) embryos 
identifies 16 clusters. Each point represents one cell (n=2044). (B) Proportions of pMN gross cell type identities at 36 hpf. A 
majority of isolated pMN cells are neurons or neuronal precursors; ~30% are progenitors and ~6% are glial precursors. (C-F) 
UMAP feature plots of selected transcripts. Cells are colored by expression level (gray is low, purple is high). (C-J) UMAP feature 
plots of selected transcripts. Cells are colored by expression level (gray is low, purple is high).  elav4+ cells represent post-mitotic 
neuronal populations (C). Co-expression of olig2 and sox19a designate pMN progenitors (D,E) and expression of neurog1 in a 
subset of olig2+ sox19+ cells represent neuronal progenitors and precursors (F). Combinatorial expression of nkx2.2a, olig1, 
ascl1a, gsx2 and her4.2 likely represent an OPC progenitor population (G-J). 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

with more dorsal spinal cord fates including pax6a, dbx1a and irx3a (Briscoe et al., 2000; Lu et al., 
Fig 5. Cell type clustering and markers of pMN cells at 24 hpf  
(A) Unsupervised UMAP of scRNA-seq data from olig2:EGFP+ spinal cord cells obtained from 24 hpf Tg(olig2:EGFP) 
embryos identifies 16 clusters. Each point represents one cell (n=1826). (B) Proportions of pMN gross cell type identities at 
24 hpf. A majority of isolated pMN cells are progenitors or precursors whereas ~10% are neurons and ~12% are glial 
precursors. (C-K) UMAP feature plots of selected transcripts. Cells are colored by expression level (gray is low, purple is 
high).  elav4+ cells represent post-mitotic neuronal populations (C). Co-expression of olig2 and sox19a designate pMN 
progenitors (D,E) and expression of neurog1 in subsets of olig2+ sox19+ cells represent neuronal progenitors and precursors 
(F). Expression of olig2, nkx2.2a and olig1 represent the more mature Pre-OPC2 population (D,G,H) and lower olig2 
expressing cells that are also marked by pax6a, dbx1a and irx3a represent a population of less mature Pre-OPC1 cells (I-
K). 
 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

1992) (Fig. 5G-K). By contrast, the Pre-OPC2 population expressed higher levels of olig2, olig1 and 
nkx2.2 but lower levels of pax6a, dbx1a and irx3a (Fig. 5G-K). One possible explanation for this 
clustering is that Pre-OPCs progress from a less mature Pre-OPC1 state to a more mature Pre-OPC2 
state. To test this possibility, we used RNA velocity analysis (Bergen et al., 2020; La Manno et al., 
2018) to predict the trajectories of cells within the 24 hpf dataset. These data show that a majority of 
Pre-OPC1 cellular velocities are directed towards the Pre-OPC2 population (Fig. S6), supporting the 
prediction that Pre-OPC1 cells transition to Pre-OPC2 cells. Altogether, these data suggest that OPCs 
arise from a dedicated Pre-OPC progenitor population that exists during active neurogenesis at 24 hpf. 
 
Motor neurons and oligodendrocytes have separate developmental trajectories throughout pMN 
development 
Our data raise the possibility that pMN cells include distinct subpopulations of pMN progenitors, one 
population that produces neurons and a separate population of Pre-OPCs that later form 
oligodendrocytes. To further investigate the relationships between these specific progenitor populations 
and their derivative cell types, we employed RNA velocity analysis to predict lineage trajectories within 
the integrated dataset (Fig. S7). The projection of velocity fields onto the integrated UMAP and single-
cell plotting of RNA velocity vector fields highlighted separate developmental trajectories for several 
pMN cell populations including glial, motor neuron, CMN, and interneuron lineages (Fig. S7). The major 
predicted trajectory consisted of pMN1-3 progenitors transitioning into neural precursors (NP), which 
differentiate into motor neurons.  
Separate from the neuronal trajectory, RNA velocity analysis predicted that the Pre-OPC 
population consists of two detached populations with one vector field transitioning into OPCs and the 
other into the V3 interneuron population (Fig. S7A). To better delineate the trajectories observed 
branching from the Pre-OPC cluster, we assessed the RNA velocity vector field at a single-cell level, 
allowing us to evaluate projected commitment of each cell based on individual vector size and 
directionality. This revealed that approximately half of the cells in the Pre-OPC lineage had larger 
vectors with strong directionality towards the interneuron cluster, suggestive of an interneuron 
precursor population. The other portion of cells within the Pre-OPC population had smaller vectors with 
less directionality, denoting a less committed progenitor identity. A majority of these trajectories pointed 
toward the oligodendrocyte lineage and those closest to OPCs had larger vectors with stronger 
directionality, indicative of cells undergoing specification for OPC fate (Fig. S7B). These data indicate 
that the integrated Pre-OPC cluster may be composed of interneuron precursors and Pre-OPCs. 
 To further resolve these distinct cell types within the Pre-OPC cluster, we subsetted and sub-
clustered the oligodendrocyte lineage. The Pre-OPC population was split into three sub-clusters 
encompassing cells collected from 24 and 36 hpf samples (Fig. S8A-B). Pre-OPC1/2 mainly consisted 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

of cells in G2M/S phase, suggestive of a more progenitor-like identity, consistent with the small and 
less directional velocities of these cells. By contrast, Pre-OPC3 cells were in G1, thereby aligning with 
the preceding velocity analysis where these cells had larger and more directional vectors, indicative of 
committed cells (Fig. S8C). Consistent with this idea, we found that cells within the Pre-OPC3 sub-
cluster expressed transcripts characteristic of neuronal precursors, including neurod4, neurog1 and 
Fig 6. Pseudotime analysis of 
pMN 
cells 
reveals 
gene 
expression 
characteristic 
of 
oligodendrocyte development 
(A) 
UMAP 
of 
sub-clustered 
oligodendrocyte lineage cells from 
the integrated dataset depicting the 
Slingshot-predicted 
lineage 
trajectory. (B) Depiction of cells 
within each sub-cluster from the 
Slingshot-predicted lineage along 
pseudo-temporal ordering. Each 
dot represents a cell and its 
predicted temporal position in 
development. 
(C) 
Heatmap 
showing 
top 
100 
differentially 
expressed transcripts based on the 
Slingshot-predicted 
oligodendrocyte lineage (left = 
OPC Progenitors, right = Pre-OLs). 
Dendrogram displays hierarchical 
clustering; each column represents 
the relative expression of each 
labeled transcript in a single-cell.  
(D-I) Scater smooth expression 
plots for transcripts related to 
neuronal (D-F) or oligodendrocyte 
(F-I) development within each sub-
cluster along Slingshot pseudo-
temporal ordering. Each point 
represents the expression of each 
transcript within a single -cell.  Most 
of the oligodendrocyte lineage cells 
do not express neuronal transcripts 
isl1 and mnx1 (E,F). olig2 and 
nkx2.2a are expressed in Pre-
OPCs and their expression is 
maintained throughout the lineage 
(D,G). OPCs and Pre-OLs are 
marked by sox10 expression (H). 
OPC2 and Pre-OLs are designated 
by increased expression of myrf (I).  
 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

dlx2a (Cau et al., 1997; Farah et al., 2000; Kim et al., 1997; Petryniak et al., 2007) whereas Pre-OPC1/2 
cells did not (Fig. S8D-F). Moreover, cells within Pre-OPC1/2 expressed nkx2.2a at a higher level than 
cells in the Pre-OPC3 cluster, in line with our prediction that these cells are fated to the oligodendrocyte 
lineage (Fig. S8G). One possible explanation for why these two populations were clustered together 
could be based on their shared expression of unique transcripts like barhl2 and otx2a (Fig. S8H-K). 
This split in the Pre-OPC lineage led us to remove the Pre-OPC3 sub-cluster from the oligodendrocyte 
lineage before continuing further pseudotime analysis (Fig. S8L). 
Our evaluation of RNA velocity fields implied that motor neurons and oligodendrocytes arise 
from discrete progenitor populations. However, the exact progression of these lineages and cellular 
position through time is not discernable in this analysis. To gain a deeper understanding of the 
differences in distinct lineages and temporal ordering within the motor neuron and oligodendrocyte 
lineages, we used Slingshot (Street et al., 2018) as an additional trajectory analysis. We performed 
Slingshot analysis on subsetted clusters included in the oligodendrocyte or motor neuron lineages (Fig. 
6A; Fig. S9A). Slingshot predicted four lineages within the neuronal subset, all emerging from pMN1. 
The first three lineages progressed through pMN2/3, NP1/2, Pre-MN and MN1. However, the first 
lineage continued through MN4 ending at MN5, the second went through MN4 stopping at MN2 and 
the third lineage terminated at MN3 (Fig. S9A). The fourth predicted lineage within the neuronal 
trajectory progressed through pMN2/3 and terminated at RG (Fig. S9A). These data are consistent with 
differences in motor neuron subtype formation and the creation of a radial glial population during spinal 
cord development (Mizuguchi et al., 2001; Park et al., 2007; Stifani, 2014). For the subsetted 
oligodendrocyte lineage clusters, Slingshot predicted only one lineage that began at Pre-OPC1, 
transitioned through Pre-OPC2, OPC1/2 and ended at Pre-OLs (Fig. 6A). When we aligned the 
oligodendrocyte and second predicted neuronal Slingshot lineages along pseudotime, we found that 
Pre-OPC1 and pMN1 progenitors represented the least differentiated cell types within the 
oligodendrocytes and neuronal lineages, respectively (Fig. 6B; Fig. S9B). These results reinforce our 
conclusion that oligodendrocytes and motor neurons arise from two distinct populations of progenitors.  
The separated neuronal and glial pMN trajectories implies that there are differences in gene 
expression that guide motor neuron and oligodendrocyte developmental progression. To explore these 
potential differences, we fit a generalized additive model (GAM) to each predicted lineage to evaluate 
the top 100 differentially expressed genes related with pseudotime (Fig. 6C; Fig. S9C). In the neuronal 
lineage, genes such as isl1, mnx1, dla and neurod4 were present among the top differentially expressed 
genes, accordant with known transcripts required for motor neuron formation (Fig. S9C) (Appel and 
Eisen, 1998; Appel et al., 2001; Arber et al., 1999; Ericson et al., 1992; Farah et al., 2000; Tanabe et 
al., 1998). Comparatively, genes associated with oligodendrocyte development like sox9b, prdm8, olig1 
and nkx2.2a were within the differentially expressed genes in the oligodendrocyte lineage but not the 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

neuronal lineage (Fig. 6C; Fig. S9C) (Agius et al., 2004; Kessaris et al., 2001; Schebesta and Serluca, 
2009; Scott et al., 2020; Soula et al., 2001; Stolt et al., 2003; Stolt et al., 2006; Zhou and Anderson, 
2002; Zhou et al., 2001). 
We then used smoother plots overlaid onto single-cell expression through pseudotime of select 
transcripts associated with motor neuron or oligodendrocyte development to evaluate the biological 
accuracy of our Slingshot analysis (Fig. 6D-I; Fig. S9D-I). In agreement with known developmental 
progression, progenitors and precursors in the neuronal lineage had high expression of olig2 but cells 
in MN1-4 expressed it at low levels (Fig. S9D-I) (Novitch et al., 2001). By contrast, oligodendrocyte 
lineage cells maintained olig2 expression at high levels through all stages (Fig. 6D) (Zhou et al., 2000; 
Zhou et al., 2001). Consistent with motor neuron development, isl1 expression began in NP1/2 and 
mnx1 and isl1 expression were upregulated and maintained in motor neuron populations (Fig. S9E-F) 
(Arber et al., 1999; Ericson et al., 1992). Conversely, very few cells in the oligodendrocyte lineage 
expressed isl1 or mnx1 (Fig. 6E-F). nkx2.2a was expressed throughout the oligodendrocyte lineage, 
sox10 expression was evident in OPC1/2 and maintained in Pre-OLs, and most cells within the OPC2 
and Pre-OL cluster expressed myrf (Fig. 6G-I). A small number of cells in pMN1/2 expressed nkx2.2a 
and sox10 and almost no cells within the neuronal lineage expressed myrf (Fig. S9G-I). Overall, the 
lineage trajectory predictions support the hypothesis that oligodendrocytes and motor neurons arise 
from distinct progenitors and the subsequent gene expression analyses offer evidence for the accuracy 
of the Slingshot predicted lineages.  
 
Pre-OPCs are formed prior to OPC specification in the embryonic zebrafish spinal cord 
Thus far we have provided evidence for the existence of discrete progenitors within the pMN lineage 
within our scRNA-seq datasets. To assess the temporal development of these two populations, we 
compared the expression of ascl1a, neurog1 and gsx2 within the predicted lineages along pseudotime 
with smoother plots overlaid onto single-cell expression of each gene (Fig. 7A-C). Expression of ascl1a 
was highest in the NP1/2 populations and in a subset of Pre-OPCs but was downregulated in 
differentiated populations within both lineages (Fig. 7A). Most strikingly, gsx2 was expressed 
exclusively in Pre-OPC1/2 and neurog1 was mainly expressed within the progenitors and precursors 
of the neuronal lineage (Fig. 7B-C). Based on these data we expect that Pre-OPCs (gsx2+/neurog1–) 
can be distinguished from the pMN population (gsx2–/neurog1+) in vivo by assessing differential 
expression of gsx2 and neurog1. 
 
To validate the separation of Pre-OPCs and neuronal-fated pMN progenitor populations, we 
performed fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) probing for ascl1a, gsx2 and neurog1 mRNA at 36 
hpf in Tg(olig2:EGFP) embryos. Consistent with our scRNA-seq data, both ascl1a+ neurog1+ gsx2– 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

cells and ascl1a+ neurog1+ gsx2+ cells were evident in the ventral spinal cord (Fig. 7D). We next tested 
the prediction that gsx2 expression marks cells fated to develop as OPCs by probing for sox10, olig1 
and gsx2 transcripts at 40 hpf. This revealed that a majority of sox10+ cells expressed gsx2 and a 
subset of those cells also expressed olig1 (Fig. 7E). These data are consistent with predictions made 
from our scRNA-seq data, thereby revealing transcriptionally distinct spinal cord progenitors of ventral 
neurons and oligodendrocytes. 
 
 
 
Fig 7. In vivo identification of 
distinct 
neuronal 
and 
oligodendrocyte progenitors in 
the embryonic zebrafish spinal 
cord 
(A-C) Scater smooth expression 
plots for transcripts distinguishing 
pMN progenitors and Pre-OPCs 
within each lineage along Slingshot 
pseudo-temporal ordering. Each 
point represents the expression of 
each transcript within a single-cell.  
A portion of cells in the neuronal 
and 
oligodendrocyte 
lineages 
express ascl1a (A). neurog1 is 
highly expressed by many cells in 
the neuronal lineage but expressed 
by relatively few cells in the 
oligodendrocyte lineage (B). gsx2 
is exclusively expressed in the Pre-
OPC 
population 
(C). 
(D,E) 
Transverse 
trunk 
spinal 
cord 
sections obtained from zebrafish 
embryos processed for fluorescent 
RNA ISH. Dorsal is up. (D) 
Detection of ascl1a (cyan puncta), 
neurog1 (magenta puncta), and 
gsx2 (yellow puncta) mRNA in 36 
hpf Tg(olig2:EGFP) embryos to 
label pMN cells (light cyan cell 
bodies). 
Arrowheads 
denote 
ascl1a+/neurog1+/gsx2– 
neuronal 
pMN progenitors. Arrow highlights 
an ascl1a+/neurog1–/gsx2+ Pre-
OPC. (E) Detection of sox10 (cyan 
puncta), 
neurog1 
(magenta 
puncta), and gsx2 (yellow puncta) 
mRNA 
in 
40 
hpf 
embryos. 
Arrowheads denote sox10+/olig1–
/gsx2+ Pre-OPCs and the arrow 
highlights a sox10+/olig1+/gsx2+ 
Pre-OPC. Dashed oval outlines the 
spinal cord boundary. 
 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

Discussion 
In the developing nervous system, neural progenitor populations first give rise to neurons and then glia, 
a process guided by changes in environmental cues and alterations in gene expression (Kessaris et 
al., 2001; Miller and Gauthier, 2007). Though the generation of diverse neurons and glia are imperative 
to nervous system function, the origins of neuronal and glial precursors remain elusive. Here we provide 
evidence that in the ventral spinal cord, motor neurons and oligodendrocytes arise from distinct neural 
progenitor populations that are specified early in development.   
 
The major finding revealed by our scRNA-seq dataset and corroborated by in vivo mRNA 
expression analysis was the presence of two transcriptionally distinct progenitor populations. One 
population of cells highly expressed the proneuronal transcript neurog1 and was closely associated 
with the motor neuron lineage. By contrast, a majority of cells in the other progenitor population did not 
express neurog1 and were closely related to the oligodendrocyte lineage, suggesting that motor 
neurons and oligodendrocytes arise from independent progenitors. Consistent with our findings, most 
clonally related cells in the mouse cortex consist of either neurons or glia (Luskin et al., 1988; Luskin 
et al., 1993; McCarthy et al., 2001). Similarly, through time-lapse imaging of transgenic labeled pMN 
cells our group showed that motor neurons and OPCs arise from distinct pMN progenitor lineages 
(Ravanelli and Appel, 2015). Further, pMN progenitors isolated during oligodendrogenesis and 
transplanted into chick embryos during motor neuron formation were only able to form oligodendrocytes 
(Mukouyama et al., 2006), suggesting that a subset of pMN progenitors are restricted for 
oligodendrocyte fate.  
 
Our pseudotime lineage analysis provided further support for the distinction between motor 
neuron and oligodendrocyte lineages by affirming that transcripts expressed throughout the predicted 
trajectories for motor neurons and oligodendrocytes reflected established developmental mechanisms. 
For example, cells identified as having motor neuron fates expressed isl1, which encodes a LIM 
homeodomain transcription factor required for motor neuron survival and specification (Ericson et al., 
1992; Pfaff et al., 1996), whereas cells in the oligodendrocyte lineage did not express isl1. In 
comparison, OPCs and differentiating oligodendrocytes highly expressed the transcript sox10, a gene 
that encodes a transcription factor necessary for oligodendrocyte formation and maintenance (Britsch 
et al., 2001; Kuhlbrodt et al., 1998; Park et al., 2002; Takada et al., 2010). Further, trajectory analysis 
showed that prdm8 is expressed in OPCs and downregulated in Pre-OLs, consistent with our recent 
publication in which we found that prdm8 inhibits oligodendrocyte differentiation (Scott et al., 2020). 
These data indicate that motor neurons and oligodendrocyte arise from distinct progenitors that 
undergo independent developmental progression and transcriptional alterations. 
 
Through further evaluation of the differences between pMN progenitors and Pre-OPCs we 
identified a novel expression profile that can be used to explore the development of the oligodendrocyte 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

lineage in future studies. The majority of Pre-OPCs did not express neurog1, but instead uniquely 
expressed gsx2. The mutually exclusive expression of gsx2 and neurog1 in pMN progenitors is similar 
to previously characterized expression of these transcripts in zebrafish dorsal spinal cord progenitors 
(Satou et al., 2013). As Pre-OPCs undergo specification and subsequent differentiation into 
oligodendrocytes, gsx2 expression is down regulated. The downregulation of gsx2 by oligodendrocyte 
lineage cells is consistent with previous findings that loss of Gsx2 function in the mouse cortex resulted 
in precocious OPC formation at the expense of neurons, indicating that Gsx2 restricts OPC formation 
and differentiation (Chapman et al., 2012; Chapman et al., 2018). Therefore, it is possible that Gsx2 
functions to reserve a population of pMN progenitors as Pre-OPCs during motor neuron formation and 
is later downregulated at the onset of gliogenesis to allow for OPC specification.  
 
We also found that at 24 hpf Pre-OPCs were composed of two clusters, a less mature Pre-OPC1 
population and a more mature Pre-OPC2 population. Of note, Pre-OPC1 cells expressed olig2 at a 
lower level compared to Pre-OPC2 cells and additionally expressed transcripts characteristic of more 
dorsal progenitors such as dbx1a and pax6a (Briscoe et al., 2000; Lu et al., 1992). These expression 
data are compatible with previous findings by our lab that motor neurons and OPCs arise from distinct 
progenitors that successively initiate expression of olig2 as more dorsal progenitors slide ventrally into 
the pMN domain (Ravanelli and Appel, 2015; Ravanelli et al., 2018). Therefore, the Pre-OPC1 cluster 
we identified from our scRNA-seq analysis might represent a transient population of dorsally recruited 
progenitors that initiate olig2 expression while retaining transcripts characteristic of their more dorsal 
spinal cord origin.  
 
 
 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

METHODS AND MATERIALS 
Zebrafish lines and husbandry 
All animal work was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IAUCUC) at the 
University of Colorado School of Medicine. All non-transgenic embryos were obtained from pairwise 
crosses of males and females from the AB strain. Embryos were raised at 28.5°C in E3 media (5 mM 
NaCl, 0.17 mM KCl, 0.33 mM CaCl2, 0.33 mM MgSO4 at pH 7.4, with sodium bicarbonate), sorted for 
good health and staged accordingly to developmental morphological features and hours post-
fertilization (hpf) (Kimmel et al., 1995). Developmental stages are described in the results section for 
individual experiments. Sex cannot be determined at embryonic and larval stages. The transgenic line 
used was Tg(olig2:EGFP)vu12 (Shin et al., 2003). All transgenic embryos were obtained from pairwise 
crosses of males or females from the AB strain to males or females to the Tg(olig2:EGFP)vu12 strain.  
Fluorescent In situ RNA Hybridization  
Fluorescent in situ RNA hybridization was performed using the RNAScope Multiplex Fluorescent V2 
Assay Kit (Advanced Cell Diagnostics; ACD) on 12 μm thick paraformaldehyde-fixed and agarose 
embedded cryosections according to manufacturer’s instructions with the following modification: 
embryos were not dehydrated prior to embedding and slides were covered with parafilm for all 40°C 
incubations to maintain moisture and disperse reagents across the sections. The zebrafish ascl1a-C1, 
neurog1-C2, and gsx2-C3 transcript probes were designed and synthesized by the manufacturer and 
used at 1:50 dilutions. Transcripts were fluorescently labeled with Opal520 (1:1500), Opal570 (1:500) 
and Opal650 (1:1500) using the Opal 7 Kit (NEL797001KT; PerkinElmer).   
Imaging 
Fixed sections of embryos were imaged on a CellObserver SD 25 spinning disk confocal system (Carl 
Zeiss). RNA FISH images were acquired using a 40X (n.a. 0.75) objective. Images are reported as 
extended z-projections collected using Zen (Carl Zeiss) imaging software. Image brightness and 
contrast were adjusted in Photoshop (Adobe) or ImageJ (National Institutes of Health). 
Cell dissociation and FACs 
Methods for cell dissociation and sorting were previously reported (Scott et al.). 24, 36, and 48 hpf 
Tg(olig2:EGFP) euthanized embryos were collected in 1.7 ml microcentrifuge tubes and deyolked in 
100 μl of pre-chilled Ca free Ringers solution (116 mM NaCl, 2.6 mM KCl, 5 mM HEPES, pH 7.0) on 
ice. Embryos were pipetted intermittently with a P200 micropipettor for 15 minutes and incubated 
unperturbed for 5 min. 500 μl of protease solution (10 mg/ml BI protease, 125 U/ml DNase, 2.5 mM 
EDTA, 1X PBS) was added to microcentrifuge tubes on ice for 15 min and embryos were homogenized 
every 3 min with a P100 micropipettor for 15 min. 200 μl of STOP solution (30% FBS, 0.8 mM CaCl2, 
1X PBS) was then mixed into the tubes. Samples were then spun down at 400g for 5 min at 4°C and 
supernatant was removed. On ice, 1 ml of chilled suspension media (1% FBS, 0.8 mM CaCl2, 50 U/ml 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

Penicillin, 0.05 mg/ml Streptomycin) was added to samples and then spun down again at 400g for 5 
min at 4°C. Supernatant was removed, and 400 μl of chilled suspension media was added and solution 
was filtered through a 35 μm strainer into a collection tube. Cells were FAC sorted to distinguish EGFP+ 
cells using a MoFlo XDP100 cell sorter at the CU-SOM Cancer Center Flow Cytometry Shared 
Resource and collected in 1.7 ml FBS coated microcentrifuge tubes in 200 μl of 1X PBS. 
Single-cell cDNA library preparation and raw data generation  
The library preparation and sequencing to produce the data reporter here were described previously 
(Scott et al., 2020). The Chromium Box from 10X Genomics was used to capture cells using Chromium 
Single Cell 3' Reagent Kit part no. PN-1000075.  Libraries were sequenced on the Illumina 
NovaSEQ6000 Instrument.  FASTQ files were analyzed using Cell Ranger Software.  2174 (24 hpf), 
2555 (36 hpf) and 3177 (48 hpf) cells were obtained yielding a mean of 118,014 (24 hpf), 65,182 (36 
hpf) and 96,053 (48 hpf) reads per cell with a median of 1929 (24 hpf), 1229 (36 hpf) and 1699 (48 hpf) 
genes identified per cell. Raw sequencing reads were demultiplexed, mapped to the zebrafish 
reference genome (build GRCz11/danRer11) and summarized into gene expression matrices using 
CellRanger (version 3.0.1). 
Unsupervised Seurat analysis of individual stages  
Resulting count matrices for each development time point were loaded into Seurat (v3.2.1) and 
mitochondrial gene expression was added by PercentageFeatureSet (pattern = "^mt-"). Cell barcodes 
with fewer than 200 detectable genes, more than 5% of nFeature_RNAs derived from mitochondrial 
genes, or more than 50,000 nFeature_RNAs (24 hpf, 48 hpf) and 30,000 UMIs (36 hpf) were removed, 
resulting in 1952, 2149 and 2393 cells filtered for 24 hpf, 36 hpf and 48 hpf samples, respectively.  Data 
were normalized using the NormalizeData function and variable features were identified using the 
FindVariableFeatures function. Cells were then scored based on cell cycle gene expression using the 
CellCycleScoring function (CC.Difference [S.Score-G2M.Score]),  and the data was centered and 
scaled 
using 
the 
ScaleData 
function 
(vars.to.regress 
= 
c("nCount_RNA", 
"percent.mt", 
"CC.Difference"), features = all.genes). PCA analysis was performed on scaled data and significant 
principal components were identified by Elbow Plots of the first 100 dimensions. Next, dimensionality 
reduction was performed using Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) on the first 40 
principal components and clusters were identified using the FindNeighbors (dims = 1:40) and 
FindClusters functions (24 hpf: res = 1.2; 36 hpf: res = 1; 48 hpf: res = 0.9). Cluster identities were 
determined by assessing differential expression of known marker genes between different clusters 
using the cluster biomarkers identified using the FindAllMarkers function (only.pos = T, min.pct = 0.25) 
(Supplemental Table 1-5).  
Removal of dying cells 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

After resolution was determined for each data set, the total RNA count, percent mitochondrial gene 
expression and number of genes detected per cell were re-examined. High mitochondrial gene 
expression and a low number of feature genes indicative of dying cells were detected in the 24 hpf 
dataset, cluster 7 and the 36 hpf dataset, cluster 13. These clusters were removed from each dataset 
leaving 1,826 cells in the 24 hpf data and 2,044 cells in the 36 hpf data set. 
Unsupervised Seurat analysis of integrated data 
The three final Seurat objects generated for each stage were integrated into a larger Seurat object 
through anchor identification using the FindIntergationAnchors and IntergrateData Seurat functions 
(dims = 1:40) (6264 cells). After integrating the data sets the same downstream analysis was conducted 
as described in the individual datasets (res = 1.2). Cluster identities were determined by assessing 
differential expression of known marker genes between different clusters using the cluster biomarkers 
identified using the FindAllMarkers function (only.pos = T, min.pct = 0.25) (Supplemental Table 4) and 
comparing previously determined cell identify at each stage.   
Seurat Sub-Clustering MEP Glia and CMNs 
Within the integrated data set, cells from the MEP glia and Cranial motor neuronal (CMN) lineages 
were clustered together. To resolve these populations, the cluster containing these cells was subsetted 
and sub-clustered by using the FindNeighbors (dims = 1:40) and FindClusters (res = 0.5) Seurat 
functions. Examination of genes characteristic of MEP glia and CMNs instructed the split in the original 
cluster, which was then added to the final integrated Seurat object (Fig. S5).  
Seurat Sub-Clustering oligodendrocyte lineage 
Within the integrated dataset we noted that some interneuron-like cells and Pre-OPC cells were 
clustered together. To resolve these populations, the oligodendrocyte lineage clusters (Pre-OL, OPC 
and Pre-OPC) were subsetted and sub-clustered by using the FindNeighbors (dims = 1:40) and 
FindClusters (res = 0.5) Seurat functions. Examination of genes characteristic of interneurons and Pre-
OPCs instructed the split in the original cluster. The interneuron-like cells were removed from the 
oligodendrocyte lineage subset (Fig. S8) and trajectory analysis was performed on the adjusted 
oligodendrocyte lineage. 
Trajectory analysis 
RNA Velocity 
We performed RNA Velocity analysis to infer potential developmental trajectories within the neuronal 
and oligodendrocyte lineages identified in our integrated and 24 hpf datasets. We used the Python 
implementation of velocyto (v0.17.13) (La Manno et al., 2018), using the basic `run` subcommand with 
our CellRanger output and GRCz11 genome assembly. We also opted to mask expressed repetitive 
elements using the GRCz11 expressed repeat annotation file downloaded from the UCSC genome 
browser. We analyzed the output loom file using scVelo (v0.2.2) (Bergen et al., 2020), and merged the 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441874
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint

===== Seifert2019_DevBiol_BlastemaEpimorph =====
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Developmental Biology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/developmentalbiology
Review article
The blastema and epimorphic regeneration in mammals
Ashley W. Seiferta,⁎, Ken Muneokab,⁎
a Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506, United States
b Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A & M University, College Station, TX 77843, United States
A B S T R A C T
Studying regeneration in animals where and when it occurs is inherently interesting and a challenging research
topic within developmental biology. Historically, vertebrate regeneration has been investigated in animals that
display enhanced regenerative abilities and we have learned much from studying organ regeneration in
amphibians and ﬁsh. From an applied perspective, while regeneration biologists will undoubtedly continue to
study poikilothermic animals (i.e., amphibians and ﬁsh), studies focused on homeotherms (i.e., mammals and
birds) are also necessary to advance regeneration biology. Emerging mammalian models of epimorphic
regeneration are poised to help link regenerative biology and regenerative medicine. The regenerating rodent
digit tip, which parallels human ﬁngertip regeneration, and the regeneration of large circular defects through
the ear pinna in spiny mice and rabbits, provide tractable, experimental systems where complex tissue
structures are regrown through blastema formation and morphogenesis. Using these models as examples, we
detail similarities and diﬀerences between the mammalian blastema and its classical counterpart to arrive at a
broad working deﬁnition of a vertebrate regeneration blastema. This comparison leads us to conclude that
regenerative failure is not related to the availability of regeneration-competent progenitor cells, but is most
likely a function of the cellular response to the microenvironment that forms following traumatic injury. Recent
studies demonstrating that targeted modiﬁcation of this microenvironment can restrict or enhance regenerative
capabilities in mammals helps provide a roadmap for eventually pushing the limits of human regeneration.
1. Introduction
While regeneration refers to the replacement of a lost body part, the
term also describes the repeated replacement of skin cells or shark's
teeth, the generation of a whole organism from part of an embryo, or in
the broadest sense, the process of embryogenesis from a fertilized egg
(the regeneration of an organism from a genome). These and other
examples are classically typed as either physiological (homeostatic) or
reparative regeneration, where physiological regeneration describes the
regular replacement of cells and tissues during homeostasis and aging
(e.g., epidermis, blood, shark's teeth, etc.), and reparative regeneration
occurs in response to injury (Morgan, 1901). Homeostatic regeneration
is a ubiquitous property of vertebrates until that time when cells can no
longer replace themselves and tissues and organs begin to fail. When
considered in this context, all vertebrates exhibit a capacity for tissue
regeneration. The enigma for regeneration biologists is that vertebrate
species appear to be distributed along a continuum of reparative
regenerative ability. As a biological problem, we still do not understand
why some adult vertebrates can regenerate organs in response to
damage while others heal similar injuries with scar tissue. Viewed as a
clinical problem, although all tissues of the human body display some
level of homeostatic regenerative ability, complex tissues and organs do
not generally regenerate in response to injury. Can complex tissue
regeneration be stimulated in non-regenerating species? These ques-
tions are the nexus of regenerative biology and medicine.
The cell is the basic unit of tissue regeneration. Accordingly,
regeneration can occur at multiple levels of biological organization.
In one dimension the smallest injury requires repair of a single cell
(e.g., a severed axon). In another, severe trauma requires replacement
of an entire organ de novo through the coordinated morphogenesis of
millions of cells into distinct tissue types (e.g., a limb following
amputation). Somewhere in between is the regeneration of variably
complex structures with multi-cellular architecture and multiple func-
tional units (e.g., ear punch, spinal cord resection, skeletal fracture,
etc.). Regeneration in all of these examples is intimately tied to the
regulated activation, coordinated growth, and diﬀerentiation of local
cells, be they adult stem cells, or diﬀerentiated cells that undergo de-
diﬀerentiation or reprogramming. How are resident cells activated and
coordinated to regenerate organs?
Generally speaking, after blood loss is stemmed and an organism
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2017.08.007
Received 2 June 2017; Received in revised form 28 July 2017; Accepted 4 August 2017
⁎ Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: awseifert@uky.edu (A.W. Seifert), KMuneoka@cvm.tamu.edu (K. Muneoka).
Developmental Biology 433 (2018) 190–199
Available online 25 December 2017
0012-1606/ © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
MARK

mounts defensive action from infection, local cells accumulate and
produce new tissue. Among vertebrates, the process of regenerating a
replacement organ in situ requires cell proliferation and is referred to
as epimorphic regeneration (Morgan, 1901). This distinguishes it from
regeneration that involves the reorganization of existing cells at the
wound site to restore normal patterning prior to growth (i.e., mor-
phallaxis). Appendage regeneration in salamanders and newts is the
classic example of a complete and complex epimorphic response (Goss,
1969; Wallace, 1981). While amputating one lobe of the liver will also
stimulate cell (hepatocyte) proliferation to restore organ function, the
lobe itself does not regenerate. What distinguishes epimorphic regen-
eration from disorganized tissue regeneration is that a regenerating
limb or tail forms from a transient proliferative mass called a blastema.
While a similar response is not usually observed following appendage
amputation in mammals, there do exist a few mammalian examples of
epimorphic regeneration in which a blastema forms, and these can
instruct the likelihood of enhancing regenerative capabilities in hu-
mans.
In this review we focus our attention on digit tip and ear hole
regeneration as two examples of blastema-based epimorphic regenera-
tion in mammals (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Joseph and Dyson, 1966;
Muneoka et al., 2008). As described below, these two mammalian
models present unique opportunities to discover the mechanisms that
stimulate a regenerative response to injury in lieu of ﬁbrotic healing. In
focusing on the digit and ear pinna we do not discuss the broader
regenerative abilities of the spiny mice primarily because full-thickness
skin regeneration is not mediated by a blastema (Seifert et al., 2012;
Seifert and Maden, 2014). Similarly, we have chosen to exclude the
annual shedding and regrowth of deer antlers which represents an
extreme example of physiological regeneration (Kierdorf et al., 2009).
While some authors have suggested deer antler regeneration is
blastema-mediated (Li, 2012) studies have shown that antler regen-
eration is nerve-independent and the antler bud displays character-
istics that are distinct from an epimorphic blastema (Kierdorf et al.,
2007, 2009). Thus, while fascinating, in light of these diﬀerences and
the fact that antler regeneration does not occur in response to injury, it
is diﬃcult to ﬁnd parallels with other blastema-mediated regenerative
responses in mammals. Ultimately, studying diﬀerent types of regen-
eration reveals the diversity of regenerative processes. In our view,
however, understanding the mechanisms that stimulate and regulate
blastema formation is the key to moving from a deconstructive to
constructive study of regeneration.
2. The vertebrate regeneration blastema
Several factors have emerged from the vertebrate regeneration
literature as key components in all known examples of blastema-based
epimorphic regeneration. These include: (1) formation of a specialized
wound epidermis that functions to attract blastemal cells and maintain
cell proliferation (Globus et al., 1980b; Thornton, 1957a; Thornton and
Steen, 1962; Thornton and Thornton 1965), (2) dependence on
innervation and exposure to nerve or Schwann cell secreted factors
(Farkas et al., 2016; Kumar et al., 2007; Mescher et al., 1997; Mullen
et al., 1996; Singer, 1952), (3) formation of a pro-regenerative
extracellular matrix (Calve et al., 2010; Gawriluk et al., 2016;
Mailman and Dresden, 1979; Marrero et al., 2017; Onda et al., 1991;
Satoh et al., 2012; Seifert et al., 2012; Tassava et al., 1996; Vinarsky
et al., 2005), (4) deployment of major developmental signaling path-
ways (rev. in Stoick-Cooper et al., 2007), (5) physical interaction of
cells from antonymic positions in three-dimensional space (Carlson,
1974; Cook and Seifert, 2016; Lheureux, 1975a, 1975b), (6) recogni-
tion of uninjured versus new tissue and thus level-speciﬁc replacement
of appropriate tissue to generate a complete organ and (7) a depen-
dence on macrophages to initiate regeneration (Godwin et al., 2013;
Petrie et al., 2014; Simkin et al., 2017). Together, these features
contribute to, and support, blastema formation, without which regen-
eration will not occur. Against the backdrop of these features
epimorphic regeneration involves two major transformations in re-
sponse to injury: 1) mature tissue into a blastema and 2) a blastema
into a regenerated organ. Viewed in this light, the blastema is the link
between healing and morphogenesis.
2.1. How to broadly deﬁne a blastema?
Blastema: From Greek blastein – to sprout; ma – result of action
A blastema is a heterogeneous cell mass that through migration and
proliferation transiently forms at the injury site and undergoes
morphogenesis to form the missing organ. We use morphogenesis as
it refers to organogenesis (i.e., organ development during embryonic
development), but occurring in the adult form. The heterogeneous
mass of cells is necessarily covered by epidermis (termed the wound
epidermis) and thus the deﬁnition of a blastema includes this
ectoderm-derived component. Historically, a vertebrate blastema was
often deﬁned as a mass of pluripotent cells where blastemal cells would
contribute to all the of the regenerated structures. In reality, classic and
modern lineage tracing techniques have shown that blastemal cells
tend to respect developmental lineages during normal regeneration
(rev. in Monaghan and Maden, 2013), although some evidence
suggests that connective tissue ﬁbroblasts over-contribute progeny to
the blastema (Dunis and Namenwirth, 1977; Kragl et al., 2009;
Muneoka et al., 1986). The blastema has also been classically deﬁned
by its developmental potential, i.e., what it transforms into distin-
guishes the blastema from any other mass of undiﬀerentiated cells
(e.g., tumor, granulation tissue, etc.). While this may be appropriate
during development (nephrogenic blastema) or during salamander
limb regeneration (limb blastema) where regeneration routinely oc-
curs, this deﬁnition is problematic in approaching translational issues
associated with regenerative failure. In this regard, it is important to
modify this classic deﬁnition and try to deﬁne a blastema by functional
attributes that are essential for establishing its’ developmental poten-
tial, rather than applying a descriptor of its ultimate developmental
fate. A broad deﬁnition of this type allows us to identify key properties
of a blastema that promote the transition from healing to morphogen-
esis and thus provides a basis for comparison across species or across
distinct injury responses within a species. This conceptual framework is
particularly useful when examining epimorphic regeneration in mam-
mals where variation in regenerative ability exists between closely
related species (ear pinna) and within an individual organ (digit). In
these instances, the presence or absence of a blastema can help provide
an explanation for regenerative success or failure.
In animals that possess regenerative capabilities, local amputation
initiates the ﬁrst transformation from mature tissue into a transient
undiﬀerentiated proliferative phase (blastema) that is followed by the
second transformation where morphogenesis and re-diﬀerentiation
replace the missing structures. The ﬁrst transformation is a specialized
wound healing response that ends with the formation of the blastema
(Fig. 1). This can be distinguished from a non-regenerative repair
response where re-epithelialization is followed by reconstitution of a
mature basement membrane, wound contraction, and the deposition of
a densely layered ﬁbrous scar tissue that deﬁnes regeneration-incom-
petence. During a regenerative response where the ﬁrst transformation
ends with the formation of a small mass of undiﬀerentiated proliferat-
ing cells, the second transformation involves proliferative expansion of
this cell population, patterning, and ultimately the orderly diﬀerentia-
tion into the multitude of cell types that make up the tissues of the
replacement structure. In the context of regenerative failure, these two
transforming events are generally viewed as distinct and independent
biological problems. In other words, the study of mammalian regen-
eration involves two distinct and historically separate ﬁelds of inquiry:
wound healing, which is largely focused on tissue healing that is non-
regenerative and resolves in the formation of scar tissue, and tissue
development, which is largely studied during embryogenesis. In
A.W. Seifert, K. Muneoka
Developmental Biology 433 (2018) 190–199
191

regeneration competent models, the blastema sits at this interface
making the study of its formation critical for understanding how
regeneration is controlled.
Whether or not morphogenesis is an emergent property of the
blastema or something that must be stimulated is unknown. If the
former, then discovering the ability to create a regeneration blastema
may be the key to stimulating successful regeneration where it does not
naturally occur (Goss, 1980). Focusing on the ﬁrst transformation, it
remains unresolved if pro-regenerative signals distinct from general-
ized injury signals exist to stimulate blastema formation (Sugiura et al.,
2016; Tassava and Mescher, 1975). One way or another, the early
response to injury during epimorphic regeneration involves acute
inﬂammation that is concurrent with re-epithelialization and formation
of the wound epidermis (Gauron et al., 2013; Godwin et al., 2013; Love
et al., 2013; Mescher and Neﬀ, 2005; Simkin et al., 2017). As the
inﬂammatory response resolves, local histolytic activity, re-innerva-
tion, and extracellular matrix production facilitates the migration and
accumulation of cells beneath the wound epidermis to form the nascent
blastema (Calve et al., 2010; Singer, 1952; Vinarsky et al., 2005). In
amphibians and ﬁsh, cells of the regenerating limb/ﬁn are derived from
multiple tissue types and lineage restricted progenitor cells have been
clearly identiﬁed (Knopf et al., 2011; Kragl et al., 2009; Singh et al.,
2012; Tu and Johnson, 2011). In addition to the variety of lineage
restricted progenitor cells that make up the blastema, there is evidence
that ﬁbroblastic cells of the interstitial connective tissue are an
important cell source for the blastema (Muneoka et al., 1986; Tank
and Holder, 1979). The connective tissue of the dermis has been
studied most extensively using cell markers coupled with skin trans-
plantation. Such tissue grafting studies show that cells of the dermis
over-contribute to the blastema, and that these cells participate in
regenerating skeletal limb tissues (e.g., bone, cartilage, tendons) as well
as re-forming the dermis (Dunis and Namenwirth, 1977; Kragl et al.,
2009; Muneoka et al., 1986). Since there are a number of distinct cell
types in dermal connective tissue, e.g., vascular, and perivascular cells,
and heterogeneity among ﬁbroblasts (Driskell et al., 2013; Rinkevich
et al., 2015) it remains to be demonstrated whether one or all of these
cell types are multipotent. Nevertheless, since there are no skeletal
structures in the dermis and yet cells from the dermis can contribute to
regenerated bone and cartilage, the evidence clearly indicates the
existence of a multipotent cell type within the dermis. Unfortunately,
the heterogeneity and plasticity of blastemal cells from tissue-speciﬁc
lineages does not aid in the task of deﬁning the blastema generally,
rather, these cellular properties are a function of the speciﬁc tissue
injured. Instead, a useful deﬁnition relies on the fact that some fraction
of blastemal cells is stimulated to re-enter the cell cycle and undergo
cell cycle progression and division (Globus et al., 1980a; Hay and
Fischman, 1961; Tomlinson and Barger, 1987). While the persistence
of active cycling cells can be used to identify the blastema, this alone
hardly diﬀerentiates a blastema from a tumor. Therefore, the presence
of proliferating cells must be used in combination with other factors.
Given that uncontrolled growth is a characteristic of tumor cells and
controlled growth is a characteristic of blastemal cells, comparative
proﬁling of cycling tumor cells and blastemal cells may identify a panel
of markers speciﬁc to cycling blastemal cells. Until these markers are
found, however, one must look to other factors to uniquely deﬁne a
blastema.
It has long been recognized that a wound epidermis forms atop the
blastema after re-epithelialization and is required to direct growth of
the blastema, maintain cell proliferation, and prevent premature
diﬀerentiation (Globus et al., 1987, 1980b; Thornton, 1960). Studies
that denude the blastema of the wound epidermis delay regeneration
until re-epithelialization occurs again because the wound epidermis
continually reforms after injury (Thornton, 1957b). In this regard, the
wound epidermis is an integral part of the blastema and essential for
successful regeneration. Once formed, the wound epidermis is further
modiﬁed by the action of re-growing axons (Endo et al., 2004; Satoh
et al., 2008). In salamanders and newts, innervation helps transition
the new epidermis into a signaling center called the apical epithelial
cap (AEC). This interaction with re-growing nerves is required for
blastema formation and distinguishes the AEC from the neoepidermis
that forms atop non-blastema-based regenerating skin wounds (Endo
et al., 2004; Satoh et al., 2008). Several molecular markers have been
identiﬁed that demarcate this specialized epidermis from epidermis
located proximal to the injury or from neoepidermis covering tissue
that does not form a blastema (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Han et al., 2001;
Mullen et al., 1996; Satoh et al., 2008). In addition to molecular
markers, the wound epidermis is morphologically distinct from the
normally stratiﬁed epithelium typical of adult skin. As regeneration
progresses reformation of the mature basement membrane beneath the
wound epidermis is delayed and its absence is a useful indicator of the
wound epidermis (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Neufeld and Day, 1996;
Neufeld et al., 1996; Seifert et al., 2012). Although further molecular
and functional characterization of the wound epidermis is necessary,
current markers and morphological features can identify a wound
epidermis as a fundamental component of the blastema.
Lastly, there is increasing evidence that the blastemal extracellular
matrix is a key component of regeneration, although its role as a
facilitator, regulator or passive support structure remains unclear
(Calve et al., 2010; Gawriluk et al., 2016; Mailman and Dresden,
1979; Marrero et al., 2017; Onda et al., 1991; Satoh et al., 2012;
Seifert et al., 2012; Tassava et al., 1996; Vinarsky et al., 2005). Early
studies of salamander and newt blastemas detected increased levels of
matrix proteins associated with cell migration and proliferation (e.g.,
ﬁbronectin and tenascin-C) (Onda et al., 1991; Tassava et al., 1996). In
vitro work examining newt myotubes on ﬁbronectin, tenascin-c and
hyaluronic acid showed these proteins could directly regulate cell
behavior (Calve et al., 2010; Calve and Simon, 2012). More recent work
in mammals (see below) suggests that the extracellular composition of
the blastema can itself help deﬁne this transient structure when
compared to non-regenerating tissues where a blastema does not form
(Gawriluk et al., 2016; Marrero et al., 2017; Seifert et al., 2012). All told,
while we have an incomplete deﬁnition of a blastema, the indicators
outlined above do provide a conceptual foundation to identify pro-
regenerative factors from cross-species and inter-injury comparisons.
Fig. 1. Schematic depicting formation of the regenerating mouse digit tip blastema. (A) Cartoon of the mouse digit tip. The P3 bone (blue) is shown as triangular with a proximal base
that contains a bone marrow region (white) and tapers to the distal tip. The bone marrow is highly vascularized (not shown) and hypocellular (red). Epidermis (black) and connective
tissue cells (green) surround the P3 bone. Amputation of the digit tip does not damage the bone marrow. (B) Following amputation of the distal bone the epidermis heals onto the
periosteum of the stump. The distal bone stump contains dead bone (red stars). (C) Histolysis of the stump is mediated by multinucleated osteoclasts (yellow) that erode the bone and
creates a secondary amputation plane. This phase is associated with increased cell numbers in the connective tissue and bone marrow. (D) Once the secondary amputation is complete,
the wound epidermis closes through the region of degraded bone and a blastema forms. Cells from the bone marrow and surrounding connective tissue participate in blastema
formation. The P3 level that regenerates is proximal to the original level of digit amputation.
A.W. Seifert, K. Muneoka
Developmental Biology 433 (2018) 190–199
192

3. Two mammalian blastemas – digits and ears
As we continue to discover fundamental mechanisms underlying a
regenerative response to injury, the importance of studying natural
examples of reparative regeneration in mammals is undeniable. Adult
regeneration models in mammals, while not as spectacular as limb
regeneration in urodeles, do aﬀord researchers a comparative approach
to understand basic principles of blastema formation and morphogen-
esis. To this end, comparing regenerating and non-regenerating
injuries should help expand our ability to deﬁne the regeneration
blastema. Moreover, putting phylogenetic considerations aside, impor-
tant physiological diﬀerences between mammals and traditional re-
generation models like salamanders, newts and zebraﬁsh (e.g., home-
othermy versus poikilothermy, high versus low metabolic rates, etc.)
make it vital to understand how tissues can regenerate against the
backdrop of mammalian physiology. As another example, although an
innate immune response to injury is an ancient weapon against
infection, it seems unlikely that this response is exactly the same in
newts as it is in a mouse or human. Below we oﬀer two models for
epimorphic regeneration in mammals where steady progress is con-
tributing to our understanding of blastema formation, its deﬁnition,
and more broadly, to the diﬀerences between a regenerative or ﬁbrotic
response to injury.
3.1. Digit tip regeneration
The regeneration of human ﬁngertips is well documented in the
clinical literature (Illingworth, 1974) and parallels between digit tip
regeneration in mice and ﬁngertip regeneration in humans have peaked
interest in the feasibility of human regeneration (Muneoka et al.,
2008). The regenerating mouse digit has become an important experi-
mental model to explore fundamental mechanisms of mammalian
regeneration and to test strategies aimed at enhancing regenerative
capabilities (Dawson et al., 2016). The mouse digit tip regenerates at all
stages of development, including adults, and the process involves the
formation of a transient blastema. The regeneration competent region
consists of the terminal or third phalangeal element (P3), a structurally
unique bone that has the shape of a ﬂattened cone with a wide basal
region that contains a bone marrow cavity and a tapered distal tip
(Fig. 2A-B). The second phalangeal element (P2) articulates with the
base of P3 forming the P2/P3 joint (Fig. 2B). The P3 element is encased
by the nail organ which is required for the regenerative response
(Takeo et al., 2013), and a thin layer of loose connective tissue
consisting of ﬁbroblasts, vasculature and nerves separate the P3 bone
from the nail epidermis. Amputation through the distal half of P3
initiates the regenerative response, while amputation at the base of P3
undergoes a healing response with no evidence of regeneration
(Neufeld and Zhao, 1995). After amputation, the continuously growing
nail encases the regenerate, initially appearing as a truncated out-
growth before eventually conforming to the contour of the blastema
(Fig. 2C-E). Internal to the nail the regeneration response involves a
series of interconnected and interdependent processes that transforms
the diﬀerentiated stump tissues into a blastema that undergoes
morphogenesis to form replacement tissues.
Unlike some other regeneration models, the digit amputation
wound does not undergo a rapid re-epithelialization response, instead
the epidermis initially heals onto the lateral regions of the amputated
stump bone and initiates a histolytic phase (Fig. 2F) that is dominated
by the recruitment of osteoclasts and the progressive degradation of the
stump bone (Fernando et al., 2011; Simkin et al., 2015b). This
histolytic phase correlates with the acute inﬂammatory response, and
the recruitment of the monocyte/macrophage lineage cells that fuse to
form large multinucleated osteoclasts (Lampiasi et al., 2016) that
degrade the stump bone (Fig. 2G). Once the stump bone is degraded,
the epidermis migrates through the region of degraded bone that
deﬁnes a new amputation level, and the blastema forms distal to the
stump (Fig. 2H). Wound closure over the stump tissue can be induced
by use of a cyanoacrylic wound dressing, and in this case the bone
degradation phase is inhibited and a small blastema forms distal to the
original amputation (Simkin et al., 2015b). Alternatively, experimen-
tally enhancing the period of bone degradation causes greater stump
bone degradation and results in blastemas of a larger size (Sammarco
et al., 2015). Thus, there appears to be a relationship between the
extent of bone degradation and blastema size, suggestive of a relation-
ship between tissue histolysis and progenitor cell availability. Blastema
maturation is characterized by the onset of skeletal diﬀerentiation and
progresses in a proximal to distal sequence (Fig. 2H-J). The regenerat-
ing new bone forms by direct ossiﬁcation with osteoblasts secreting
osteoid in a pericellular manner to rapidly form woven bone. The use of
µCT imaging has become an important tool to study the regeneration of
bone during digit tip regeneration. Bone length and volume can be
tracked and quantitated in vivo and soft tissue changes can be
quantitated using contrasting reagents (Fig. 2K-N).
The question of how the digit blastema forms is key to under-
standing both regenerative success and regenerative failure, and is an
important step for addressing the question of why most mammals
studied to date have limited regenerative capabilities. Since a blastema
can form following digit tip amputation, it is reasonable to ask why a
blastema does not form at other amputation levels. The digit blastema
can be deﬁned based on transiently expressed characteristics asso-
ciated with its formation, and for a more stringent deﬁnition, based on
a subset of characteristics that are experimentally shown to be
functionally linked to successful regeneration. An approach of this
kind reﬂects the general criteria outlined above while also potentially
expanding our deﬁnition of the blastema. One example is the composi-
tion of the extracellular matrix (ECM) produced by blastema cells.
Collagen 3 is a minor component of the digit prior to amputation, but
becomes a prominent component of the blastema ECM before return-
ing to baseline levels after diﬀerentiation (Marrero et al., 2017; Simkin
et al., 2015b). The cells that produce collagen 3 have been identiﬁed as
a subset of digit ﬁbroblasts, called ﬁbroblast reticular cells, and they
display an enhanced proliferative response during blastema formation
(Marrero et al., 2017). Collagen 3 production by digit ﬁbroblasts is
induced in vitro by multi-TNF receptor activation (Katakai et al., 2008;
Marrero et al., 2017) suggesting that digit ﬁbroblasts speciﬁcally react
to inﬂammation by producing a provisional matrix that supports a
regenerative response. Although functional studies on the role of
collagen 3 in digit blastema formation are currently lacking, the data
are consistent with the conclusion that a collagen 3 rich matrix
supports mammalian regeneration. A more comprehensive analysis
of the extracellular environment in regenerative-competent P3 ampu-
tations compared to regeneration-incompetent P2 amputations will
help resolve how matrix proteins contribute to blastema formation.
A number of studies have identiﬁed major developmental pathways
important for digit regeneration through functional analysis. These
include multiple secreted factor signaling pathways including BMP (Yu
et al., 2010), WNT (Lehoczky and Tabin, 2015; Takeo et al., 2013,
2016), PDGF (Johnston et al., 2016), Oncostatin M (Johnston et al.,
2016), CXCL12 (Lee et al., 2013), and VEGF (Yu et al., 2014). Some of
these signaling factors are regulated in the blastema microenvironment
and control cell proliferation, cell migration or cell diﬀerentiation
(Lehoczky, 2016; Simkin et al., 2015a). A series of recent studies have
identiﬁed interactions linking the inﬂammatory response, angiogen-
esis, and re-epithelialization to the control of oxygen availability during
the transformation from stump to blastema. Initial studies identifying
the central region of the digit blastema as avascular echoed similar
accounts from descriptive studies of the salamander limb blastema
(Fernando et al., 2011; Mescher, 1996; Peadon and Singer, 1966; Said
et al., 2004). The avascular character of the digit blastema correlates
with reduced expression of Vegfa and up-regulated expression of the
potent anti-angiogenic factor Pedf, during early regeneration stages in
neonates (Muneoka et al., 2008; Yu et al., 2014). Experimental
A.W. Seifert, K. Muneoka
Developmental Biology 433 (2018) 190–199
193

treatment of digit amputations with VEGF induces precocious angio-
genesis and inhibits skeletal regeneration without inhibiting the
formation of a blastema structure, indicating that the avascular nature
of the blastema is a characteristic essential for regeneration (Yu et al.,
2014). The region of digit blastema avascularity displays a low oxygen
tension (< 1.3%) indicating a hypoxic microenvironment (Fig. 2O) and
suggestive
of
a
relationship
between
avascularity
and
hypoxia
(Sammarco et al., 2014). When oxygen levels are experimentally
elevated by hyperbaric oxygen treatment, the hypoxic state of the
blastema is eliminated, and this was found to alter the regeneration
response by extending the period of osteoclast-mediated bone degra-
dation (Sammarco et al., 2015, 2014). While oxygen treatment does not
enhance osteoclastogenesis, it does inhibit the termination of the
osteoclast response, thus extending the period and extent of the bone
histolytic phase. In classic models of bone degradation, osteoclastogen-
esis is inhibited by production of osteoprotegrin, a secreted decoy
receptor that competes with and inhibits RANKL-RANK signaling that
stimulates osteoclastogenesis (Chen et al., 2017). In osteoblasts,
osteoprotegrin expression appears directly downstream of Hif2b
activity which is regulated via the oxygen sensing activity of prolyl
hydroxylase enzymes (Wu et al., 2015). These studies identify a
dynamic process that involves regulating angiogenesis to establish a
transient hypoxic blastema microenvironment that functions as a
regulatory switch to transition the histolytic phase prior to blastema
formation to the growth phase once the blastema has formed. It is
interesting that the pro-angiogenic microenvironment of granulation
tissue in full-thickness skin wounds causes excessive re-vascularization
that is linked to scar formation (DiPietro, 2016; Wietecha et al., 2015).
Thus, the evidence suggests that the regulation of this angiogenesis/
oxygen/hypoxia cascade is a potential evolutionary target responsible
for restricted regenerative capabilities in mammals, and also identiﬁes
a target pathway to enhance regenerative ability of regeneration
incompetent wounds. The extent to which oxygen availability controls
blastema formation in other examples of epimorphic regeneration
awaits more general investigation.
One of the fundamental questions surrounding epimorphic regen-
eration responses concerns the source and potency of progenitor cells
that form the blastema and contribute to the regenerate. As indicated
above, while the identity of these cells may not help deﬁne a blastema
per se, the source and plasticity of blastemal cells can reveal funda-
mental aspects of how cellular phenotypes are modiﬁed during
regeneration. Lineage tracing studies in mice utilizing cell type speciﬁc
promoter-driven reporter expression are a powerful test for multi-
potency during regeneration. Not surprisingly, the epidermis has been
shown to be lineage restricted during digit tip regeneration as it is
during salamander limb regeneration (Kragl et al., 2009; Rinkevich
et al., 2011), and cell labeling studies show that cells derived from
hematopoietic stem cells do not contribute to the major structural
tissues of the regenerated digit (Rinkevich et al., 2011). Endothelial
cells and osteoblasts contribute to the blastema and regenerated digit,
and both are lineage-restricted with regard to their potency (Lehoczky
et al., 2011; Rinkevich et al., 2011). The use of promoter-speciﬁc Cre
Fig. 2. Digit tip regeneration. (A) The distal region of the adult digit tip is comprised of the distal tip of the P3 skeletal element surrounded by a layer of connective tissue and the nail
plate (n). The plane of amputation is indicated by the solid line. (B) Sagittal section through an unamputated P3 element shows the triangle shaped bone (p3) that contains a proximal
bone marrow cavity (bm) and is enclosed by the nail (n). The P3 element articulates with the second phalangeal element (p2) at the P2/P3 joint. The plane of amputation is indicated by
the solid line. (C) External view of a regenerating digit tip at 7 days post-amputation (dpa) showing distal elongation of the nail plate (n) with no remarkable change of the stump bone.
(D) External view of a regenerating digit tip at 12 dpa showing outgrowth of a prominent digit blastema (b) surrounded by the elongating nail (n). (E) External view of a regenerating
digit tip at 17 dpa showing a regenerate that has the general shape of the terminal phalanx. Vasculature associated with ossiﬁcation is apparent proximal to the distal blastema. (F)
Mallory's triple-stained section of a regenerating digit at 7 dpa showing the absence of wound closure and epidermal attachment to the lateral bone surface. Pitting of the stump bone
surface (p) is observed at this stage. (G) TRAP staining of a 7 dpa regenerate identiﬁes multinucleated osteoclasts (*) associated with the amputated stump bone. (H) Malory's triple-
stained section of a 12 dpa digit showing the distal undiﬀerentiated blastema (b). (I) Mallory's triple-stained regenerate at 17 dpa showing the distal stump with newly diﬀerentiated
woven bone (wb) that is capped with undiﬀerentiated blastema cells. (J) At 28 dpa the distal P3 element is regenerated with an interlacing network of new woven bone (wb) that is
histologically distinct from the cortical bone of the stump. (K-M) µCT imaging of regenerating digits stained with a soft-tissue contrast agent (alcoholic iodine) to make the epidermis
radio-opaque and enable analyses of soft tissue versus bone. (K) At 10 dpa the distal cortical bone is eroded and the bone marrow cavity is contiguous with the distal digit blastema (b).
(L) At 17 dpa the regenerated woven bone (wb) appears as a loose network of bony tissue. (M) At 28 dpa the regenerated woven bone (wb) has a mottled appearance and is distinct from
the cortical bone of the stump. (N) Graph showing the normalized longitudinal lengths of the digit tip (solid boxes) and the P3 bone (open boxes) during the regeneration process. The
arrow highlights the transition between bone degradation, blastema formation and osteogenic diﬀerentiation of new bone. Both total digit and P3 length regenerates to normal levels
within 3–4 weeks. (O) Hypoxic character of the blastema is shown in a colorimetric overlay of hypoxyprobe staining (pink, O2 < 1.3%) and oxygen-stabilized FBXL5 immunostaining
(green, O2 > 6.0%) as compared to normoxic (purple) areas at 12 dpa. A, C-N from Fernando et al. (2011); B, from Han et al., 2008; O, from Sammarco et al. (2014).
A.W. Seifert, K. Muneoka
Developmental Biology 433 (2018) 190–199
194

expression coupled with a constitutively active reporter gene to track
cell lineage has also been useful in determining whether speciﬁc cell
types change phenotype during regeneration. Such studies show that
Sox9-expressing skeletal cells, Scx-expressing tendon cells, and Tie2-
expressing endothelial cells do not undergo transdiﬀerentiation during
regeneration (Rinkevich et al., 2011). While lineage studies have led to
the general conclusion that the digit blastema is composed of only
lineage restricted cells (Lehoczky et al., 2011; Rinkevich et al., 2011),
this generalized conclusion must be weighed against the limited
number of cell types that have been studied, and that the cell types
contributing to the regenerated digit (epidermis, endothelial cells,
osteoblasts) are lineage restricted during development. Indeed, with
the exception of hematopoietic stem cells that do not contribute to
regenerated structures, the contribution of more phenotypically labile
cells such as mesenchymal stem cells or tissue-speciﬁc stem cells
remain unknown. Current studies show that a panel of positive and
negative markers is required to identify certain multipotent progenitor
cells making it diﬃcult to locate and trace these cells in vivo (Caplan
and Correa, 2011; Gökçinar-Yagci et al., 2015). Nevertheless, currently
available evidence indicates that a number of cell types participating in
digit regeneration are lineage restricted.
3.2. Ear pinna regeneration
The regeneration of holes made through the ear pinna has long
been recognized as another example of epimorphic regeneration in
mammals (Goss and Grimes, 1972; Vorontsova and Liosner, 1960).
The external ear pinna is a complex organ comprised of skin, adipose
tissue, skeletal muscle, vasculature, nerves, and elastic cartilage
(Fig. 3A-B). In some species, a complete hole punched through the
pinna removes portions of all of these structures and initiates a
regenerative response (Fig. 3C-E). The phenomenon was ﬁrst reported
in 1953 with the observation that 1 cm holes made in rabbit ears
completely closed with new tissue including new hair follicles, skin and
cartilage (Markelova cited by Vorontsova and Liosner (1960)). Ensuing
investigations in the rabbit ear extended these observations and
provided evidence that the type of epidermis (i.e., abdominal vs. ear)
and presence of auricular cartilage were required for successful
regeneration (Goss and Grimes, 1972; Grimes and Goss, 1972;
Joseph
and
Dyson,
1966;
Williams-Boyce
and
Daniel,
1980).
Interestingly, semicircular wounds or notches made at the edges of
the ear were reported to initiate, but not complete regeneration
(Williams-Boyce and Daniel, 1980). More recently, work with two
species of wild African spiny mouse (Acomys kempi and A. percivali)
led to the discovery that these rodents could regenerate 4 mm holes in
the ear pinna (Seifert et al., 2012) and subsequent research extended
these ﬁndings to include another species, A. cahirinus (Gawriluk et al.,
2016; Matias et al., 2015). Comprehensive studies in spiny mice and
rabbits have detailed the regeneration of full-thickness skin, hair
follicles, glands, adipose tissue, elastic cartilage, and to a limited
degree, muscle ﬁbers (Fig. 3E) (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Joseph and
Dyson, 1966; Matias et al., 2015). That some species can regenerate ear
holes while others cannot make this model of epimorphic regeneration
attractive to uncover mechanisms that stimulate blastema formation
and diﬀerentiate a regenerative or ﬁbrotic response to injury.
Superﬁcially, the regenerative response follows the stereotypical
pattern observed during other examples of vertebrate appendage
regeneration. The initial trauma stimulates an injury response that
recruits neutrophils and monocytes to the injury site, while the
hemostatic response contributes to scab formation (Simkin et al.,
2017). Shortly thereafter, wound edge keratinocytes are stimulated to
migrate beneath the scab and re-epithelialize the injury (Gawriluk
et al., 2016; Joseph and Dyson, 1966; Seifert et al., 2012). Once the
epidermal barrier is restored, cells begin to accumulate centripetally
beneath the neoepidermis and as this accumulation continues a
regeneration blastema forms (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Joseph and
Dyson, 1966). Cell cycle re-entry, progression and proliferation are
observed in blastemal cells and a small group of epidermal cells at the
proximal wound margins (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Seifert et al., 2012). As
the ear hole is progressively ﬁlled, new tissue growth preferentially
occurs in the proximal portion of the hole (Fig. 3C-C′) and new tissue
growth is coincident with axon regeneration (Gawriluk et al., 2016) and
angiogenesis (Joseph and Dyson, 1966; Matias et al., 2015). Re-
diﬀerentiation of new tissues occurs outside to inside such that new
hair follicles and cartilage form nearer to the wound margin before they
appear in the center (Fig. 3C-D′) (Joseph and Dyson, 1966; Seifert
et al., 2012). Hair follicle regeneration in spiny mice is visible twenty
days post injury. As new tissue forms to close spiny mouse ear holes,
elastic cartilage regeneration occurs at two positions. Similar to
fracture healing, a callous forms at the cut end of the cartilage sheet
and this appears to contribute some portion of the new cartilage.
However, the majority of the new cartilage appears to emerge de novo
from mesenchymal condensations within the new tissue (Seifert et al.,
2012). Eventually, new tissue completely ﬁlls the hole and cellular
diﬀerentiation restores the excised tissue. These interconnected and
overlapping processes together constitute regeneration of a complex
musculoskeletal structure. Importantly, provided holes larger than
2 mm are made through the pinna, epimorphic regeneration of ear
holes can be diﬀerentiated from ﬁbrosis-driven partial ear hole closure
observed in other rodents and laboratory mouse strains (Gawriluk
et al., 2016).
Whereas the digit tip provides a model to study regenerative
success and failure in the same organ (e.g., successful regeneration in
P3 versus regenerative failure in P2), the ear hole model of epimorphic
regeneration exploits interspecies variation in regenerative ability. In
contrast to regeneration observed in rabbits and spiny mice, broad
phylogenetic sampling shows that the ability to regenerate ear holes is
restricted among mammals (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Goss, 1980;
Williams-Boyce and Daniel, 1986). Ear hole regeneration may extend
to chinchillas, pikas and cats, but other rodents so far studied are
unable to regenerate ear holes. This raises the question as to how
regeneration occurs in some mammalian species? With the discovery of
regeneration in spiny mice, one approach has been to compare the
regenerative response of the ear pinna to ﬁbrotic repair of the same
injury in other rodents. Comparing spiny mice to outbred Mus
musculus showed that formation and persistence of a blastema during
healing distinguishes the regenerative response from a scarring re-
sponse (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Seifert et al., 2012). This distinction
provides an opportunity to characterize a mammalian blastema and
tease apart cellular and molecular processes that operate during these
diﬀerential responses to injury.
Careful analysis of tissue regeneration in spiny mice has begun to
help deﬁne cellular and molecular features of the ear blastema
(Gawriluk et al., 2016; Matias et al., 2015; Seifert et al., 2012;
Simkin et al., 2017). As indicated above, a key characteristic of the
blastema is its epidermal compartment, the wound epidermis, which
forms following re-epithelialization. As mesenchymal cells accumulate
beneath the epidermis distal to the cut cartilage, epidermal cell
proliferation is excluded from the wound epidermis and maintained
in a small group of wound edge keratinocytes (Gawriluk et al., 2016).
Basal keratinocytes in this distal epidermis maintain a circular
morphology rather than assume the columnar morphology typical of
normal stratiﬁed epidermis and the distal epidermis observed in mice
during scarring. Importantly, keratin 17 is upregulated in the wound
epidermis and expressed until the ear hole is ﬁlled with new tissue, a
situation that does not occur during scarring where keratin 17
expression disappears by D15 post injury (Gawriluk et al., 2016).
These features are coincident with a failure to reconstitute the lamina
densa beneath the distal epidermis until hole closure is complete
(Gawriluk et al., 2016; Seifert et al., 2012). Together, these features
characterize the unique epidermal compartment of the blastema which
persists until hole closure is completed and the circular blastema
A.W. Seifert, K. Muneoka
Developmental Biology 433 (2018) 190–199
195

disappears. Further molecular characterization of the wound epidermis
in spiny mice and other vertebrates will help reﬁne our understanding
of how this compartment regulates blastema formation and regenera-
tion.
Cells accumulating beneath the wound epidermis constitute the
mesenchymal compartment of the blastema, and another salient
feature of the blastema is the unique composition of the extracellular
matrix (ECM) that supports speciﬁc activities of blastemal cells during
morphogenesis. Fibrotic ECM is dominated by collagen with a ratio
favoring collagen 1 > collagen 3 (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Lo et al., 2012;
Marrero et al., 2017; Seifert and Maden, 2014; Simkin et al., 2015b).
Analysis of blastema ECM in comparison to matrix composition during
ﬁbrotic healing revealed a profound diﬀerence in the extracellular
environment (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Seifert et al., 2012). While collagen
1 was produced during mammalian regeneration, it comprised only a
small fraction of the blastemal ECM, which was instead dominated by
ﬁbronectin and tenascin-C among other matrix proteins (Gawriluk
et al., 2016). Fibronectin and tenascin-C promote cell migration and
proliferation, two cellular attributes required for morphogenesis during
regeneration. Beyond the capacity of ECM proteins to physically
interact with cells and stimulate behavior, the ECM also acts as a
reservoir for growth factors, cytokines and signaling molecules.
Although more work is required to fully characterize the blastemal
ECM in spiny mice, work across regenerating vertebrates strongly
supports ECM composition as a key marker of a regeneration blastema
(Calve et al., 2010; Gawriluk et al., 2016; Marrero et al., 2017; Onda
et al., 1991; Satoh et al., 2012; Seifert et al., 2012; Tassava et al., 1996).
While comparative transcriptomics may suggest that the blastema
extracellular
environment
has
a
unique
molecular
signature
(Gawriluk et al., 2016), the extent to which known and novel matrix
molecules are functionally required for blastema formation and
morphogenesis awaits testing.
Epimorphic regeneration in an adult occurs in the context of a fully
diﬀerentiated and operational immune system. Prior to blastema
formation, local injury elicits an immune response. Although innate
and adaptive immune defenses occur in both scarring and regenerating
systems, recent work from mammals and other vertebrates suggests
that aspects of these responses may positively regulate a regenerative
response (Gauron et al., 2013; Godwin et al., 2013; Lai et al., 2017;
Love et al., 2013; Petrie et al., 2014; Simkin et al., 2017). Comparing
the inﬂammatory response during regeneration and scarring in spiny
mice revealed that reactive oxygen species produced by NAPDH-
oxidase at the injury site were signiﬁcantly elevated during regenera-
tion and these molecules persisted in elevated amounts during
blastema formation (Simkin et al., 2017). This mirrors a proposed role
for reactive oxygen species during tail regeneration in Xenopus and
Fig. 3. 4 mm ear punch assay and epimorphic regeneration in the spiny mouse Acomys cahirinus. (A) Position of a normal ear punch in an adult spiny mouse relative to the ear pinna
along the proximodistal (p/d) axis. (B) Masson's Trichrome stained tissue section of an uninjured spiny mouse ear pinna indicating: epidermis (e), dermis (d), adipose tissue (ad),
skeletal muscle (m), and elastic cartilage (c). Hair follicles and sebaceous glands are visible in the dorsal and ventral skin. Scale bar = 50 µm. (C-D) Whole mount images of regenerating
ear holes at D30 (C) and D40 (D) post injury along the proximodistal (p/d) axis. In regenerating ears growth is biased to the proximal part of the hole. White circles indicate original
4 mm punch. (C′-D′) Sections through C and D showing the regeneration blastema (C′) and ear hole closure (D′). New hair follicles, dermis, adipose tissue and cartilage are visible at
D40. Cartoon at right in C′ shows how tissue sections are collected. (E) A regenerated ear hole in Acomys cahirinus at D85 showing complete regeneration along the proximodistal and
dorsoventral axes. New muscle ﬁbers are visible past the proximal amputation plane. Dotted black lines indicate the injury place (C′-E). Image in E modiﬁed slightly from Gawriluk et al.
(2016).
A.W. Seifert, K. Muneoka
Developmental Biology 433 (2018) 190–199
196

zebraﬁsh (Gauron et al., 2013; Love et al., 2013) and brain regenera-
tion in newts (Hameed et al., 2015). Macrophages are a key regulator of
the local immune response and vertebrate studies suggests that they
control inﬂammation, ﬁbrosis and blastema formation during regen-
eration (Godwin et al., 2013; Petrie et al., 2014; Simkin et al., 2017).
Depleting macrophages during normal ﬁbrotic wound healing demon-
strated they control the rate of re-epithelialization, ﬁbrosis and cell
proliferation (Leibovich and Ross, 1975; Mirza et al., 2009). Similarly,
macrophages inﬁltrate the ear pinna and are present during regenera-
tion and scarring. Depleting macrophages in the ear pinna prior to and
during injury demonstrated a functional requirement for these cells
during ear hole regeneration (Simkin et al., 2017). Interestingly,
depleting macrophages delayed re-epithelialization and inhibited blas-
tema formation, and when macrophages were allowed to inﬁltrate the
ear pinna a blastema formed and regeneration ensued. Beyond the
assessment that macrophages are generally required for epimorphic
regeneration, some evidence suggests speciﬁc macrophage subtypes
may diﬀerentially regulate this response to injury (Mescher, 2017;
Simkin et al., 2017). Interestingly, when macrophage subtypes were
analyzed during spiny mouse ear hole regeneration, classically acti-
vated (M1) macrophages were largely absent from the blastema
(Simkin et al., 2017). This study left open whether the blastema
triggered macrophage phenotype switching or instead certain subtypes
were restricted from inﬁltrating the blastema. Further studies will need
to determine the importance of particular macrophage subtypes and
the extent to which these subtypes may regulate blastema formation
either by directly stimulating local ﬁbroblasts or indirectly by polariz-
ing the immune response.
The identity and plasticity of progenitor cells that form the ear
blastema is currently unknown. The mesenchymal compartment of the
ear pinna develops entirely from Hoxa2-expressing cranial neural crest of
the second pharyngeal arch, whereas the epidermal compartment is
derived from ectoderm (Minoux et al., 2013). Whereas subsequent
diﬀerentiation of these neural crest progenitors during external ear
development is less well understood, Hoxa2 regulates BMP signaling,
speciﬁcally Bmp5 and Bmp4, during cartilage development in the pinna
(Minoux et al., 2013). While the prevailing view of the cellular contribu-
tion to the blastema is that lineage restricted cells will supply progenitors
to a heterogeneous pool that will expand and diﬀerentiate into speciﬁc
tissue subsets, what remains unknown is the degree to which lineage
restriction applies to local cells that contribute to the ear blastema. For
instance, if the shared cranial crest cell origin of all non-epidermal tissue
structures in the ear pinna sets the plasticity limit during regeneration,
then in theory, the pool of available cells for regeneration would extend to
all mesenchymal cells of the ear. Similarly, if regeneration in the ear is
dependent on reserves of adult stem cells rather than some form of de-
diﬀerentiation then fewer populations would be necessary to replace all
the missing tissues in the ear. A diﬀerent question is whether the
appropriate cells are present for regeneration, but they are simply unable
to form a blastema. In this scenario, heterogeneous blastemal cells that
normally contribute to regeneration in spiny mice are resistant to cell
cycle re-entry, progression and division in non-regenerating mammals.
Evidence to support the latter comes from research showing that while the
number of Ki67+ cells in the ear during regeneration and scarring is
similar, cell cycle progression and division is rarely observed during
scarring (Gawriluk et al., 2016). This result was partly attributed to the
observation that p21 and p27 were found throughout cell nuclei during
scarring, but were absent from the blastema during regeneration.
Importantly, the blastema in spiny mice was signiﬁcantly enriched with
markers for the G1/S transition (pRb), DNA replication (EdU) and
mitosis (PHH3) which diﬀerentiated blastema cells from cells present
during ﬁbrotic healing in lab mice (Gawriluk et al., 2016). Understanding
whether or not cell proliferation occurs in response to speciﬁc paracrine
signals or results from an intrinsic ability to undergo cell cycle progression
will be vital in discovering how spiny mice form an ear blastema and
undergo regeneration.
4. Conclusions: expanding the limits of regeneration
The continued study of epimorphic regeneration in mammals has
much to add to our understanding of vertebrate regeneration
biology. The ear hole model discussed above provides an experi-
mental system to uncover key mechanisms that explain diﬀerences
in regenerative ability across mammalian species. When applied
more broadly, it may also help identify additional mammalian
species that possess enhanced regenerative ability. As a comparative
system between regenerating and non-regenerating species, the ear
punch assay will reveal whether speciﬁc molecules or pathways can
serve as early indicators for blastema formation and which factors
alone or in combination are required to maintain blastema morpho-
genesis. This will be necessary if we hope to uncover potential
targets that might be used to stimulate regeneration. In this light,
both the ear hole and digit tip models oﬀer an added translational
perspective to the biology of regeneration. In digit studies, amputa-
tion of the mouse P2 digit has become a useful regeneration
incompetent model to test strategies for inducing a regeneration
response (Dawson et al., 2016). BMP signaling has been shown to be
important for digit tip regeneration (Yu et al., 2010) and digit
amputation at a P2 level is stimulated to regenerate a patterned
response by targeted BMP2 treatment in both neonates and adult
mice (Dawson et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2012). The BMP2 response
indirectly induces the recruitment of cells to the amputation wound
by activating CXCL12 production (Lee et al., 2013) and BMP2
functions as a mitogen for chondrocytes that establish an endochon-
dral ossiﬁcation center at the amputation wound (Dawson et al.,
2017; Yu et al., 2012). Once formed, the induced endochondral
ossiﬁcation center organizes the morphogenesis of new distal
skeletal tissue that replaces the amputated P2 bone. These studies
provide proof of concept that a regenerative response can be
stimulated at a regeneration incompetent amputation wound, and
when combined with results from the ear leads to two important
conclusions. First, progenitor cell availability is not a limiting factor
at a mammalian amputation injury. Indeed, it seems unlikely that
diﬀerent progenitor cell populations would be present in the second
and third phalanx of the digit or in the ear pinna from diﬀerent
rodent species. Second, limitation of the wound microenvironment
to activate progenitor cells is in part responsible for regenerative
failure. How exactly this activation is controlled remains the focus of
current and future investigations. As studies using mammalian
regeneration models progress they will continue providing insight
into how injured tissue can be transformed into a regeneration
blastema and how blastemal morphogenesis is controlled to appro-
priately replace injured tissue in situ. This will require dissecting
components of the blastema to uncover new characteristics or
markers that can indicate when these two transformations take
place and using these markers to test approaches at successfully
stimulating regeneration where it does not normally occur.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Jennifer Simkin and two anonymous
reviewers for comments and critical reading of the manuscript and
Ricardo Zayas and Karen Echeverri for soliciting our review. A.W.
Seifert is supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the
Oﬃce
for
International
Science
and
Engineering
(OISE)
(IOS
-1353713)
and
the
National
Institute
of
Arthritis
and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS – NIH) (R01AR070313).
K. Muneoka is supported by Texas A & M University.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
A.W. Seifert, K. Muneoka
Developmental Biology 433 (2018) 190–199
197

References
Calve, S., Odelberg, S.J., Simon, H.G., 2010. A transitional extracellular matrix instructs
cell behavior during muscle regeneration. Dev. Biol. 344, 259–271.
Calve, S., Simon, H.-G., 2012. Biochemical and mechanical environment cooperatively
regulate skeletal muscle regeneration. FASEB J. 26, 2538–2545.
Caplan, A.I., Correa, D., 2011. The MSC: an injury drugstore. Cell stem Cell 9, 11–15.
Carlson, B.M., 1974. Morphogenetic interactions between rotated skin cuﬀs and
underlying stump tissues in regenerating axolotl forelimbs. Dev. Biol. 39, 263–285.
Chen, X., Wang, Z., Duan, N., Zhu, G., Schwarz, E.M., Xie, C., 2017. Osteoblast-osteoclast
interactions. Connect Tissue Res., 1–9.
Cook, A.B., Seifert, A.W., 2016. Beryllium nitrate inhibits ﬁbroblast migration to disrupt
epimorphic regeneration. Development 143, 3491–3505.
Dawson, L.A., Simkin, J., Sauque, M., Pela, M., Palkowski, T., Muneoka, K., 2016.
Analogous cellular contribution and healing mechanisms following digit amputaton
and phalangeal fracture in mice. Regeneration 3, 13.
Dawson, L.A., Yu, L., Yan, M., Marrero, L., Schanes, P.P., Dolan, C., Pela, M., Peterson,
B., Han, M., Muneoka, K., 2017. The periosteal requirement and temporal dynamics
of BMP2-induced middle phalanx regeneration in the adult mouse. Regeneration, 4.
DiPietro, L.A., 2016. Angiogenesis and wound repair: when enough is enough. J. Leukoc.
Biol. 100, 979–984.
Driskell, R.R., Lichtenberger, B.M., Hoste, E., Kretzschmar, K., Simons, B.D.,
Charalambous, M., Ferron, S.R., Herault, Y., Pavlovic, G., Ferguson-Smith, A.C.,
Watt, F.M., 2013. Distinct ﬁbroblast lineages determine dermal architecture in skin
development and repair. Nature 504, 277–281.
Dunis, D.A., Namenwirth, M., 1977. The role of grafted skin in the regeneration of x-
irradiated axolotl limbs. Dev. Biol. 56, 97–109.
Endo, T., Bryant, S.V., Gardiner, D.M., 2004. A stepwise model system for limb
regeneration. Dev. Biol. 270, 135–145.
Farkas, J.E., Freitas, P.D., Bryant, D.M., Whited, J.L., Monaghan, J.R., 2016.
Neuregulin-1 signaling is essential for nerve-dependent axolotl limb regeneration.
Development 143, 2724–2731.
Fernando, W.A., Leininger, E., Simkin, J., Li, N., Malcom, C.A., Sathyamoorthi, S., Han,
M., Muneoka, K., 2011. Wound healing and blastema formation in regenerating digit
tips of adult mice. Dev. Biol. 350, 301–310.
Gauron, C., Rampon, C., Bouzaﬀour, M., Ipendey, E., Teillon, J., Volovitch, M., Vriz, S.,
2013. Sustained production of ROS triggers compensatory proliferation and is
required for regeneration to proceed. Sci. Rep. 3, 2084.
Gawriluk, T.R., Simkin, J., Thompson, K.L., Biswas, S.K., Clare-Salzler, Z., Kimani, J.M.,
Kiama, S.G., Smith, J.J., Ezenwa, V.O., Seifert, A.W., 2016. Comparative analysis of
ear-hole closure identiﬁes epimorphic regeneration as a discrete trait in mammals.
Nat. Commun. 7, 11164.
Globus, M., Vethamany-Globus, S., Kesik, A., 1987. Control of blastema cell proliferation
by possible interplay of calcium and cyclic nucleotides during newt limb
regeneration. Diﬀerentiation 35, 94–99.
Globus, M., Vethamany-Globus, S., Lee, Y.C., 1980a. Eﬀect of apical epidermal cap on
mitotic cycle and cartilage diﬀerentiation in regeneration blastemata in the newt,
Notophthalmus viridescens. Dev. Biol. 75, 358–372.
Globus, M., Vethamany-Globus, S., Lee, Y.C.I., 1980b. Eﬀect of apical epidermal cap on
mitotic cycle and cartilage diﬀerentiation in regeneration blastemata in the newt,
Notophthalmus viridescens. Dev. Biol. 75, 358–372.
Godwin, J.W., Pinto, A.R., Rosenthal, N.A., 2013. Macrophages are required for adult
salamander limb regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 9415–9420.
Gökçinar-Yagci, B., Uçkan-Çetinkaya, D., Çelebi-Saltik, B., 2015. Pericytes: properties,
functions and applications in tissue engineering. Stem Cell Rev. Rep. 11, 549–559.
Goss, R.J., 1969. Principles of Regeneration. Academic Press, New York.
Goss, R.J., 1980. Prospects for regeneration in man. Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 151,
270–282.
Goss, R.J., Grimes, L.N., 1972. Tissue interactions in regeneration of rabbit ear holes.
Am. Zool. 12, 151–157.
Grimes, L.N., Goss, R.J., 1972. Morphogenetic inﬂuence of cartilage in regenerating
rabbit ear holes. Am. Zool. 12, 708–709.
Hameed, L.S., Berg, D.A., Belnoue, L., Jensen, L.D., Cao, Y., Simon, A., 2015.
Environmental changes in oxygen tension reveal ROS-dependent neurogenesis and
regeneration in the adult newt brain. Elife, 4.
Han, M.J., An, J.Y., Kim, W.S., 2001. Expression patterns of Fgf-8 during development
and limb regeneration of the axolotl. Dev. Dyn. 220, 40–48.
Han, M., Yang, X., Lee, J., Allan, C.H., Muneoka, K., 2008. Development and
regeneration of the neonatal digit tip in mice. Dev. Biol. 315, 125–135.
Hay, E.D., Fischman, D.A., 1961. Origin of the blastema in regenerating limbs of the
newt Triturus viridescens. An autoradiographic study using tritiated thymidine to
follow cell proliferation and migration. Dev. Biol. 3, 26–59.
Illingworth, C.M., 1974. Trapped ﬁngers and amputated ﬁnger tips in children. J.
Pediatr. Surg. 9, 853–858.
Johnston, A.P., Yuzwa, S.A., Carr, M.J., Mahmud, N., Storer, M.A., Krause, M.P., Jones,
K., Paul, S., Kaplan, D.R., Miller, F.D., 2016. Dediﬀerentiated schwann cell
precursors secreting paracrine factors are required for regeneration of the
mammalian digit tip. Cell Stem Cell 19, 433–448.
Joseph, J., Dyson, M., 1966. Tissue replacement in the rabbit's ear. Br. J. Surg. 53,
372–380.
Katakai, T., Suto, H., Sugai, M., Gonda, H., Togawa, A., Suematsu, S., Ebisuno, Y.,
Katagiri, K., Kinashi, T., Shimizu, A., 2008. Organizer-like reticular stromal cell layer
common to adult secondary lymphoid organs. J. Immunol. 181, 6189–6200.
Kierdorf, U., Kierdorf, H., Szuwart, T., 2007. Deer antler regeneration: cells, concepts,
and controversies. J. Morphol. 268, 726–738.
Kierdorf, U., Li, C., Price, J.S., 2009. Improbable appendages: deer antler renewal as a
unique case of mammalian regeneration. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 20, 535–542.
Knopf, F., Hammond, C., Chekuru, A., Kurth, T., Hans, S., Weber, C.W., Mahatma, G.,
Fisher, S., Brand, M., Schulte-Merker, S., Weidinger, G., 2011. Bone regenerates via
dediﬀerentiation of osteoblasts in the zebraﬁsh ﬁn. Dev. Cell 20, 713–724.
Kragl, M., Knapp, D., Nacu, E., Khattak, S., Maden, M., Epperlein, H.H., Tanaka, E.M.,
2009. Cells keep a memory of their tissue origin during axolotl limb regeneration.
Nature 460, 60–65.
Kumar, A., Godwin, J.W., Gates, P.B., Garza-Garcia, A.A., Brockes, J.P., 2007. Molecular
basis for the nerve dependence of limb regeneration in an adult vertebrate. Science
318, 772–777.
Lai, S.L., Marin-Juez, R., Moura, P.L., Kuenne, C., Lai, J.K.H., Tsedeke, A.T., Guenther,
S., Looso, M., Stainier, D.Y., 2017. Reciprocal analyses in zebraﬁsh and medaka
reveal that harnessing the immune response promotes cardiac regeneration. Elife, 6.
Lampiasi, N., Russo, R., Zito, F., 2016. The alternative faces of macrophage generate
osteoclasts. Biomed. Res. Int. 2016, 9089610.
Lee, J., Marrero, L., Yu, L., Dawson, L.A., Muneoka, K., Han, M., 2013. SDF-1alpha/
CXCR4 signaling mediates digit tip regeneration promoted by BMP-2. Dev. Biol. 382,
98–109.
Lehoczky, J.A., 2016. Are ﬁngernails a key to unlocking the puzzle of mammalian limb
regeneration? Exp. Dermatol..
Lehoczky, J.A., Robert, B., Tabin, C.J., 2011. Mouse digit tip regeneration is mediated by
fate-restricted progenitor cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 20609–20614.
Lehoczky, J.A., Tabin, C.J., 2015. Lgr6 marks nail stem cells and is required for digit tip
regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, 13249–13254.
Leibovich, S.J., Ross, R., 1975. The role of the macrophage in wound repair. A study with
hydrocortisone and antimacrophage serum. Am. J. Pathol. 78, 71–100.
Lheureux, E., 1975a. Nouvelles donnees sur les roles de la peau et des tissues internes
dans la regeneration du membre du triton Pleurodeles waltlii, Michah (amphibian
urodele). Wilhelm. Roux. Arch. 776, 285–301.
Lheureux, E., 1975b. Régénération des membres irradiés dePleurodeles waltlii Michah.
(Urodčle). Inﬂuence des qualités et orientations des greﬀons non irradies. Wilhelm.
Roux'Arch. Entwickl. Org. 176, 303–327.
Li, C., 2012. Deer antler regeneration: a stem cell-based epimorphic process. Birth
Defects Res. C Embryo Today 96, 51–62.
Lo, D.D., Zimmermann, A.S., Nauta, A., Longaker, M.T., Lorenz, H.P., 2012. Scarless
fetal skin wound healing update. Birth Defects Res. Part C: Embryo Today: Rev. 96,
237–247.
Love, N.R., Chen, Y., Ishibashi, S., Kritsiligkou, P., Lea, R., Koh, Y., Gallop, J.L., Dorey,
K., Amaya, E., 2013. Amputation-induced reactive oxygen species are required for
successful Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Nat. Cell Biol. 15, 222–228.
Mailman, M.L., Dresden, M.H., 1979. Denervation eﬀects on newt limb regeneration:
collagen and collagenase. Dev. Biol. 71, 60–70.
Marrero, L., Simkin, J., Sammarco, M.C., Muneoka, K., 2017. Fibroblast reticular cells
engineer a blastema extracellular network during digit tip regeneration in mice.
Regeneration 4, 16.
Matias, D.S., Martins, A.R., Casanellas, I., Ova, A.B., Araújo, I.M., Power, D., Tiscornia,
G., 2015. Ear wound regeneration in the African spiny mouse Acomys cahirinus.
Regeneration.
Mescher, A.L., 1996. The cellular basis of limb regeneration in urodeles. Int. J. Dev. Biol.
40, 785–795.
Mescher, A.L., 2017. Macrophages and ﬁbroblasts during inﬂammation and tissue repair
in models of organ regeneration. Regeneration, (n/a-n/a).
Mescher, A.L., Connell, E., Hsu, C., Patel, C., Overton, B., 1997. Transferrin is necessary
and suﬃcient for the neural eﬀect on growth in amphibian limb regeneration
blastemas. Dev. Growth Diﬀer. 39, 677–684.
Mescher, A.L., Neﬀ, A.W., 2005. Regenerative capacity and the developing immune
system. Adv. Biochem. Eng. Biotechnol. 93, 39–66.
Minoux, M., Kratochwil, C.F., Ducret, S., Amin, S., Kitazawa, T., Kurihara, H., Bobola, N.,
Vilain, N., Rijli, F.M., 2013. Mouse Hoxa2 mutations provide a model for microtia
and auricle duplication. Development 140, 4386–4397.
Mirza, R., DiPietro, L.A., Koh, T.J., 2009. Selective and speciﬁc macrophage ablation is
detrimental to wound healing in mice. Am. J. Pathol. 175, 2454–2462.
Monaghan, J.R., Maden, M., 2013. Cellular plasticity during vertebrate appendage
regeneration. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 367, 53–74.
Morgan, T.H., 1901. Regeneration. The Macmillan Company; Macmillan & Co., ltd., New
York, London.
Mullen, L.M., Bryant, S.V., Torok, M.A., Blumberg, B., Gardiner, D.M., 1996. Nerve
dependency of regeneration: the role of distal-less and FGF signaling in amphibian
limb regeneration. Development 122, 3487–3497.
Muneoka, K., Allan, C.H., Yang, X., Lee, J., Han, M., 2008. Mammalian regeneration and
regenerative medicine. Birth Defects Res. C Embryo Today 84, 265–280.
Muneoka, K., Fox, W.F., Bryant, S.V., 1986. Cellular contribution from dermis and
cartilage to the regenerating limb blastema in axolotls. Dev. Biol. 116, 256–260.
Neufeld, D.A., Day, F.A., 1996. Perspective: a suggested role for basement membrane
structures during newt limb regeneration. Anat. Rec. 246, 155–161.
Neufeld, D.A., Day, F.A., Settles, H.E., 1996. Stabilizing role of the basement membrane
and dermal ﬁbers during newt limb regeneration. Anat. Rec. 245, 122–127.
Neufeld, D.A., Zhao, W., 1995. Bone regrowth after digit tip amputation in mice is
equivalent in adults and neonates. Wound Repair Regen. 3, 461–466.
Onda, H., Poulin, M.L., Tassava, R.A., Chiu, I.M., 1991. Characterization of a newt
tenascin cDNA and localization of tenascin mRNA during newt limb regeneration by
in situ hybridization. Dev. Biol. 148, 219–232.
Peadon, A.M., Singer, M., 1966. The blood vessels of the regenerating limb of the adult
newt, Triturus. J. Morphol. 118, 79–89.
Petrie, T.A., Strand, N.S., Yang, C.T., Rabinowitz, J.S., Moon, R.T., 2014. Macrophages
A.W. Seifert, K. Muneoka
Developmental Biology 433 (2018) 190–199
198

modulate adult zebraﬁsh tail ﬁn regeneration. Development 141, 2581–2591.
Rinkevich, Y., Lindau, P., Ueno, H., Longaker, M.T., Weissman, I.L., 2011. Germ-layer
and lineage-restricted stem/progenitors regenerate the mouse digit tip. Nature 476,
409–413.
Rinkevich, Y., Walmsley, G.G., Hu, M.S., Maan, Z.N., Newman, A.M., Drukker, M.,
Januszyk, M., Krampitz, G.W., Gurtner, G.C., Lorenz, H.P., Weissman, I.L.,
Longaker, M.T., 2015. Skin ﬁbrosis. Identiﬁcation and isolation of a dermal lineage
with intrinsic ﬁbrogenic potential. Science 348, aaa2151.
Said, S., Parke, W., Neufeld, D.A., 2004. Vascular supplies diﬀer in regenerating and
nonregenerating amputated rodent digits. Anat. Rec. A Discov. Mol. Cell Evol. Biol.
278, 443–449.
Sammarco, M.C., Simkin, J., Cammack, A.J., Fassler, D., Gossmann, A., Marrero, L.,
Lacey, M., Van Meter, K., Muneoka, K., 2015. Hyperbaric oxygen promotes proximal
bone regeneration and organized collagen composition during digit regeneration.
PLoS One 10, e0140156.
Sammarco, M.C., Simkin, J., Fassler, D., Cammack, A.J., Wilson, A., Van Meter, K.,
Muneoka, K., 2014. Endogenous bone regeneration Is dependent Upon a dynamic
oxygen event. J. Bone Miner. Res..
Satoh, A., Graham, G.M., Bryant, S.V., Gardiner, D.M., 2008. Neurotrophic regulation of
epidermal dediﬀerentiation during wound healing and limb regeneration in the
axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum). Dev. Biol. 319, 321–335.
Satoh, A., Hirata, A., Makanae, A., 2012. Collagen reconstitution is inversely correlated
with induction of limb regeneration in Ambystoma mexicanum. Zool. Sci. 29,
191–197.
Seifert, A.W., Kiama, S.G., Seifert, M.G., Goheen, J.R., Palmer, T.M., Maden, M., 2012.
Skin shedding and tissue regeneration in African spiny mice (Acomys). Nature 489,
561–565.
Seifert, A.W., Maden, M., 2014. New insights into vertebrate skin regeneration. Int. Rev.
Cell Mol. Biol. 310, 129–169.
Simkin, J., Gawriluk, T.R., Gensel, J.C., Seifert, A.W., 2017. Macrophages are necessary
for epimorphic regeneration in African spiny mice. elife 6, e24623.
Simkin, J., Sammarco, M.C., Dawson, L.A., Schanes, P.P., Yu, L., Muneoka, K., 2015a.
The mammalian blastema: regeneration at our ﬁngertips. Regeneration 2, 13.
Simkin, J., Sammarco, M.C., Dawson, L.A., Tucker, C., Taylor, L.J., Van Meter, K.,
Muneoka, K., 2015b. Epidermal closure regulates histolysis during mammalian
(Mus) digit regeneration. Regeneration 2, 14.
Singer, M., 1952. The inﬂuence of the nerve in regeneration of the amphibian extremity.
Q. Rev. Biol. 27, 169–200.
Singh, B.N., Doyle, M.J., Weaver, C.V., Koyano-Nakagawa, N., Garry, D.J., 2012.
Hedgehog and Wnt coordinate signaling in myogenic progenitors and regulate limb
regeneration. Dev. Biol. 371, 23–34.
Stoick-Cooper, C.L., Moon, R.T., Weidinger, G., 2007. Advances in signaling in vertebrate
regeneration as a prelude to regenerative medicine. Genes Dev. 21, 1292–1315.
Sugiura, T., Wang, H., Barsacchi, R., Simon, A., Tanaka, E.M., 2016. MARCKS-like
protein is an initiating molecule in axolotl appendage regeneration. Nature.
Takeo, M., Chou, W.C., Sun, Q., Lee, W., Rabbani, P., Loomis, C., Taketo, M.M., Ito, M.,
2013. Wnt activation in nail epithelium couples nail growth to digit regeneration.
Nature 499, 228–232.
Takeo, M., Hale, C.S., Ito, M., 2016. Epithelium-derived Wnt ligands are essential for
maintenance of underlying digit bone. J. Investig. Dermatol. 136, 1355–1363.
Tank, P.W., Holder, N., 1979. The distribution of cells in the upper forelimb of the
axolotl, Ambystoma mexicanum. J. Exp. Zool. 209, 435–442.
Tassava, R., Mescher, A., 1975. The roles of injury, nerves, and the wound epidermis
during the initiation of amphibian limb regeneration. Diﬀerentiation 4, 23–24.
Tassava, R.A., Nace, J.D., Wei, Y., 1996. Extracellular matrix protein turnover during
salamander limb regeneration. Wound Repair Regen. 4, 75–81.
Thornton, C.S., 1957a. The eﬀect of apical cap removal on limb regeneration in
Amblystoma larvae. J. Exp. Zool. Part A: Ecol. Genet. Physiol. 134, 357–381.
Thornton, C.S., 1957b. The eﬀect of apical cap removal on limb regeneration in
Amblystoma larvae. J. Exp. Zool. 134, 357–381.
Thornton, C.S., 1960. Inﬂuence of an eccentric epidermal cap on limb regeneration in
Amblystoma larvae. Dev. Biol. 2, 551–569.
Thornton, C.S., Steen, T.P., 1962. Eccentric blastema formation in aneurogenic limbs of
Ambystoma larvae following epidermal cap deviation. Dev. Biol. 5, 328–343.
Thornton, C.S., Thornton, M.T., 1965. The regeneration of accessory limb parts following
epidermal cap transplantation in urodeles. Experientia 21, 146–148.
Tomlinson, B.L., Barger, P.M., 1987. A test of the punctuated-cycling hypothesis in
Ambystoma forelimb regenerates: the roles of animal size, limb innervation, and the
aneurogenic condition. Diﬀerentiation 35, 6–15.
Tu, S., Johnson, S.L., 2011. Fate restriction in the growing and regenerating zebraﬁsh ﬁn.
Dev. Cell 20, 725–732.
Vinarsky, V., Atkinson, D.L., Stevenson, T.J., Keating, M.T., Odelberg, S.J., 2005. Normal
newt limb regeneration requires matrix metalloproteinase function. Dev. Biol. 279,
86–98.
Vorontsova, M.A., Liosner, L.D., 1960. Asexual Propagation and Regeneration.
Pergamon Press, New York.
Wallace, H., 1981. Vertebrate Limb Regeneration. John Wiley and Sons.
Wietecha, M.S., Krol, M.J., Michalczyk, E.R., Chen, L., Gettins, P.G., DiPietro, L.A., 2015.
Pigment epithelium-derived factor as a multifunctional regulator of wound healing.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 309, H812–H826.
Williams-Boyce, P.K., Daniel, J.C., Jr., 1980. Regeneration of rabbit ear tissue. J. Exp.
Zool. 212, 243–253.
Williams-Boyce, P.K., Daniel, J.C., Jr., 1986. Comparison of ear tissue regeneration in
mammals. J. Anat. 149, 55–63.
Wu, C., Rankin, E.B., Castellini, L., Alcudia, J.F., LaGory, E.L., Andersen, R., Rhodes,
S.D., Wilson, T.L., Mohammad, K.S., Castillo, A.B., Guise, T.A., Schipani, E., Giaccia,
A.J., 2015. Oxygen-sensing PHDs regulate bone homeostasis through the
modulation of osteoprotegerin. Genes Dev. 29, 817–831.
Yu, L., Han, M., Yan, M., Lee, E.C., Lee, J., Muneoka, K., 2010. BMP signaling induces
digit regeneration in neonatal mice. Development 137, 551–559.
Yu, L., Han, M., Yan, M., Lee, J., Muneoka, K., 2012. BMP2 induces segment-speciﬁc
skeletal regeneration from digit and limb amputations by establishing a new
endochondral ossiﬁcation center. Dev. Biol. 372, 263–273.
Yu, L., Yan, M., Simkin, J., Ketcham, P.D., Leininger, E., Han, M., Muneoka, K., 2014.
Angiogenesis is inhibitory for mammalian digitregeneration. Regeneration 1, 33–46.
A.W. Seifert, K. Muneoka
Developmental Biology 433 (2018) 190–199
199

===== Shah2018_Cell_scTxEpendymalCellbrain =====
Matters Arising
Single-Cell Transcriptomics and Fate Mapping of
Ependymal Cells Reveals an Absence of Neural Stem
Cell Function
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d High-ﬁdelity genetic labeling and analysis of ependymal cells
in the adult V-SVZ
d Ependymal cells are transcriptionally distinct from neural
stem cells
d Ependymal cells express cilia genes (e.g., FoxJ1), not
angiogenic genes (e.g., Flt1)
d Ependymal cells don’t behave as neural stem cells or
progenitors in vitro or in vivo
Authors
Prajay T. Shah, Jo A. Stratton,
Morgan Gail Stykel, ..., Kathrin Koblinger,
Patrick J. Whelan, Jeff Biernaskie
Correspondence
jeff.biernaskie@ucalgary.ca
In Brief
Targeted labeling of ependymal cells in a
transgenic mouse model provides
insights into the molecular signature of
the ventricular-subventricular zone niche
but is not consistent with ependymal cell
neurogenic capacity at that site.
Shah et al., 2018, Cell 173, 1045–1057
May 3, 2018 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.063

Matters Arising
Single-Cell Transcriptomics and Fate Mapping
of Ependymal Cells Reveals an Absence
of Neural Stem Cell Function
Prajay T. Shah,1,2,4 Jo A. Stratton,1,2,3,4 Morgan Gail Stykel,2 Sepideh Abbasi,2 Sandeep Sharma,1,2 Kyle A. Mayr,1,2
Kathrin Koblinger,1,2 Patrick J. Whelan,1,2 and Jeff Biernaskie1,2,3,5,*
1Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 4N1, Canada
2Department of Comparative Biology and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 4N1,
Canada
3Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 4N1, Canada
4These authors contributed equally
5Lead Contact
*Correspondence: jeff.biernaskie@ucalgary.ca
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.063
SUMMARY
Ependymal cells are multi-ciliated cells that form the
brain’s ventricular epithelium and a niche for neural
stem cells (NSCs) in the ventricular-subventricular
zone (V-SVZ). In addition, ependymal cells are sug-
gested to be latent NSCs with a capacity to acquire
neurogenic function. This remains highly controver-
sial due to a lack of prospective in vivo labeling tech-
niques that can effectively distinguish ependymal
cells from neighboring V-SVZ NSCs. We describe a
transgenic system that allows for targeted labeling
of ependymal cells within the V-SVZ. Single-cell
RNA-seq revealed that ependymal cells are enriched
for cilia-related genes and share several stem-cell-
associated genes with neural stem or progenitors.
Under in vivo and in vitro neural-stem- or progeni-
tor-stimulating environments, ependymal cells failed
to demonstrate any suggestion of latent neural-
stem-cell function. These ﬁndings suggest remark-
able stability of ependymal cell function and provide
fundamental insights into the molecular signature of
the V-SVZ niche.
INTRODUCTION
The
ventricular-subventricular
zone
(V-SVZ)
of
the
adult
mammalian brain, lying adjacent to the lateral ventricles, con-
tains a cluster of stem cells that generates neurons, astrocytes,
and oligodendrocytes throughout development, which could be
directed to endogenously repair brain structures. The cytoarch-
itecture within the V-SVZ consists of a monolayer of ependymal
cells, GFAP+ve neural stem (type B) cells, transit amplifying pro-
genitors, and neuroblasts (Lim and Alvarez-Buylla, 2016). Two
characterized subpopulations of ependymal cells exist: most
prominently, multi-ciliated (E1) ependymal cells, but also a rare
subset of bi-ciliated (E2) ependymal cells (Mirzadeh et al.,
2008, 2017). Ependymal cells are a ciliated epithelial interface
between the brain parenchyma and ﬂuid-ﬁlled ventricles that
form the wall of the ventricular system and a niche for type B
neural stem cells (NSCs) in the V-SVZ (Lim and Alvarez-
Buylla, 2016).
Although it is well established that ‘‘sub-ependymal’’ GFAP+ve
type B cells are putative NSCs, the stem-cell-like plasticity of
ependymal cells has been contentiously debated (Carle´ n et al.,
2009; Luo et al., 2015). There is consensus that adult ependymal
cells are post-mitotic under homeostasis (Spassky et al., 2005).
However, ependymal cells may represent a population of
‘‘dormant’’ NSCs, which are maintained in a state of quiescence
via Notch signalling but convert to a neurogenic state in
response to certain stimuli such as local striatal injury or bFGF
and VEGF exposure (Carle´ n et al., 2009; Luo et al., 2015). Indeed,
a number of mature tissue-resident cells have been shown to
acquire alternative fates following stimuli such as injury (Kopp
et al., 2016; Magnusson et al., 2014; Merrell and Stanger,
2016). If ependymal cells could be coaxed to acquire alternative
fates, this may hold signiﬁcant clinical potential given that epen-
dymal cells greatly outnumber type B NSCs (Mirzadeh et al.,
2008) and populate the entirety of the brain’s ventricular system,
making them easily accessible for therapeutic activation.
However, any bona ﬁde neurogenic ability of ependymal cells
has remained contentious, since distinguishing ependymal cells
and type B NSCs (or their progenitor descendants) in vivo is difﬁ-
cult. In addition to both cells being derived from radial glia cells,
in the adult V-SVZ, these cells share numerous phenotypic
markers such as mCD24, Sox2, Nestin, and CD133 (Beckervor-
dersandforth et al., 2010; Doetsch et al., 2002; Merkle et al.,
2004; Spassky et al., 2005; Tavazoie et al., 2008). FACS puriﬁed
CD133+ve GFAPve cells from the V-SVZ have been deﬁned as
ependymal cells; however, this is not sufﬁcient, as other
GFAPve cells such as oligodendrocytes and circulating precur-
sors may also be captured (Beckervordersandforth et al., 2010;
Llorens-Bobadilla et al., 2015; Luo et al., 2015; Peichev et al.,
2000; Wu et al., 2014). The FoxJ1 promoter was originally used
for lineage tracing of V-SVZ ependymal cells, but it was found
to be also expressed in postnatal V-SVZ NSCs (Beckervorder-
sandforth et al., 2010; Carle´ n et al., 2009; Devaraju et al., 2013;
Jacquet et al., 2009, 2011; Paez-Gonzalez et al., 2011).
Cell 173, 1045–1057, May 3, 2018 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc.
1045

Ultimately, although several studies suggest that ependymal
cells contain stem cell properties, these conclusions have all
been confounded by the possibility of contaminant labeling of
non-ependymal NSCs in the V-SVZ. A key gap that remains to
be ﬁlled is a comprehensive understanding of ependymal cell
function and plasticity in the healthy and injured brain.
To directly assess the controversy surrounding the neuro-
genic capacity of ependymal cells, we developed a novel
transgenic mouse model for the widespread targeting of
ependymal cells at the exclusion of neural lineages within
the postnatal V-SVZ. Contradictory to recent suggestions
(Luo et al., 2015), we ﬁnd ependymal cells at large are Flt1,
FN1-negative and have a remarkable lack of stemness or
neurogenic capacity in vivo. We also ﬁnd that ependymal
cells have a distinct transcriptional signature, enriched for
cilia-related genes, despite sharing a number of stem-cell-
associated genes with neural stem and progenitor cells.
These ﬁndings suggest the remarkable stability of ependymal
cell function and provide fundamental insights into the molec-
ular signature of the V-SVZ niche.
RESULTS
Genetic Labelling of Ependymal Cells in the Brain Using
aSMACreERT2 Transgenic Mice
Actin and other cytoskeletal proteins are reported to be important
for the maturation and planar cell polarity development of V-SVZ
ependymal cells, so we ﬁrst examined whether they could be
used to distinguish ependymal cells from V-SVZ NSCs (Ohata
and Alvarez-Buylla, 2016). The alpha smooth muscle actin
(aSMA) driven CreERT2 transgenic ﬂuorescent labeling system
(aSMACreERT2::ROSA26eYFPor aSMACreERT2::ROSA26tdTomato;
referred to as aSMA::R26) has been previously characterized to
study hair follicles and smooth muscle cells (Moiseenko et al.,
2017; Rahmani et al., 2014). We found that postnatal (P40/41)
tamoxifen-induced recombination (Figure 1A) in the aSMA::R26
system resulted in labeling of cells directly lining the walls of the
lateral ventricles of the brain (Figure 1B). As suggestive of mature
ependymal cells, these cells were multi-ciliated and expressed
acetylated-Tubulin, CD133 (Prominin1), and FoxJ1 (Figures
1C–1E). All recombined cells along the ventricular wall were
CD133+ve, and 71.4% ± 4.9% of CD133+ve cells lining the wall
were recombined (n = 3 mice). ‘‘En-face’’ analysis of b-catenin-
immunostained whole mounts demonstrated that recombined
cellsappearedinpin-wheelorganizations,asexpectedofependy-
mal cells (Mirzadeh et al., 2008). There was an absence of reporter
labeling in the center of pinwheels where type B NSCs make
ventricular contact (Figure 1F). In addition, we also observed
recombined ependymal cells extending a single, long process
along the ventricular wall (Figure 1G). To further deﬁne the identity
of aSMA::R26 recombined cells lining the wall, we performed co-
localization studies using a battery of V-SVZ cell-identity markers.
Asexpectedofependymal cells,recombinedcellsalsoco-labeled
with Sox2 and Nestin (Figures 1H and 1I) (Tavazoie et al., 2008)
along with several sub-ependymal cells. Importantly, cells marked
by aSMA::R26 in the V-SVZ did not exhibit astrocytic morphology,
showing only rare co-expression of GFAP (GFAP+ve: 5/159 cells, n
= 6 mice,Figure1J)yetwerecloselyassociatedwithGFAP+vesub-
ependymal cells and were non-proliferative, as evidenced by an
absenceofKi67staining(Ki67+ve:0/47cells,n=3mice;Figure1K).
As expected of the aSMA promoter, other recombined cells iden-
tiﬁed throughout the brain were from mural cells, including smooth
muscle cells associated with CD31+ve blood vessels and a previ-
ously described rare population of integrin a9+ve densely ﬁbrous
putative pericyte-precursors (Figures S1A and S1B; Sharma
et al., 2012). Critically, after 2–5 months of fate mapping, we found
no evidence of recombined cell contribution to olfactory bulb neu-
rogenesis (0 cells, n = 5 mice, Figure 1N).
We next wanted to understand the time course of genetic
targeting of ependymal cells in aSMA::R26 mice. Ependymal
cell or type B NSC fate in radial glia is determined largely by
embryonic day (E) 15.5 (Fuentealba et al., 2015; Spassky
et al., 2005). Intriguingly, tamoxifen administration at E17 did
not label any cells along the ventricular lining despite success-
ful recombination in vascular cells (Figure 1M); however, induc-
tion at P3+4 marked a subset of cells lining the ventricles by P8
(Figure 1N). We found examples of both ciliated and un-ciliated
cells, with some extending a single, deprecated radial-glia-like
process away from the V-SVZ. Fate mapping of these cells into
adulthood (up to 5 months later) demonstrated labeling of
multi-ciliated ependymal cells in the V-SVZ (Figure 1N’) and
no labeling of astrocytic or neural progenitor cells. Moreover,
induction at P3+4 resulted in a pattern of labeling closely re-
ﬂecting previously described rostro-caudal and dorso-ventral
pattern of ependymal cell maturation (Figure 1N’’, Spassky
et al., 2005). This suggests that aSMA::R26 is activated in
immature, yet committed, ependymal cells on their way to fully
mature into ependymal cells.
Adult Ependymal Cells Do Not Survive or Proliferate
In Vitro under Pro-growth Conditions
Like NSCs, it has been suggested that V-SVZ ependymal cells
can form clonal colonies under neurosphere growth conditions
(Coskun et al., 2008). To test the in vitro colony forming capabil-
ities of ependymal cells, we FACS collected aSMA::eYFP+ve
cells
and
aSMA::eYFPve
cells
from
the
microdissected
adult V-SVZ and plated them in parallel under various NSC
growth conditions (Figure 2A). Within 1 week, we observed
robust colony formation in aSMA::eYFPve cell cultures, but
aSMA::eYFP+ve cell cultures showed no proliferative capacity
for up to 2 weeks of culture (Figures 2B and 2C). These cells
failed to proliferate when grown in the presence of FGF2+EGF
or VEGF+FGF2+EGF, as well as in co-culture with E13 NSCs
or with conditioned media collected from E13 neurosphere
cultures (Figure 2C). To exclude the likely contamination of
aSMA::eYFP+ve non-ependymal cells (e.g. mural cells), we
developed a double-transgenic reporter system using Sox2-
eGFP transgenic reporter mice, which reports Sox2 expression
in the V-SVZ and throughout the adult brain and spinal cord (Ferri
et al., 2004; Suh et al., 2007), as well as in 83.4% ± 2.2% (n = 3
mice)
of
aSMA::R26
ependymal
cells
in
the
V-SVZ.
In
aSMACreERT2::ROSA26tdTomato/Sox2GFP
double-transgenic
mice, GFP expression could be used to distinguish between
Sox2ve mural cells and Sox2+ve ependymal cells. We compared
cells from the microdissected V-SVZ (rich in ependymal cells)
and neocortex to conﬁrm that aSMA::tdTomato+ve cells from
1046
Cell 173, 1045–1057, May 3, 2018

the neocortex were Sox2ve, whereas aSMA::tdTomato+ve cells
from the V-SVZ were both Sox2ve and Sox2+ve (Figure 2D).
aSMA::tdTomato+ve Sox2-GFP+ve cells from the V-SVZ often
had multiple cilia (Figure 2E) and exhibited motile behavior that
is characteristic of ependymal cells in culture (Laywell et al.,
2000), neither of which were observed in cells from cortical
isolates,
V-SVZ-derived
aSMA::tdTomato+ve
Sox2-GFPve
cells, or V-SVZ-derived aSMA::tdTomatove Sox2-GFP+ve cells.
Instead, V-SVZ-derived aSMA::tdTomatove Sox2-GFP+ve cells
grew spheres by 1 week (Figure 2E). As suggested previously
(Doetsch et al., 1999), aSMA::tdTomato+ve Sox2-GFP+ve ependy-
mal cells did not survive in vitro (0/600 cells, n = 3 independent
Figure 1. aSMACreERT2 Marks Forebrain
Ependymal Cells, Allowing for Inducible Tar-
geting of Subventricular Zone Ependymal
Cells in Adult Mice
(A and B) In adult aSMACreERT2::ROSA26eYFP or
::ROSA26tdTOMATO mice (aSMA::R26), tamoxifen
induces targeted expression of reporter proteins
(green) in cells lining the lateral ventricles.
(C–E) High-magniﬁcation images of recombined
cells with acetylated-tubulin (Acety-tub, red, C),
CD133 (red, D), and FoxJ1 (red, E) co-immunore-
activity (arrowheads).
(F and G) Representative en-face immunoﬂuores-
cence images of the lateral wall in the V-SVZ. Re-
combined cells often formed pinwheel formations
(b-cat, red, F), where central cells within these
formations were unlabeled (arrows). We observed
a distinct subpopulation of recombined cells
characterized by a single, long process extending
along the ventricular wall (arrowheads, G).
(H and I) Colocalization of Sox2 (red, H) and
Nestin (red, I) immunoreactivity (arrowheads) in
recombined ependymal cells.
(J and K) Recombined ependymal cells were
generally GFAPve (5/159 cells, n = 6 mice, J) but
were often in close association with GFAP+ve cells
(J’) and were non-proliferative Ki67ve cells (0/47
cells, n = 3 mice, K).
(L) After 5 months of fate mapping (following
tamoxifen at P40/41 in aSMA::R26 mice), there
was no evidence of recombined cell contribution to
olfactory bulb neurogenesis.
(M) Tamoxifen at E17+18 failed to show labeling of
cells lining the ventricular walls, although the re-
porter was activated in vascular smooth muscle
cells within the parenchyma (arrows).
(N) Tamoxifen at P3+4 resulted in labeling of both
ciliated cells and un-ciliated (arrow) cells with
some extending a single, deprecated radial-glia-
like process away from the V-SVZ at this time point
(arrowhead). Fate mapping of these cells for
5 months conﬁrmed that aSMA::R26+ve cells that
had recombined along the ventricular wall at P3+4
had maintained localization along the ventricular
lining and had acquired multi-ciliated apical pro-
jections typical of an ependymal fate (arrowhead,
N’). Moreover, induction at P3+4 resulted in a
pattern of aSMA::R26 labeling closely reﬂecting
the rostro-caudal and dorso-ventral pattern of
ependymal cell maturation (N’’).
Scale bars: 500 mm (B and N’’ overview); 5 mm (C–E
and H–K); 50 mm (F, G, and N’’ zoomed); 200 mm
(L); 10 mm (M, N, and N’). Sep= septum, Stri=
striatum, LV= lateral ventricle. EPL= external
plexiform layer, GCL= granule cell layer, RMS=
rostral migratory stream, E= embryonic day, P =
postnatal day.
Cell 173, 1045–1057, May 3, 2018
1047

experiments), much less proliferate, in sphere-forming condi-
tions (Figure 2E).
Single-Cell Transcriptional Proﬁling of Ependymal Cells
and Neural Stem or Progenitor Cells
To better characterize the transcriptional proﬁle of ependy-
mal cells relative to neural stem or progenitor cells, we
performed single-cell transcriptomic analysis on micro-dissected
V-SVZs (Figure 3A). We FACS puriﬁed individual samples of
aSMA::tdTomato+ve
Sox2-GFP+ve
ependymal
cells
and
aSMA::tdTomatove Sox2-GFP+ve neural stem or progenitor cells
from adult aSMACreERT2::ROSA26tdTomato/Sox2GFP mice and
prepared single-cell RNA sequencing libraries for each sample
in parallel using 10X Chromium technology and v2 chemistry.
Sequencing metrics for each library, quality control measures,
and downstream analysis are described in Figures S2A–S2F.
Each sample was sequenced to an average depth of 49 million
reads, and all samples were subsequently aggregated to a total
of 1,700 barcoded cells. Low-quality cells with <400 genes de-
tected were excluded, as were genes detected in <3 cells. We
performed graph-based clustering using 2,985 highly variable
genes, projected onto a tSNE plot, to explore cell clustering. We
found that cells from the aSMA::tdTomato+ve Sox2-GFP+ve sam-
ple largely clustered distinctly apart from the aSMA::tdTomatove
Sox2-GFP+ve sample (Figures 3B and S2A). This was not due to
separate processing of each sample, as two individually pro-
cessed aSMA::tdTomatove Sox2-GFP+ve cell samples showed
remarkably concordant clustering (Figure S2A).
Nine unique cell clusters emerged from our single-cell
RNA-seq experiment (Figure 3B). Using previously established
expression patterns of selected genes and the top ﬁve markers
found for each cell population (Figures 3C and 3D), we assigned
classiﬁcations
to
each
cell
cluster.
We
found
most
aSMA::tdTomato+ve Sox2-GFP+ve cells (92.7%; 255/275 cells)
clustered distinctly apart from the Sox2-GFP+ve neural lineage
cells with the major aSMA::tdTomato+ve Sox2-GFP+ve cell
cluster, termed ependymal cells, expressing Acta2 and Foxj1
(Figure 3D). A small number of aSMA::tdTomatove Sox2-
GFP+ve cells (23%) also appeared in this cluster and were
presumed to be ependymal cells that escaped recombination
Figure 2. Prospectively Isolated Adult Fore-
brain Ependymal Cells Do Not Survive or
Proliferate In Vitro in the Presence of Known
NSC Mitogens
(A) Illustration of FACS puriﬁcation and culturing of
subventricular
zone
cells
from
aSMACreER-
T2::ROSA26eYFP mice.
(B
and
C)
In
contrast
to
sphere-forming
aSMA::YFPve cells, aSMA::YFP+ve cells (green)
failed to form proliferative colonies by 2 weeks in
classic neurosphere forming culturing conditions
(EGF/FGF), conditions considered to promote
‘‘ependymal cell’’ proliferation (VEGF/FGF), in co-
culture with E13 NSCs, or following addition of E13
NSC-conditioned medium. Error bars: mean ±
SEM; ** p < 0.01, one-way ANOVA followed by a
Tukey’s post hoc test, n = 4 independent experi-
ments.
(D) FACS identiﬁcation of aSMA::tdTomato+ve-
Sox2-GFP+ve ependymal cells from the micro-
dissected V-SVZ. aSMA::tdTomato+ve cells from
microdissected V-SVZs separated into two distinct
Sox2-GFP+ve and Sox2-GFPve populations. In
contrast,
microdissected
neocortex
(which
is
devoid of ependymal cells) contained only a aS-
MA::tdTomato+ve Sox2-GFPve population.
(E)
FACS-isolated
aSMA::tdTomato+ve
Sox2-
GFP+ve ependymal cell from the V-SVZ exhibiting
multiple cilia (yellow box, arrow), a feature never
observed in cells from cortical isolates (green box)
or aSMA::tdTomato+ve single (red box) positive
populations from the V-SVZ. In contrast to sphere-
forming aSMA::tdTomatove Sox2-GFP+ve cells
from the V-SVZ, aSMA::tdTomato+ve Sox2-GFP+ve
puriﬁed ependymal cells failed to proliferate and
did not appear to survive (0/600 cells, n = 3 inde-
pendent experiments) in sphere-forming condi-
tions in vitro.
Scale bars: 100 mm (B); 50 mm (E, tdTomatove
GFP+ve at day 7); 10 mm (E, all other panels).
EGF: Epidermal growth factor; FGF: Fibroblast growth factor; VEGF: vascular endothelial growth factor; YFP: yellow ﬂuorescent protein; GFP:
green ﬂuorescent protein; E13 NSCs CM: embryonic day 13 derived neurosphere conditioned media.
1048
Cell 173, 1045–1057, May 3, 2018

Figure 3. Single-Cell Transcriptome-Wide Proﬁling of Adult V-SVZ Ependymal Cells and Neural Stem or Progenitor Cells
(A) FACS puriﬁcation and single cell sequencing of V-SVZ cells from adult aSMACreERT2::ROSA26tdTomato/Sox2GFP mice.
(B) Unsupervised graph-based clustering of single-cell RNA-seq dataset projected onto a tSNE plot. Most aSMA::tdTomato+ve Sox2-GFP+ve cells (orange
outline) aggregated in one distinct cluster (ependymal cells).
(C and D) Heat map of top ﬁve marker genes (determined by likelihood-ratio test) for each of the nine clusters (C) and gene expression proﬁles of selected marker
genes were used to assign cell classiﬁcations (D): neuroblasts, ependymal cells, activated NSCs (aNSCs), late activated NSCs (aNSCs-late), quiescent NSCs
(qNSCs), oligodendrocytes/oligodendrocyte precursors (OL/OPCs), microglia, and undeﬁned cells.
Cell 173, 1045–1057, May 3, 2018
1049

(Figure 3B). Most aSMA::tdTomatoveSox2-GFP+ve cells were
found in a chain of clusters that traversed the tSNE projection
and were enriched in several neural lineage genes (Figure 3B).
At one end was a cluster of cells enriched in a number of identi-
ﬁed markers of quiescent NSCs (qNSCs) such as Clu, Gja1,
Sox9, S100b, and Ntsr2 (Figure 3D) (Dulken et al., 2017;
Llorens-Bobadilla et al., 2015). Interestingly, expression of Clu,
Gja1, Sox9, and S100b, but not Ntsr2, was also found in the
ependymal cell cluster (Figure 3D). In total, we observed 2,375
shared genes between ependymal cells and qNSCs, whereas
only 193 and 128 genes, respectively, were unique to ependymal
cells or qNSCs (p > 0.01 or log2 fold change < 1, Figures S3A and
S3B). The largest cluster of aSMA::tdTomatoveSox2-GFP+ve
cells was strongly enriched for the neuroblast marker, Dcx.
Between qNSC and neuroblast clusters, there were two clusters
that expressed markers such as Thbs4 and Cdk1 and were clas-
siﬁed as activated NSCs, with the latter likely representing an
aNSC-late population (Figure 3D; Benner et al., 2013; Dulken
et al., 2017). We also identiﬁed several other distinct clusters in
our dataset. The largest of these clusters contained cells from
all samples and was overrepresented by oligodendroglia lineage
genes such as Sox10, Plp1, and Mbp (Figures 3C and 3D). We
also found small clusters containing only aSMA::tdTomato+ve
Sox2-GFP+ve cells positioned distinctly away from the primary
ependymal cell cluster. One of these clusters notably expressed
Flt1 (‘‘undeﬁned cluster 1’’), a second expressed Cx3cr1
(a microglia marker), and a ﬁnal cluster was enriched for Vtn
(‘‘undeﬁned cluster 2’’).
Flt1-Expressing Cell Cluster Does Not Represent
Ependymal Cells at Large
A previous study published in Cell used CD133 to reportedly
isolate V-SVZ ependymal cells and ascribe them a transcriptional
signature that included Flt1 (VEGF-receptor) and a number of
other angiogenesis and hematopoietic-lineage-related genes
(Luo et al., 2015). We further examined the Flt1-expressing cell
cluster that was captured in our dataset, and in contrast to our pri-
mary ependymal cell cluster, we found a complete absence of
cilia-related genes previously shown to be associated with epen-
dymal cells or found in association with cilia under GO term anno-
tations (Figure 4A; Zeisel et al., 2015). Interestingly however, this
Flt1-expressing cell cluster showed an expression pattern (e.g.,
Slco1a4, Spock2, Cldn5, Kdr, and Fn1) that was remarkably
consistent with the signature described for Flt1-expressing epen-
dymal cells by Luo et al. (2015). We were unable to detect
immunoreactivity of VEGFR1 (Flt1) (using an Abcam antibody
consistent with Luo et al., 2015) or FN1 in aSMA::R26-labeled
ependymal cells lining the walls of the V-SVZ despite clearly
positive labeling of blood vessels, choroid plexus, and/or the
meningeal lining in the same brain (Figures 4C and 4D).
VEGF Infusion Does Not Result in Ependymal Cell
Activation
Although it appears that aSMA::R26 ependymal cells are Flt1
negative (Figure 4) and are not neurogenic or proliferative in
the uninjured brain or in vitro (Figures 1 and 2), Luo et al. (2015)
had suggested that Flt1-positive, CD133-labeled ependymal
cells may be stimulated as neural stem cells in response to
VEGF+bFGF exposure in vivo. Given the fact that our genetic
labeling approach captures deﬁnitive ependymal cells, as well
as a rare subset of cells expressing Flt1, we tested if any
V-SVZ aSMA::R26-labeled cells in our system could be acti-
vated by direct infusion of exogenous VEGF+bFGF into the
lateral ventricle. To do this, we injected either VEGF+bFGF
(n = 3) or PBS (as control, n = 3) into the ventricle of adult
aSMA::R26 mice, administered EdU for 1 week, and then
assessed the cellular response at 1 week post-stimulation
(Figure 5A). We observed a robust increase in the density of
EdU-labeled proliferative cells (p < 0.001) compared to PBS con-
trol animals (Figure 5B). VEGF treatment resulted in signiﬁcantly
higher numbers of GFAP+ve EdU+ve-labeled cells, but not Dcx+ve
EdU+ve neuroblasts, in the V-SVZ (p < 0.01, PBS versus
VEGF+bFGF, n = 3 mice/group, Figures 5B–5D). Notably, no
recombined cells lining the ventricle or in the adjacent striatal
parenchyma ever incorporated EdU or labeled for GFAP or
Dcx in either group. As in the PBS control group, all recombined
cells in the adjacent striatal parenchyma were GFAPve and
Dcxve and appeared to be mural or smooth muscle cells closely
associated with CD31+ve blood vessels; similarly, their cell
density remained unchanged following ventricular VEGF+bFGF
administration (Figure 5E).
Striatal Injury Does Not Induce Proliferation,
Delamination, or Differentiation of Neonatal or Adult
V-SVZ Ependymal Cells
It remains a possibility that brain injury may be necessary to
‘‘awaken’’ neurogenic or proliferative programs within V-SVZ
ependymal cells (Carle´ n et al., 2009). To test this, we induced
striatal intracerebral hemorrhagic (ICH) stroke in aSMA::R26
mice using an unilateral injection of collagenase (or PBS as
controls) to produce a spatially prescribed, reproducible injury
(directly adjacent to the V-SVZ, Figure 6A) consisting of both
necrotic and ischemic tissue injury (Lok et al., 2011). At 1 and
4 weeks post-injury, we did not observe any change in the
density of aSMA::R26+ve ependymal cells lining the V-SVZ
following stroke (p = 0.17; n = 3–6 mice/group, Figure 6B). As
previously found in ischemic striatal stroke injury (Young et al.,
2013), we found ependymal cells in the ipsilateral V-SVZ
responded acutely by expressing GFAP at 1 week post-stroke,
which was diminished by 4 weeks (p < 0.05 versus 1 week
PBS, n = 3 mice/group, Figure 6C). That being said, none of
these
GFAP+ve
ependymal
cells
adopted
a
star-shaped
morphology (Figure 6C). To track cell division, we injected EdU
during the ﬁrst week or second and third weeks following stroke.
Interestingly, we did not observe any evidence of EdU incorpora-
tion in aSMA::R26+ve ependymal cells lining the lateral wall at any
time point (Figure 6D). Instead, there was a marked increase in
the density of EdU+ve GFAP+ve cells present within the V-SVZ re-
gion at 1 week post-stroke (p < 0.01 versus 1 week PBS, n = 3
mice/group, Figure 6D), conﬁrming that ICH injury was sufﬁcient
to activate resident cells within the V-SVZ. None of the recom-
bined cells outside of the ependyma were immunoreactive for
GFAP or Dcx but appeared to be mural or smooth muscle cells
due to their close apposition to CD31+ve blood vessels and did
not change in cell density following injury (Figure 6E). Surround-
ing the lesion, there was marked GFAP+ve astrogliosis, as well as
1050
Cell 173, 1045–1057, May 3, 2018

Figure 4. Gene-Expression Proﬁling of Flt1-
Expressing Cells
(A) Gene-expression pattern analysis of several
genes related to ciliary function, showing a clear
absence of the expression of cilia genes in the
cluster that is enriched for Flt1. Instead, cilia genes
are highly expressed by ependymal cells (as
deﬁned in Figure 3).
(B) Consistent with the cell type identiﬁed as
ependymal cells by Luo et al. (2015), we found that
Flt1-expressing cells were enriched for Slco1a4,
Spock2, Cldn5, Kdr, and Fn1.
(C) Immunohistochemical analysis of VEGFR1
(Flt1, white) shows that it is not expressed in the
V-SVZ but rather in the choroid plexus (white,
arrowhead) and vascular-associated cells (white,
arrowhead).
Ependymal
cells
are marked
by
aSMA::R26+ve (green, arrow) and CD133 (red,
arrow). Scale bar: 20mm. LV= lateral ventricle,
CP= choroid plexus, BV= blood vessel.
(D and E) Immunolabeling for FN1 (red) was found
throughout the meningeal layer (D, arrowhead), but
was absent from the V-SVZ (E, red). Ependymal
cells are marked by aSMA::R26 (green). Scale bar:
10mm (D). LV: lateral ventricle; ML: meningeal
lining; Cx: cortex.
Cell 173, 1045–1057, May 3, 2018
1051

a progressive increase in numbers of Dcx+ve neuroblasts over
time (p < 0.01; 4 weeks stroke versus PBS, n = 3–6 mice/group,
Figures 6F, 6G, and 6G’). Importantly, neither population co-ex-
pressed the aSMA::R26 reporter (Figures 6F, 6G, and 6G’’).
Thus, despite a signiﬁcant stroke-induced neurogenic response,
we found no evidence of neurogenesis derived from ependymal
cells for up to 4 weeks following injury.
We then surmised that immature ependymal cells might har-
bor greater plasticity. We induced hemorrhagic stroke in
the striatum of neonatal (P10) aSMA::R26 mice that were
administered tamoxifen at P4+5 (Figure S4A). The response
was identical to that observed in adult brains such that aS-
MA::R26+ve cells remained ﬁxed along the V-SVZ wall (Fig-
ure S4B). These aSMA::R26+ve cells were not immunoreactive
for the proliferative marker, Ki67 (0/111 recombined cells, n = 4
mice), despite the presence of widespread Ki67 immunoreac-
tivity in adjacent cells (Figures S4B’ and S4B’’) and Dcx+ve neuro-
blasts in the injured striatum (Figures S4C and S4C’).
Unique Patterns of Gene Sets Distinguish Ependymal
Cells from Quiescent Neural Stem Cells
Despite our RNA-seq data demonstrating some degree of shared
gene expression between ependymal cells and qNSCs (Figures 3
and S3), we do not ﬁnd functional stemness in ependymal cells.
To further compare the molecular characteristics of ependymal
cells with NSCs and progenitors, we performed pathway and
gene set overdispersion analysis (PAGODA) on ependymal cells,
NSCs, and neuroblasts in our RNA-seq dataset (Figure 7).
PAGODA identiﬁes overdispersion of coordinated expression
patterns of gene sets deﬁned by gene ontology (GO), as well as
discovering de novo gene sets (Fan et al., 2016). These gene
sets are further summarized to ‘‘aspects,’’ and examination of
these associative aspects revealed that ependymal cells shared
one aspect with qNSCs (enriched in neural development-related
GO terms) and a second aspect with aNSCs enriched in microtu-
bule-associated processes but were uniquely enriched in an
aspect largely dominated by cilia-related processes (Figure 7A).
Multiple aspects containing cell-cycle- and nuclear division-
related GO terms, as well fate-specifying genes such as Dlx1,
were overdispersed in aNSCs, aNSCs late, and neuroblasts.
Interestingly, we also found an aspect that was exclusive to
qNSCs and was made up of only a small number of gene sets,
which were largely uncharacterized. For example, the top three
gene sets driving this aspect were all de novo gene sets. Interest-
ingly, de novo gene set #1 (cZ = 16.32) contained genes with
consistent expression across all qNSCs, whereas the remaining
two gene sets (gene set #3, cZ = 13.63; and gene set #2,
cZ = 11.60) showed substantial heterogeneity in expression of
their respective genes within qNSCs (Figure 7B). We performed
ingenuity pathway analysis on the top de novo gene set (gene
set #1) enriched in the qNSCs aspect and found enrichment of
the GO biological processes: glutamine-family amino-acid meta-
bolism (fold enrichment: 40.17, p = 2.74e02) and nervous
system development (fold enrichment: 3.85, p = 4.98e02).
Figure 5. Ventricular VEGF+bFGF Application Fails to Activate Adult Ependymal Cell as NSCs
(A) Growth factors (VEGF+bFGF) or PBS were stereotaxically injected into the right lateral ventricle of aSMA::R26 transgenic mice given tamoxifen at P40+41.
EdU was injected daily until tissue collection at 1 week.
(B) Representative images showing a notable increase in EdU-marked cells (red) in the V-SVZ following VEGF+bFGF infusion compared to PBS controls.
(C and D) EdU+ve cells (white) in the V-SVZ following VEGF+bFGF infusion include GFAP and Dcx-expressing cells (red) but notably do not include recombined
cells (green). There is a signiﬁcant increase in EdU incorporation by GFAP+ve cells in the V-SVZ (C), but not Dcx+ve neuroblasts (D), at this time point (** p < 0.01,
Student’s t test, n = 3 mice/group).
(E) CD31 expression and co-localization with aSMA::R26+ve cells in the brain parenchyma following VEGF+bFGF injection. Quantiﬁcation shows there was no
difference in total number of aSMA::R26+ve cells (green) or total number of aSMA::R26+ve cells associated with CD31+ve blood vessels (red).
Scale bars: 20 mm (B), 10 mm (C and D), and 50 mm (E). Error bars: mean ± SEM. LV: lateral ventricle.
1052
Cell 173, 1045–1057, May 3, 2018

This analysis suggests that, despite considerable sharing of gene
expression between ependymal cells and NSCs, there are
several unique sets of genes that are likely important for divergent
functions.
DISCUSSION
Until now, studying adult ependymal cells has been complicated
by a lack of efﬁcient and accurate tools that allow for prospective
identiﬁcation, isolation, and in vivo lineage tracing. The tamox-
ifen-inducible
aSMACreERT2
transgenic
system
described
here speciﬁcally targets ependymal-fated cells in the V-SVZ
during the process of ependymal cell maturation and persists
throughout adulthood. Although both ependymal cells and
type B cells are derived from the same radial glia lineage, our
data provide compelling evidence that only the latter retains their
ancestral stem cell capacity in the postnatal brain.
The promoter for FoxJ1, a transcription factor for motile cilia
generation, has been previously used to drive in vivo genetic
targeting of V-SVZ ependymal cells; however, it appears that
Figure 6. Adult Ependymal Cells Fail to Activate Proliferative or Neurogenic Potential after Striatal Stroke Injury
(A) Induction of striatal intracerebral hemorrhagic stroke induced by stereotaxic infusion of collagenase into adult aSMA::R26 mice. A large striatal haematoma
forms adjacent to the subventricular zone present at 1 day post-stroke. EdU was administered either during the ﬁrst or second and third weeks post-injury.
(B) Representative images of aSMA::R26 recombined cells (green) lining the walls of the V-SVZ adjacent to the injured striatum. There were no differences in the
density of recombined ependymal cells in the V-SVZ between ipsilateral versus contralateral to the lesion at either 1 week or 4 weeks post-stroke (p = 0.17,
one-way ANOVA followed by a Tukey’s post hoc test, n = 3–6 mice/group).
(C) Upregulation of GFAP (red, arrowhead) in recombined ependymal cells (green) at 1 week post-stroke (Stroke) compared to sham (PBS) (C). Quantiﬁcation of
GFAP co-expression in recombined ependymal cells at 1 week post-stroke compared to PBS (* p < 0.05, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test,
n = 3–6 mice/group).
(D) Representative images demonstrating that recombined ependymal cells (green) did not incorporate EdU at 1 week following either sham injury (PBS) or
hemorrhagic stroke (right). In contrast, frequent EdU+ve cells (red) were found directly beneath the ependymal cell layer (D). Quantiﬁcation of ependymal
(aSMA::R26+ve EdU+ve) and subependymal cell proliferation (aSMA::R26ve EdU+ve ± GFAP+ve) in the V-SVZ at 1 and 4 weeks following stroke (* p < 0.01, one-
way ANOVA followed by a Tukey’s post hoc test, n = 3–6 mice/group).
(E) CD31 expression and co-localization with aSMA::R26+ve cells in the striatum 1 week following injury. There was no difference in density of total aSMA::R26+ve
cells (green) or aSMA::R26+ve cells associated with CD31+ve blood vessels (red, one-way ANOVA, n = 3–6 mice/group).
(F and G) The injury site was marked by robust astrocytosis (white, GFAP, F) and Dcx+ve neuroblasts (red, F and G) surrounding the infarct area at 1 week post-
injury. Confocal analysis and quantiﬁcation revealed a robust neurogenic response (Dcx+ve cell density) following striatal injury (G), but none of the Dcx+ve cells
co-expressed reporter protein (green) at either 1 or 4 weeks post-stroke (* p < 0.01, one-way ANOVA followed by a Tukey’s post hoc test, n = 3–6 mice/group).
Scale bars: 100 mm (B and C); 10 mm (D); 5 mm (E); 200 mm (F); and 20 mm (G). LV: lateral ventricle; NS: not signiﬁcantly different. Error bars: mean ± SEM.
Cell 173, 1045–1057, May 3, 2018
1053

FoxJ1 is also expressed in a subset of neurogenic cells (Becker-
vordersandforth et al., 2010). Induction of labeling at P6 or P21 in
the FoxJ1CreERT2 system results in mature neurons being
labeled in the adult brain (Benner et al., 2013; Jacquet et al.,
2011), whereas recombination during development or adulthood
in the aSMACreERT2 system does not. Fate-mapping of labelled
Figure 7. Pathway Overdispersion Analysis
of Ependymal Cells, NSCs, and Progenitors
(A) Pathway and gene set overdispersion analysis
(PAGODA) and hierarchical clustering of neural
lineage and ependymal cell clusters.
(B) Top 10 genes (sorted by variance) in the top
three de novo gene sets found in aspect 7. Gene
set #1, cZ = 16.32; gene set #3, cZ = 13.63; and
gene set #2, cZ = 11.60.
(C) Ingenuity pathway analysis of genes from the
top de novo gene set #1 shows enrichment of
glutamine family amino acid metabolic process
(fold enrichment: 40.17, p = 2.74e02) and ner-
vous system development (fold enrichment: 3.85,
p = 4.98e02).
cells in the rat brain using a FoxJ1 piggy-
Bac system also shows postnatal neuro-
genesis (Devaraju et al., 2013). Since
radial glia cells become committed to an
ependymal or type B NSC fate at E15.5
(Fuentealba et al., 2015), the FoxJ1-
CreERT2
system
must
concomitantly
target a subpopulation of postnatal V-
SVZ neural progenitors or stem cells
outside of ependymal cells, whereas
the aSMACreERT2 system appears to
exclude
these
NSCs
or
progenitors.
CD133-FACS-sorted
ependymal
cells
have been reported to generate clonally
derived neurosphere colonies in vitro
(Coskun et al., 2008), and CD133-immu-
noreactive ependymal cells have also
been reported to proliferate in vivo (Luo
et al., 2015); however, both these results
are confounded because CD133 expres-
sion is found in all NSCs within the post-
natal
V-SVZ
(Beckervordersandforth
et al., 2010; Codega et al., 2014). Our
data, collected with strict exclusion of
the NSC lineage, shows for the ﬁrst time
that ependymal cells do not proliferate
in response to known NSC mitogens
in vitro or in vivo.
Recently,
single-cell
transcriptomics
has highlighted the inherent heterogene-
ity of adult V-SVZ neural stem cells at
the single-cell level (Dulken et al., 2017;
Llorens-Bobadilla et al., 2015). However,
the ependymal cell, which is a major
component of the V-SVZ neurogenic
niche and has been proposed to be a
stem cell itself, has been difﬁcult to study alongside NSCs
due to the
aforementioned
lack of
prospective
isolation
techniques (Beckervordersandforth et al., 2010). In our single-
cell
RNA-seq
analysis
of
ependymal
cell
reporter
mice
(aSMACreERT2::R26-tdTomato/Sox2-GFP), we found that the
majority of aSMA::tdTomato+veSox2-GFP+ve cells formed a
1054
Cell 173, 1045–1057, May 3, 2018

distinct cluster away from the majority of Sox2-GFP+ve NSCs
and progenitors, suggesting that on a whole-transcriptome level,
ependymal cells at large do not have a NSC-like signature. Still,
we continued to ﬁnd that this cluster of ependymal cells shared
many gene expression patterns, especially with qNSCs. Luo
et al. (2015) suggested that CD133+ve GFAPve ependymal cells
from the postnatal mouse brain exhibit a proﬁle that overlaps
with other tissue-resident stem cells, such as hematopoietic
stem cells (Luo et al., 2015). These cells were found to express
angiogenic receptors like Flt1 and Kdr, which they interpreted
as being indicative of a ‘‘dormant’’ NSC state, poised for activa-
tion under conditions such as brain injury, where levels of angio-
genic factors like VEGF are signiﬁcantly increased in situ (Carle´ n
et al., 2009; Thau-Zuchman et al., 2010). However, our transcrip-
tional proﬁling of the large majority of aSMA::tdTomato+ve Sox2-
GFP+ve ependymal cells shows that they do not express Flt1 or
Kdr. A key ﬁnding is that our transcriptomic analysis captures
a rare population of Flt1-expressing cells that shows almost
complete concordance with the ‘‘ependymal’’ signature identi-
ﬁed by Luo et al. (2015). These Flt1-expressing cells showed
marked separation from our ependymal cell cluster and did not
exhibit hallmark ependymal features such as expression of
cilia-related genes. Thus, while it is possible that Flt1-expressing
cells represent a rare subset of ependymal cells, we contend that
this rare population identiﬁed in both studies does not represent
ependymal cells at large. Even if rare Flt1-expressing ependymal
cells are present, they are not likely to be dormant neural stem
cells, since we observed no neural stem or progenitor character-
istics in our recombined cells under any of our stem cell stimu-
lating conditions.
A growing body of research suggests that mature, differenti-
ated tissue cell types may be able to de-differentiate into stem
or progenitor cells, or trans-differentiate into alternative identities
(Merrell and Stanger, 2016). In the brain, cell types that are other-
wise non-neurogenic, such as parenchymal astrocytes, can be
reportedly induced into a neurogenic state in vivo following brain
injury (Magnusson et al., 2014), with similar claims being made
for ependymal cells using a FoxJ1-driven lineage tracing strat-
egy (Carle´ n et al., 2009). However, recently, further investiga-
tions of FoxJ1-driven lineage tracing in stroke has found minimal,
if any, direct stem-cell-like contribution to sites of injury (Muthus-
amy et al., 2018). We performed striatal hemorrhagic stroke
injury, which provides a broad range of injury etiologies (Lok
et al., 2011), and thus multiple routes of possible ependymal
cell ‘‘induction’’ to test whether ependymal cells in the adult brain
could be induced into neurogenesis by brain injury. Still, we
found no evidence for ependymal cell mitosis, ependymal cell
loss, or emigration from their niche. Rather, ependymal cells
responded to the injury with acute expression of GFAP, as has
been reported following ischemic (middle cerebral artery occlu-
sion) injury (Young et al., 2013).
It could be argued that a subset of ependymal cells in the
V-SVZ are in fact neurogenic but escape labeling by the
aSMACreERT2 reporter system. If so, this does not represent
ependymal cell function at large, considering our system targets
the overwhelming majority of ependymal cells. Although our
quantiﬁcation suggests that we label 71% of cells lining the V-
SVZ with our reporter system, this is likely an underestimation
of the actual number of ependymal cells that are represented
by aSMA and share their unique transcriptional proﬁle. Perhaps
the most signiﬁcant factor affecting ependymal cell labeling in
our system is that recombination efﬁciency using the tamox-
ifen-inducible Cre-lox system is never complete, so some
aSMACreERT2-expressing
ependymal
cells
have
escaped
recombination. This is supported by our single-cell RNA-seq
data, where 23% of cells in our ependymal cell cluster were
not captured by aSMA::tdTomato labeling but were instead
captured as only Sox2-GFP+ve. Furthermore, only 63% of cells
that were in the ependymal cell cluster and labelled by
aSMA::tdTomato+ve showed detectable expression of Acta2
at the time of RNA collection, and 41% of cells in the ependymal
cluster and labeled by Sox2-GFP+ve alone showed expression
of Acta2. This suggests that aSMA expression in ependymal
cells in the adult V-SVZ is dynamic, possibly above and beyond
the stochastic nature of transcriptional activity (Raj and van
Oudenaarden, 2008). These factors limit the ability to make
deﬁnitive conclusions about cell populations on a single-
transcript level, emphasizing one of the unique insights
provided by single-cell RNA-seq: the ability to assess cell
populations across multiple transcripts to more accurately
deﬁne cellular phenotypes. That said, our results together
suggest that the vast majority of ependymal cells do not
function as latent NSCs or progenitors and are not induced to
acquire such properties following brain insult or exogenous
growth actor stimulation.
Our work begins to comprehensively identify the salient differ-
ences (beyond the intriguing similarities) between ependymal
cells and NSCs. Interestingly, hierarchical clustering placed
qNSCs closer to ependymal cells than to aNSCs and neuro-
blasts, yet ependymal cells show a notable lack of stem-cell-
like abilities. We surmise that post-translational modiﬁcation or
repression may be a critical mechanism underlying their diver-
gent functions and will be investigated in future studies. Interest-
ingly, our analysis did not ﬁnd any gene expression pattern
showing consistent overdispersion in all NSCs and an absence
in ependymal cells, suggesting that there is no gene set that
qualiﬁes stemness across all NSCs. Instead, we ﬁnd that there
is a transcriptional program unique to qNSCs containing largely
uncharacterized gene sets. There is signiﬁcant heterogeneity
within qNSCs in the expression of fate-specifying transcription
factors, and only a small number of these transcription factors
show correlated expression (Llorens-Bobadilla et al., 2015).
Thus, the genes conferring stemness to qNSCs may be highly
heterogenous, small in number, and unique to each individual
cell in relation to its ultimate fate or spatial location. Neverthe-
less,
we
did
ﬁnd
one
gene
set
that
exhibited
relative
homogeneity in qNSCs and was enriched in the glutamine-family
amino-acid metabolic process and nervous system develop-
ment. We suspect that these genes may be necessary to support
the quiescent neural stem cell state. Although ependymal cells
exhibit shared gene sets with both qNSCs and aNSCs (most
likely due to their shared developmental origin), the ependymal
cell signature was also exclusively driven by many gene sets
related to cilia, appearing to be the differentiating proﬁle that
clearly distinguished them from the entire neural stem and pro-
genitor cell lineage.
Cell 173, 1045–1057, May 3, 2018
1055

STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
d METHOD DETAILS
B Mouse and Tissue Handling
B Intracerebral Hemorrhagic Stroke
B Stereotactic Injection of Growth Factors
B Immunohistochemistry, EdU staining and Imaging
B FACS Sorting and culturing
B Single cell library preparation and RNA-sequencing
B Single cell RNA-seq processing
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes four ﬁgures and can be found with this
article online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.063.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute (ACHRI) and
Markin Undergraduate Research Program (University of Calgary) for fellowship
and studentship funding (P.T.S., J.A.S.). This work was supported by grants
from
the
Canadian
Institutes
of
Health
Research
(MOP106646
and
MOP130475; both to J.B.). J.B. was supported by a CIHR New Investigator
award and the Calgary Fireﬁghters Burn Treatment Society Chair in Skin
Regeneration and Wound Healing. M.G.S. was supported by a University of
Calgary QEII award. We acknowledge technical support from Grace Yoon
(sectioning), Nicole Rosin (colony maintenance), Khalil Rawji (image process-
ing), Anowara Islam (FACS), Marco Gallo (single-cell RNA-seq), Matthew
Workentine (bioinformatics), Min Cheng (reagent ordering), and Martha Hurta-
tis (animal care). We also acknowledge the RUN facility at the Hotchkiss Brain
Institute and the Princess Margaret Genomics Centre (Toronto, ON).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, P.T.S., J.A.S., and J.B.; Methodology, P.T.S., J.A.S., and
J.B.; Investigation, P.T.S., J.A.S, M.G.S., S.A., S.S., K.A.M., and K.K.; Writing –
Original Draft, P.T.S. and J.A.S.; Writing – Review & Editing, P.T.S., J.A.S.,
K.A.M., P.J.W., and J.B.; Resources, P.J.W. and J.B.; Supervision, P.J.W.
and J.B.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: June 27, 2017
Revised: December 13, 2017
Accepted: March 23, 2018
Published: May 3, 2018
REFERENCES
Beckervordersandforth, R., Tripathi, P., Ninkovic, J., Bayam, E., Lepier, A.,
Stempfhuber, B., Kirchhoff, F., Hirrlinger, J., Haslinger, A., Lie, D.C., et al.
(2010). In vivo fate mapping and expression analysis reveals molecular
hallmarks of prospectively isolated adult neural stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 7,
744–758.
Benner, E.J., Luciano, D., Jo, R., Abdi, K., Paez-Gonzalez, P., Sheng, H.,
Warner, D.S., Liu, C., Eroglu, C., and Kuo, C.T. (2013). Protective astrogenesis
from the SVZ niche after injury is controlled by Notch modulator Thbs4. Nature
497, 369–373.
Carle´ n, M., Meletis, K., Go¨ ritz, C., Darsalia, V., Evergren, E., Tanigaki, K.,
Amendola, M., Barnabe´ -Heider, F., Yeung, M.S.Y., Naldini, L., et al. (2009).
Forebrain ependymal cells are Notch-dependent and generate neuroblasts
and astrocytes after stroke. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 259–267.
Codega, P., Silva-Vargas, V., Paul, A., Maldonado-Soto, A.R., Deleo, A.M.,
Pastrana, E., and Doetsch, F. (2014). Prospective identiﬁcation and puriﬁca-
tion of quiescent adult neural stem cells from their in vivo niche. Neuron 82,
545–559.
Coskun, V., Wu, H., Blanchi, B., Tsao, S., Kim, K., Zhao, J., Biancotti, J.C., Hut-
nick, L., Krueger, R.C., Jr., Fan, G., et al. (2008). CD133+ neural stem cells in
the ependyma of mammalian postnatal forebrain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
105, 1026–1031.
Devaraju, K., Barnabe´ -Heider, F., Kokaia, Z., and Lindvall, O. (2013). FoxJ1-
expressing cells contribute to neurogenesis in forebrain of adult rats: evidence
from in vivo electroporation combined with piggyBac transposon. Exp. Cell
Res. 319, 2790–2800.
Doetsch, F., Caille´ , I., Lim, D.A., Garcı´a-Verdugo, J.M., and Alvarez-Buylla, A.
(1999). Subventricular zone astrocytes are neural stem cells in the adult
mammalian brain. Cell 97, 703–716.
Doetsch, F., Petreanu, L., Caille, I., Garcia-Verdugo, J.-M., and Alvarez-Buylla,
A. (2002). EGF converts transit-amplifying neurogenic precursors in the adult
brain into multipotent stem cells. Neuron 36, 1021–1034.
Dulken, B.W., Leeman, D.S., Boutet, S.C., Hebestreit, K., and Brunet, A.
(2017). Single-Cell Transcriptomic Analysis Deﬁnes Heterogeneity and Tran-
scriptional Dynamics in the Adult Neural Stem Cell Lineage. Cell Rep. 18,
777–790.
Fan, J., Salathia, N., Liu, R., Kaeser, G.E., Yung, Y.C., Herman, J.L., Kaper, F.,
Fan, J.B., Zhang, K., Chun, J., and Kharchenko, P.V. (2016). Characterizing
transcriptional heterogeneity through pathway and gene set overdispersion
analysis. Nat. Methods 13, 241–244.
Ferri, A.L.M., Cavallaro, M., Braida, D., Di Cristofano, A., Canta, A., Vezzani, A.,
Ottolenghi, S., Pandolﬁ, P.P., Sala, M., DeBiasi, S., and Nicolis, S.K. (2004).
Sox2 deﬁciency causes neurodegeneration and impaired neurogenesis in
the adult mouse brain. Development 131, 3805–3819.
Fuentealba, L.C., Rompani, S.B., Parraguez, J.I., Obernier, K., Romero, R.,
Cepko, C.L., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2015). Embryonic Origin of Postnatal Neu-
ral Stem Cells. Cell 161, 1644–1655.
Jacquet, B.V., Salinas-Mondragon, R., Liang, H., Therit, B., Buie, J.D., Dyk-
stra, M., Campbell, K., Ostrowski, L.E., Brody, S.L., and Ghashghaei, H.T.
(2009). FoxJ1-dependent gene expression is required for differentiation of
radial glia into ependymal cells and a subset of astrocytes in the postnatal
brain. Development 136, 4021–4031.
Jacquet, B.V., Muthusamy, N., Sommerville, L.J., Xiao, G., Liang, H., Zhang,
Y., Holtzman, M.J., and Ghashghaei, H.T. (2011). Speciﬁcation of a Foxj1-
dependent lineage in the forebrain is required for embryonic-to-postnatal tran-
sition of neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb. J. Neurosci. 31, 9368–9382.
Kopp, J.L., Grompe, M., and Sander, M. (2016). Stem cells versus plasticity in
liver and pancreas regeneration. Nat. Cell Biol. 18, 238–245.
Laywell, E.D., Rakic, P., Kukekov, V.G., Holland, E.C., and Steindler, D.A.
(2000). Identiﬁcation of a multipotent astrocytic stem cell in the immature
and adult mouse brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 13883–13888.
Lim, D.A., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2016). The Adult Ventricular-Subventricular
Zone (V-SVZ) and Olfactory Bulb (OB) Neurogenesis. Cold Spring Harb. Per-
spect. Biol. 8, 1–34.
Llorens-Bobadilla, E., Zhao, S., Baser, A., Saiz-Castro, G., Zwadlo, K., and
Martin-Villalba, A. (2015). Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population
of Dormant Neural Stem Cells that Become Activated upon Brain Injury. Cell
Stem Cell 17, 329–340.
1056
Cell 173, 1045–1057, May 3, 2018

Lok, J., Leung, W., Murphy, S., Butler, W., Noviski, N., and Lo, E.H. (2011).
Intracranial Hemorrhage: Mechanisms of Secondary Brain Injury. Acta Neuro-
chirurgica. Suppl. 111, 63–69.
Luo, Y., Coskun, V., Liang, A., Yu, J., Cheng, L., Ge, W., Shi, Z., Zhang, K., Li,
C., Cui, Y., et al. (2015). Single-cell transcriptome analyses reveal signals to
activate dormant neural stem cells. Cell 161, 1175–1186.
Macosko, E.Z., Basu, A., Satija, R., Nemesh, J., Shekhar, K., Goldman, M., Tir-
osh, I., Bialas, A.R., Kamitaki, N., Martersteck, E.M., et al. (2015). Highly
Parallel Genome-wide Expression Proﬁling of Individual Cells Using Nanoliter
Droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214.
Magnusson, J.P., Go¨ ritz, C., Tatarishvili, J., Dias, D.O., Smith, E.M.K., Lindvall,
O., Kokaia, Z., and Frise´ n, J. (2014). A latent neurogenic program in astrocytes
regulated by Notch signaling in the mouse. Science 346, 237–241.
Merkle, F.T., Tramontin, A.D., Garcı´a-Verdugo, J.M., and Alvarez-Buylla, A.
(2004). Radial glia give rise to adult neural stem cells in the subventricular
zone. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 17528–17532.
Merrell, A.J., and Stanger, B.Z. (2016). Adult cell plasticity in vivo: de-differen-
tiation and transdifferentiation are back in style. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 17,
413–425.
Mirzadeh, Z., Merkle, F.T., Soriano-Navarro, M., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., and Al-
varez-Buylla, A. (2008). Neural stem cells confer unique pinwheel architecture
to the ventricular surface in neurogenic regions of the adult brain. Cell Stem
Cell 3, 265–278.
Mirzadeh, Z., Kusne, Y., Duran-Moreno, M., Cabrales, E., Gil-Perotin, S., Ortiz,
C., Chen, B., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., Sanai, N., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2017).
Bi- and uniciliated ependymal cells deﬁne continuous ﬂoor-plate-derived tany-
cytic territories. Nat. Commun. 8, 13759.
Moiseenko, A., Kheirollahi, V., Chao, C.-M., Ahmadvand, N., Quantius, J., Wil-
helm, J., Herold, S., Ahlbrecht, K., Morty, R.E., Rizvanov, A.A., et al. (2017).
Origin and characterization of alpha smooth muscle actin-positive cells during
murine lung development. Stem Cells 35, 1566–1578.
Muthusamy, N., Brumm, A., Zhang, X., Carmichael, S.T., and Ghashghaei, H.T.
(2018). Foxj1 expressing ependymal cells do not contribute new cells to sites
of injury or stroke in the mouse forebrain. Sci. Rep. 8, 1766.
Ohata, S., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2016). Planar Organization of Multiciliated
Ependymal (E1) Cells in the Brain Ventricular Epithelium. Trends Neurosci.
39, 543–551.
Ottone, C., Krusche, B., Whitby, A., Clements, M., Quadrato, G., Pitulescu,
M.E., Adams, R.H., and Parrinello, S. (2014). Direct cell-cell contact with the
vascular niche maintains quiescent neural stem cells. Nat. Cell Biol. 16,
1045–1056.
Paez-Gonzalez, P., Abdi, K., Luciano, D., Liu, Y., Soriano-Navarro, M., Raw-
lins, E., Bennett, V., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., and Kuo, C.T. (2011). Ank3-depen-
dent SVZ niche assembly is required for the continued production of new
neurons. Neuron 71, 61–75.
Peichev, M., Naiyer, A.J., Pereira, D., Zhu, Z., Lane, W.J., Williams, M., Oz,
M.C., Hicklin, D.J., Witte, L., Moore, M.A., and Raﬁi, S. (2000). Expression of
VEGFR-2 and AC133 by circulating human CD34(+) cells identiﬁes a popula-
tion of functional endothelial precursors. Blood 95, 952–958.
Rahmani, W., Abbasi, S., Hagner, A., Raharjo, E., Kumar, R., Hotta, A., Mag-
ness, S., Metzger, D., and Biernaskie, J. (2014). Hair follicle dermal stem cells
regenerate the dermal sheath, repopulate the dermal papilla, and modulate
hair type. Dev. Cell 31, 543–558.
Raj, A., and van Oudenaarden, A. (2008). Nature, nurture, or chance: stochas-
tic gene expression and its consequences. Cell 135, 216–226.
Sharma, V., Ling, T.W., Rewell, S.S., Hare, D.L., Howells, D.W., Kourakis, A.,
and Wookey, P.J. (2012). A novel population of a-smooth muscle actin-positive
cells activated in a rat model of stroke: an analysis of the spatio-temporal dis-
tribution in response to ischemia. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 32, 2055–2065.
Spassky, N., Merkle, F.T., Flames, N., Tramontin, A.D., Garcı´a-Verdugo, J.M.,
and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2005). Adult ependymal cells are postmitotic and are
derived from radial glial cells during embryogenesis. J. Neurosci. 25, 10–18.
Suh, H., Consiglio, A., Ray, J., Sawai, T., D’Amour, K.A., and Gage, F.H. (2007).
In vivo fate analysis reveals the multipotent and self-renewal capacities of
Sox2+ neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus. Cell Stem Cell 1, 515–528.
Tavazoie, M., Van der Veken, L., Silva-Vargas, V., Louissaint, M., Colonna, L.,
Zaidi, B., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., and Doetsch, F. (2008). A specialized vascular
niche for adult neural stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 3, 279–288.
Thau-Zuchman, O., Shohami, E., Alexandrovich, A.G., and Leker, R.R. (2010).
Vascular endothelial growth factor increases neurogenesis after traumatic
brain injury. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 30, 1008–1016.
Wu, W.-C., Sun, H.-W., Chen, H.-T., Liang, J., Yu, X.-J., Wu, C., Wang, Z., and
Zheng, L. (2014). Circulating hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells are
myeloid-biased in cancer patients. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111,
4221–4226.
Young, C.C., van der Harg, J.M., Lewis, N.J., Brooks, K.J., Buchan, A.M.,
and Szele, F.G. (2013). Ependymal ciliary dysfunction and reactive astrocy-
tosis in a reorganized subventricular zone after stroke. Cereb. Cortex 23,
647–659.
Zeisel, A., Manchado, A.B.M., Codeluppi, S., Lonnerberg, P., La Manno, G.,
Jureus, A., Marques, S., Munguba, H., He, L., Betsholtz, C., et al. (2015).
Cell types in the mouse cortex and hippocampus revealed by single-cell
RNA-seq. Science s347, 1138–1142.
Zheng, G.X.Y., Terry, J.M., Belgrader, P., Ryvkin, P., Bent, Z.W., Wilson, R.,
Ziraldo, S.B., Wheeler, T.D., McDermott, G.P., Zhu, J., et al. (2017).
Massively parallel digital transcriptional proﬁling of single cells. Nat.
Commun. 8, 14049.
Cell 173, 1045–1057, May 3, 2018
1057

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Rabbit anti-S100a/b
Dako
Z0311
Rat anti-Ki67
ThermoFisher
14-5698-82
Guinea pig anti-Dcx
Millipore
AB2253
Goat anti-Sox2
Santa Cruz
sc-17320
Rabbit anti-GFAP
Sigma
G9269
Rat anti-CD31
Acris
BM4086
Mouse anti-Nestin
Stemgent
9.0045
Chicken anti-GFP (to stain for eYFP)
Aves lab
1020
Mouse anti-Acetylated Tubulin
Sigma
T7451
APC or FITC-conjugated anti-CD133
eBioscience
12133182 / 53133180
Goat anti-Integrin a9
R&D
AF3827
Rat anti-VEGFR1/Flt1
Abcam
ab9540
Mouse anti-Fibronectin
BD Biosciences
610078
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Hoestch-33258
Sigma
14530
5-ethnyl-2’-deoxyuridine (EdU)
Carbosynth
C10419
Papain
Worthington
PDS
Recombinant VEGF
Peprotech
1450-32
Recombinant EGF
Peprotech
315-09
Recombinant bFGF
Sigma
3685
Buprenorphine/Vetergesic multidose
Champion Alstoe
02342510
Tamoxifen
Toronto Research Chemicals
T006000
Collagenase IV
Worthington
CLS-4
Critical Commercial Assays
Chromium Single Cell 3’ Solution (v2 chemistry)
10X Genomics
http://www.10xgenomics.com/
solutions/single-cell/
Kapa Library quantiﬁcation kit
Kapa Biosystems
KK4824 / 0790140001
Illumina HiSeq 2500
Princess Margaret Genomics
N/A
Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 555 kit
Invitrogen
C10338
Deposited Data
Raw and processed RNA sequencing reads
This paper
GSE100320
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Mouse: aSMACreERT2
Rahmani et al., 2014
N/A
Mouse: ROSA26eYFP
The Jackson Laboratory
006148
Mouse: ROSA26tdTomato
The Jackson Laboratory
00791
Mouse: Sox2tm2HochGFP
The Jackson Laboratory
017592
Mouse: Wildtype C57/Bl6
Charles River
027
Software and Algorithms
GraphPad Prism 5
GraphPad, v5.03
https://www.graphpad.com/
scientiﬁc-software/prism/
Cell Ranger
10X Genomics, v2.0.0
https://support.10xgenomics.com/
single-cell-gene-expression/software/
pipelines/latest/installation
Seurat
Macosko et al., 2015; v1.4.0.15
http://satijalab.org/seurat/install.html
scde
Fan et al., 2016; v1.99.4
http://hms-dbmi.github.io/scde/
e1
Cell 173, 1045–1057.e1–e4, May 3, 2018

CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact, Jeff Biernaskie (jeff.
biernaskie@ucalgary.ca).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Animal work was carried out in accordance with the guidelines and regulations of the CCAC and received prior approval from the
University of Calgary’s Animal Care Committee (protocol AC14-0019). Adult mice of both sexes (2-6 months of age) on a
C57BL/6 background were used for experiments. For genetic labeling of ependymal cells, aSMACreERT2 mice were crossed with
a ROSA26eYFP or a ROSA26tdTomato reporter strain (referred to as aSMA::ROSA26; The Jackson Laboratory). For FACS puriﬁcation
of ependymal cells, aSMACreERT2::ROSA26tdTomato mice were crossed with Sox2tm2HochGFP mice (The Jackson Laboratory).
METHOD DETAILS
Mouse and Tissue Handling
Postnatal CreERT2 activity was induced by two consecutive intraperitoneal injections (24 hrs apart; 0.25mg/injection for pups, and
1mg/injection for adults) of tamoxifen (4-OHT; Toronto Research Chemicals). For quantiﬁcation of recombination efﬁciency and
library preparation of single cell RNA-seq experiments, ﬁve consecutive daily intraperitoneal tamoxifen injections were performed.
To induce embryonic CreERT2 recombination, a pregnant mother was given 2 mg of tamoxifen via oral gavage on embryonic day
17. All animals undergoing surgical procedures received pre- and post-operative buprenorphine analgesia (0.05mg/kg). See below
for detailed surgical procedures. To label proliferating cells following stroke induction or growth factor infusions, 5-ethnyl-2’-deox-
yuridine (EdU; Carbosynth) was injected intraperitoneally (50 mg/kg). Before tissue collection, mice were euthanized with an
overdose of sodium pentobarbital and transcardially perfused with 20 mL of PBS and then cold 4% PFA. Dissected brains were
post-ﬁxed in 4% PFA at 4 C overnight and subsequently allowed to equilibrate in 30% sucrose at 4 C overnight, before ﬁnally
embedding in cryoprotectant (VWR Clear Frozen Section Compound) for storage at -80 C. The rostral-caudal axis of the V-SVZ
was cut in coronal sections (20 mm) using a cryostat (Leica) and stored at -80 C until further use.
Intracerebral Hemorrhagic Stroke
Animals were anaesthetized with isoﬂurane, subsequently mounted into a stereotaxic frame and maintained on 1%–2% isoﬂurane
anesthesia throughout the surgery. Mice received either 0.5 mL injections of 1x PBS as control or Collagenase IV (Worthington;
150U/mL) dissolved in 1x PBS to induce an intracerebral hemorrhage. Mice were stratiﬁed to achieve close to equal representation
of gender and age in each group. For stereotaxic injections, a midline scalp incision was made, followed by a small burr hole and
puncturing of the dura. Mice received consecutive unilateral stereotaxic injections of these drugs at two depths into the right striatum
at: AP +0.5mm, LM +1.5mm, and DV -3.5mm/-2.7mm using a pulled glass injection needle, with the needle left in following each
injection for 10 mins to prevent backﬂow. Speciﬁcally, mice received 280 nL at DV 3.5 mm, and 210 nL at DV -2.7 mm, followed
by an additional 5 mins backﬂow wait time at DV -2.0 mm. Surgeons were not blinded to the agent being injected. Mice also received
subcutaneous buprenorphine injections (0.05 mg/kg) at the time of surgery and daily for two days post-surgery. Brains were collected
1 or 4 weeks following stroke induction.
Stereotactic Injection of Growth Factors
Animals were anaesthetized with isoﬂurane, subsequently mounted into a stereotaxic frame and maintained on 1%–2% isoﬂurane
anesthesia throughout the surgery. Mice received either 1 mL injections of 1x PBS as control or VEGF (1 mg/mL; Peprotech) and bFGF
(1 mg/mL; Sigma) dissolved in 1 x PBS as growth factor stimulation. Surgeons were not blinded to the agent being injected. Mice
were stratiﬁed to achieve close to equal representation of gender and age in each group. Mice received a unilateral stereotaxic
injection of these agents into the right lateral ventricle at: AP +0.80 mm, LM +1.25 mm, and DV 2.5 mm using a pulled glass injection
needle, with the needle left in place for 15 mins following the injection. Brains were collected 1 week following VEGF/bFGF
stimulation.
Immunohistochemistry, EdU staining and Imaging
For immunohistochemical analysis, sections were permeabilized by incubating in 0.5% Triton X-100 in blocking solution (5% bovine
serum albumin (BSA) in PBS) for 1 hr at room temperature. Then, sections were treated with primary antibodies (1:200) in 0.1% Triton
X-100 in PBS and left at 4 C overnight. Subsequently, sections were washed twice in PBS and incubated with secondary antibodies
(1:200, Alexa) in PBS for 2h at room temperature, then washed thrice in PBS, stained for nuclei using Hoestch-33258 and mounted
using Permaﬂuor mountant. The following primary antibodies were used: anti-S100a/b, anti-Ki67, anti-Dcx, anti-Sox2, anti-GFAP,
anti-CD31, anti-Nestin, anti-GFP, anti-Acetylated Tubulin, APC-conjugated anti-CD133, anti-Integrin a9, anti-VEGFR1/Flt1, anti-
Fibronectin. After immunohistochemical staining, sections were stained for EdU using a Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 555 kit according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. All immunohistochemical stains were conﬁrmed positive with appropriate no primary (secondary
Cell 173, 1045–1057.e1–e4, May 3, 2018
e2

alone) controls. Sections were imaged using a Leica SP8 confocal microscope (63x objective, 15-25 serial z-stacks every
0.5 mm-1.0 mm).
FACS Sorting and culturing
The lateral wall of lateral ventricles (at the V-SVZ) from adult mice (n = 5) were microdissected and enzymatically dissociated with
Papain (Worthington, 30 U/mL with 330 mg/mL L-Cysteine in HBSS) at 37C for 30 mins with trituration every 10 min. Cell suspensions
were then ﬁltered through a 40 mm Nylon cell strainer to obtain a single cell suspension. Liberated cells were re-suspended in 0.5%
BSA in HBSS before FACS puriﬁcation. For FACS puriﬁcation/sorting, a stringent initial gate was used to exclude debris, and cell
doublets. Wildtype cells were used as negative control to determine gates for detection of eYFP, GFP, tdTomato-ﬂuorescence,
then cells from aSMACreERT2::ROSAeYFP, aSMACreERT2::ROSA26tdTomato or aSMACreERT2::ROSA26tdTomato/Sox2tm2HochGFP
mice were puriﬁed according to these gates. For aSMACreERT2::ROSA26tdTomato/Sox2tm2HochGFP mice, cortical tissue (devoid of
ependymal cells) was dissociated and sorted as above in order to determine gates distinguishing two subpopulations of aSMA::td-
Tomato+ve cells from V-SVZ tissue. As a positive control for sphere growth, aSMA::YFPve or aSMA::tdTomatove cells or Sox2-
GFP+ve aSMA::tdTomatove cells were also collected and cultured in parallel. All cultured cells were collected by FACS
puriﬁcation and plated at 10 cells/mL directly onto PDL/Laminin coated 96-well plates containing standard neurosphere growth media
(1% B27, 1% P/S, 50 ng/mL EGF, 50 ng/mL FGF, with or without 50ng/mL VEGF (Peprotech), in high-glucose DMEM and F12 (3:1)).
Cells were left in culture for seven days, with supplementation of growth factors every 3 days. For co-culture experiments with
embryonic neural stem cells, the brains of 5 wildtype E13 C57/Bl6 mice were dissociated into a single-cell suspension as described
above. For co-culture and conditioned media experiments, primary embryonic NSCs were grown at a density of 30,000 cells/mL with
passages using TrypLE for 10 mins every 5-7 days. Floating colonies were dissociated to single cells before re-plating along with
sorted cells at a 5:1 ratio (embryonic NSCs to sorted aSMA-YFP+ve ependymal cells). Conditioned media was collected from P1
spheres at optimal passaging density and stored at -80C. For conditioned media treatment, neurosphere growth media was
substituted for conditioned media at a 1:1 ratio at the time of sorting and supplemented with 1% B27, 1% P/S and growth factors
(EGF/FGF with or without VEGF) in identical concentrations to experiments described above. Cells were pulsed with growth factors
every 3 days. In vitro images were taken with 20x LD Axioplan objectives on a Zeiss Observer epiﬂuorescence microscope.
Single cell library preparation and RNA-sequencing
As described above, aSMA::tdTomato+ve Sox2-GFP+ve double positive cells were FACS collected from 8 week old aSMACreER-
T2::ROSA26tdTomato/Sox2tm2HochGFP mice. We collected one population of aSMA::tdTomato+ve Sox2-GFP+ve cells (1200 cells, Library
ID 1) and two populations of aSMA::tdTomatove Sox2-GFP+ve cells (1200 cells, Library ID 2 and 6000 cells, Library ID 3; Fig S3A) and
prepared single-cell sequencing libraries for each sample in parallel. All cells were processed according to 10X Genomics Chromium
Single Cell 30 Reagent Guidelines (v2 Chemistry; https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression). Brieﬂy, cells were
partitioned into nanoliter-scale Gel Bead-In-EMulsions (GEMs) using 10X GemCode Technology. Primers containing (i) an Illumina R1
sequence, (ii) a 16 bp 10x barcode, (iii) a 10 bp Unique Molecular Identiﬁer (UMI) and (iv) a poly-dT primer sequence were incubated
with partitioned cells resulting in barcoded, full-length cDNA from poly-adenylated mRNA. Silane magnetic beads were used to
remove leftover biochemical reagents/primers, then cDNA was ampliﬁed by PCR. Enzymatic Fragmentation and Size Selection
was used to optimize cDNA amplicon size prior to library construction. R1 (read 1 primer sequence) were added during GEM
incubation, whereas P5, P7, a sample index (i7), and R2 (read 2 primer sequence) were added during library construction via End
Repair, A-tailing, Adaptor Ligation and PCR. Quality control and quantiﬁcation was performed using a Kapa Library Quantiﬁcation
qPCR kit (Kapa Biosystems). Sequencing was performed using Illumina HiSeq 2500 (read 1 26 cycles, i7 Index 8 cycles, Read 2
98 cycles). Each sample was sequenced to an average depth of 50 million total reads. This resulted in an average read depth of
170 000 reads/cell for Library ID 1 and 2, and 44 000 reads/cell for Library ID 3 (Fig S3A).
Single cell RNA-seq processing
Reads were processed using the 10X Genomics Cell Ranger Single Cell 2.0.0 pipeline with default and recommended parameters, as
previously described (Zheng et al., 2017). FASTQs generated from Illumina sequencing output were aligned to the mouse
GRCm38.p5 (primary assembly) reference genome using the STAR algorithm. Next, Gene-Barcode matrices were generated for
each individual sample by counting unique molecular identiﬁers (UMIs) and ﬁltering non-cell associated barcodes. Finally, all three
samples were aggregated, with intermediary depth normalization, to generate a gene-barcode matrix containing 1700 barcoded
cells and gene expression counts.
This output was then imported into the Seurat (v1.4.0.15) R toolkit for quality control and downstream analysis of our single cell
RNA-seq experiment (Macosko et al., 2015) (Fig. S3B-F). All functions were run with default parameters, unless speciﬁed otherwise.
Low quality cells (<400 genes/cell and <3 cells/gene) were excluded from the overall experiment. Gene expression was log normal-
ized to a scale factor of 10 000. UMI counts, gene counts, and % of mitochondrial genes detected in single cell data were plotted to
determine any outliers of cells (there were none, Fig S3B, C). Total gene and UMI counts for each cell sub-divided by cell clusters was
also plotted (Fig. S3D).
e3
Cell 173, 1045–1057.e1–e4, May 3, 2018

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Information for animal and experimental replicates can be found in the results section and in the ﬁgure legends. Replicate numbers
were set at similar numbers to experiments outlined in previous publications that assessed neural stem cell responses in a similar
fashion to the current manuscript (Ottone et al., 2014). All statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 5 unless
otherwise stated. For comparisons of groups across multiple groups, a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s
post-hoc comparison was used. For comparisons of groups across 2 groups, an unpaired Student’s t test was used. p values < 0.05
was considered signiﬁcant. An F test was done concurrently and group variances were not found to be signiﬁcantly different.
All quantiﬁcation of immunostaining experiments was performed while blinded to the groups. All quantitative analysis at the V-SVZ
was normalized to the total length of the lateral wall analyzed and contained a deﬁned region >500 mm and 60 mm depth into the brain
parenchyma from the lateral ventricle. For growth factor injection experiment, all V-SVZ walls were also imaged adjacent to the in-
jection site. The proportion of EdU incorporation in reporter-labelled ependymal cells, GFAP+ve cells or Dcx+ve cells was quantiﬁed
from z-stacked confocal images and normalized to the total area of tissue analyzed. A two-tailed Student’s t test was used to
compare GFAP/EdU+ve and total EdU+ve cells in control (n = 3 animals) vs growth factor injection (n = 3 animals) groups.
For stroke experiments, all V-SVZ walls were imaged adjacent to the core of the injury site and compared to ependymal cells in the
V-SVZ of PBS control injections or to lateral wall of contralateral hemisphere. To quantify the ependymal cell numbers following
stroke, the number of recombined cells lining the lateral walls ipsilateral to the injury site was normalized to the contralateral lateral
wall, and the mean from three serially sectioned brain slices/animal containing the stroke injury was taken. For quantiﬁcation of neu-
roblasts at the rim of the injury site, the number of Dcx+ve cells within a 1mm2 region in the striatum was counted. A one-way ANOVA
followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test was used for all analyses to compare control (n = 3 animals) and injury (1 week: n = 3 animals;
4 week: n = 6 animals).
For in vitro experiments, colony number counts were performed at 1 week post-seeding for each group in each independent exper-
iment under a 20x LD Axioplan brightﬁeld objective on a Zeiss Observer microscope. The number of colonies exceeding 50 mm in size
were quantiﬁed. Colony counts were averaged across all wells collected for each group. All groups were compared to each other
using a one-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test (n = 4 independent trials). Ependymal cell analysis using aSMACreER-
T2::ROSA26tdTomato/Sox2tm2HochGFP cells were replicated as 3 independent trials.
For quantiﬁcation of single cell RNA-seq data, ﬁrstly unsupervised clustering of cells was performed. A selection of highly variable
genes (2985 genes) was obtained and used for principle component analysis (Fig S3E, F). Signiﬁcant principle components were
determined (PCs 1 through 20) using JackStraw analysis and visualization of heatmaps focusing on PCs 12 to 20. PCs 1 to 20
were used for graph based clustering (at res = 0.4) to identify distinct groups of cells. These groups were projected onto tSNE analysis
run using previously computed principle components 1 to 20. Expression of selected marker genes was used to classify each of the
9 cell clusters identiﬁed by graph-based clustering. Then, marker genes for each cell cluster were identiﬁed using the likelihood-ratio
test for single cell gene expression, and the top 5 markers for each cluster (based on average difference compared to remaining cells)
were selected and plotted on a heatmap. Importantly, individual parallel processing of each sample nor differences in total cell num-
ber between each sample did not affect results as evidenced by remarkable concordant clustering of Library ID 2 and 3 (Figure S3A).
For PAGODA analysis, cells classiﬁed as OL/OPCs, microglia and both undeﬁned cell populations were excluded before beginning
pathway and gene set overdispersion analysis. The scde (v1.99.4) R package was used for carrying out this analysis. After building
error models for each cell, and normalizing gene expression magnitudes, genes were grouped into gene sets corresponding to pre-
annotated unique GO terms and a total of 150 novel ‘de novo’ gene sets. Weighted PCA on these gene sets was run using 1 principle
component, as we wanted to identify gene sets overdispersed in unique cell populations. Then, hierarchical clustering was performed
to order 5 populations. We then explored the pre-annotated and novel gene sets overdispersed in various aspects corresponding to
gene expression signatures in each cell population. Speciﬁcally, we identiﬁed the top 3 gene sets overdispersed in the aspect exclu-
sively specifying qNSCs and identiﬁed the top 10 genes (ordered by normalized variance magnitude for each gene) from each of the
3 gene sets.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
The RNA-seq data reported in this study has been deposited under GEO: GSE100320.
Cell 173, 1045–1057.e1–e4, May 3, 2018
e4

Supplemental Figures
Figure S1. Non-ependymal Cell Recombination in the Parenchyma, Related to Figure 1
(A and B) Immunohistochemical analysis of Integrin a9 (Int a9, A) and CD31 (B) revealed that other recombined cells found throughout the brain were smooth
muscle cells associated with CD31+ve blood vessels and a previously described rare population of Integrin a9+ve densely ﬁbrous putative pericyte-precursors.
Scale bars: 20 mm (A and B).

(legend on next page)

===== SharifAlhoseini2017_SpinalCord_SCI+AnimalModels+Review =====
REVIEW
Animal models of spinal cord injury: a systematic review
M Sharif-Alhoseini1, M Khormali1,2, M Rezaei1,2, M Safdarian1, A Hajighadery1,2, MM Khalatbari1,
M Safdarian1, S Meknatkhah3, M Rezvan1, M Chalangari1, P Derakhshan1 and V Rahimi-Movaghar1
Study Design:
PRISMA-guided systematic review.
Objectives:
To provide a comprehensive framework of the current animal models for investigating spinal cord injury (SCI) and
categorize them based on the aims, patterns and levels of injury, and outcome measurements as well as animal species.
Setting:
Sina Trauma and Surgery Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
Methods:
An electronic search of the Medline database for literature describing animal models of SCI was performed on 1 January
2016 using the following keywords: ‘spinal cord injuries’ and ‘animal models’. The search retrieved 2870 articles. Reviews and
non-original articles were excluded. Data extraction was independently performed by two reviewers.
Results:
Among the 2209 included studies, testing the effects of drug's or growth factor's interventions was the most common aim
(36.6%) followed by surveying pathophysiologic changes (30.2%). The most common spinal region involved was thoracic (81%).
Contusion was the most common pattern of injury (41%) followed by transection (32.5%) and compression (19.4%). The most
common species involved in animal models of SCI was the rat (72.4%). Two or more types of outcome assessments were used in the
majority of the studies, and the most common assessment method was biological plus behavioral (50.8%).
Conclusions:
Prior to choosing an animal model, the objectives of the proposed study must precisely be deﬁned. Contusion and
compression models better simulate the biomechanics and neuropathology of human injury, whereas transection models are valuable to
study anatomic regeneration. Rodents are the most common and probably best-suited species for preliminary SCI studies.
Spinal Cord (2017) 55, 714–721; doi:10.1038/sc.2016.187; published online 24 January 2017
INTRODUCTION
Spinal cord injury (SCI), a fundamental medical problem, is associated
with severe disability and high rates of mortality. Although there is no
deﬁnite treatment for SCI, various research studies are ongoing
including experimental models to understand the anatomical and
biological events involved in SCI and repair, and to test the safety
and efﬁcacy of potential therapies. Animal models are in vivo
investigational methods used to analyze events under controlled
conditions. Therefore, to be insightful for a given human condition,
a disease or injury model should not only be similar in terms of the
causation and function to the human analog but also must have
advantages over simple clinical observation.1,2 Animal models also
allow for in-depth investigation of physiological and pathological
events. An astute researcher should be capable of choosing a proper
model and outcome assessment given the speciﬁc objectives. To select
an appropriate model and test a speciﬁc hypothesis, all existing SCI
animal models and related outcome assessments must be considered.
So far, some reviews focused on the paradigms3,4 or outcomes5–7 in
animal models of SCI. However, there is a gap in the literature for a
complete categorization of animal models of SCI studies. This
systematic review provides a comprehensive framework of the current
animal models of SCI and categorizes them based on the study aims,
patterns and levels of injury, and outcome measurements as well as
animal species.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
This systematic review was conducted according to the Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis (PRISMA)
statement.8 An electronic search of the Medline literature for animal
models of SCI was performed (1946 to 1 January 2016), using the
following conditions: SCI (MeSH Terms) AND (Models, Animal
(MeSH Terms) OR Behavior, Animal/Physiology (MeSH Terms) OR
Animal Experimentation (MeSH Terms)). Next the titles and abstracts
of studies of the resultant articles were independently screened by two
reviewers. Reviews and non-original articles were excluded at this
stage. Full-texts of the remaining manuscripts were retrieved and
further screened by reviewers against the exclusion/inclusion criteria
without language restriction. Reports were excluded based on the
following: review articles, articles not relevant to the experimental SCI,
in vitro spinal cord preparations and overlapping publications of larger
studies. In the latter case, the original studies that had used animal
models of SCI were included in the systematic review. Data extraction
from the resulting studies meeting inclusion criteria was performed.
The purpose of data extraction was to obtain the goals, methods and
outcome measurements from each study in a consistent manner so
that the ﬁndings could be interpreted and analyzed (Supplementary 1).
The data extraction form was pre-tested by all investigators using ﬁve
sample studies. Agreement among reviewers in this pilot test was
achieved by discussion to expose any ambiguity of the instrument and
1Sina Trauma and Surgery Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; 2Students' Scientiﬁc Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran and 3Laboratory of Neuro-Organic Chemistry, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics (IBB), University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran
Correspondence: Professor V Rahimi-Movaghar, Sina Trauma and Surgery Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Sina Hospital, Hassan-Abad Square,
Imam Khomeini Avenue, Tehran, 11365-3876, Iran.
Email: v_rahimi@sina.tums.ac.ir
Received 10 July 2016; revised 8 November 2016; accepted 27 November 2016; published online 24 January 2017
Spinal Cord (2017) 55, 714–721
& 2017 International Spinal Cord Society All rights reserved 1362-4393/17
www.nature.com/sc

to improve subsequent reliability. Extraction was executed by the
reviewers in the following manner: a reviewer would ﬁrst extract data
into the form and a second reviewer would conﬁrm the accuracy of
data extracted by the ﬁrst reviewer. Any disagreements were resolved
by a third reviewer. Full-text of studies in languages other than English
would be screened by one reviewer only. For this purpose, the
corresponding authors of non-English articles were asked to send
the English version of research method via email. In case that no reply
was received, translations were done using Google Translate. Descrip-
tive summaries were conducted using SPSS (IBM Corp., Endicott,
NY, USA).
RESULTS
Initial records identiﬁed through Medline literature searching included
2870 articles (Supplementary 2). The study selection procedure is
summarized in Figure 1.
In total, 661 articles were excluded because they were reviews,
non-original articles, not related to the experimental SCI, or a part of
larger included studies. A total of 74 non-English articles were
included.
Among the 2209 included studies, testing the effects of drug's or
growth factor's interventions was the most common aim of studies
(36.6%) followed by evaluating pathophysiologic changes (30.2%).
Other aims and their frequencies based on injury patterns are shown
in Table 1.
The most common spinal region studied was thoracic (1790, 81%)
followed
by cervical (265,
12%),
lumbar (113,
5.1%), sacral
(16, 0.7%), other (16, 0.7%) and unknown (64, 2.9%). In 54 studies
(2.4%), SCIs were induced in multiple regions.
On the basis of the mechanism of injury, SCI models were classiﬁed
as mechanical traumatic injury (94.5%) and non-mechanical injury
(5.5%). Contusion as a transient force to displace and damage the
spinal cord was the most common pattern of injury. Transection and
compression which were characterized by compression of the spinal
cord over an extended period of time were the next most frequent
injury patterns. In 25 studies (1.1%), more than one pattern was used.
Figure 2 shows all the types and subtypes of mechanical traumatic SCI
patterns in 2087 related studies.
The injury extent was not reported in 722 studies (33%). In 785
studies (35%), the injury was described as complete, and incomplete
injury was used in another 702 studies (32%), which included
transection.
Identification 
2870 records identified through database searching 
612 non-original articles excluded 
based on title and abstract: 
•
Review articles (279) 
Screening
2870 records screened 
2258 full-text articles 
assessed for eligibility 
Eligibility
49 full-text articles excluded: 
•
Non relevant articles (38) 
•
Review articles (11) 
Included 
2209 studies included 
Figure 1 Flow diagram of summarized search procedure. A full color version
of this ﬁgure is available at the Spinal Cord journal online.
Table 1 Study aims and injury patterns in 2209 animal model studies of SCI sorted by frequency
Aim of study, N (%)
Injury pattern, N(%)
Mechanical traumatic, 2087 (94.5)
Non-mechanical, 122 (5.5)
Contusion
Transection
Compression
Distraction/dislocation
Existent
Aspiration
Ischemic
Excitotoxic
Photochemical
Electrolytic
Effect of a drug or neurotrophic/growth factor interventions, 809 (36.6)
324
244
181
3
3
0
29
9
7
5
Pathophysiologic changes, 668 (30.2)
287
220
113
6
7
2
9
17
6
8
Effect of cell transplantation, 227 (10.3)
98
82
36
2
1
2
1
2
2
0
Characterization of a new model, 199 (9)
71
32
64
13
2
0
3
3
10
4
Behavior assessment, 86 (3.9)
30
46
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
Diagnosis, 64 (2.9)
34
16
11
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
Effect of scaffold, 46 (2.1)
9
33
2
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
Effect of electrical stimulation, 31 (1.4)
11
16
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
Effect of locomotor training therapies, 30 (1.4)
14
16
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Effect of decompression/ column ﬁxation, 15 (0.7)
7
4
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Effect of other treatments, 12 (0.5)
6
5
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Effects of hypothermia, 7 (0.3)
5
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
Effect of gene therapy, 7 (0.3)
4
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
Effect of x-irradiation, 5 (0.2)
4
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Effect of cerebrospinal ﬂuid drainage, 3 (0.1)
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
Total: 2209 (100)
906 (41)
717 (32.5)
428 (19.4)
24 (1.1)
15 (0.7)
6 (0.3)
46 (2.1)
32 (1.4)
25 (1.1)
19 (0.9)
Abbreviation: SCI, spinal cord injury.
Animal models of spinal cord injury
M Sharif-Alhoseini et al
715
Spinal Cord

Rat was the most common species in the animal models of SCI.
All species of animal used in studies are shown in Figure 3.
Outcome
assessments
were
classiﬁed
into
seven
categories
which included biological, behavioral, neurophysiology, imaging,
musculoskeletal, cardiovascular and respiratory evaluations (Table 2,
Supplementary 3). Figure 4 is a schematic drawing of outcome
assessments based on frequency and coincidence. With respect to
the histological methods, chemistry techniques and behavioral meth-
ods used, these were expanded based on the speciﬁc tests, frequencies
and features presented in Tables 3 and 4, separately.
Sixty-three percent of studies used two or more types of
outcome assessments (Table 5). The most common combination of
multiple outcome assessments was the usage of biology and behavior
assessments.
DISCUSSION
Aim of studies
Testing the effects of drug's or growth factor's interventions was the
most common aim of studies (36.6%) followed by evaluating
pathophysiologic changes (30.2%). Because of the technical and ethical
issues associated with human studies, most of the existing knowledge
regarding SCI pathophysiology and related interventions is derived
from animal studies.9 Animal models provide opportunities to discern
the cause and effect relationship between functional deﬁcits and their
essential biology. However, the heterogeneous nature of SCIs remains
an obstacle to translating ﬁndings across different paradigms and
severity of injuries as well as various species and to humans.10 Table 1,
showing the aims of studies based on injury patterns, could help
researchers to select an appropriate model, especially about less
common and non-mechanical models.
Region of injury
The most common region involved in SCIs in humans is the
cervical.11 However, these data indicate that thoracic SCIs are the
most common location used in animal models (81%). On the basis of
the literature, thoracic SCI models are apparently reliable and easy to
reproduce.12,13 As reduction of gray matter in this spinal region causes
less identiﬁable functional loss, SCIs in thoracic levels permit the
Figure 2 Injury types and subtypes in 2087 animal model studies with
mechanical traumatic SCI. A full color version of this ﬁgure is available at
the Spinal Cord journal online.
Figure 3 Species of animal used in 2209 animal model studies of SCI.
Table 2 Outcome assessments in 2209 animal model studies of SCI
sorted by frequencya
Type, N (%)a
Subtype, N (% of type)a
Biology, 1827 (82.7)
Immunohistochemistry, 1154 (63.2)
Staining and labelingb, 1089 (59.6)
Chemistry techniquesb, 644 (35.2)
Genetic techniques, 371 (20.3)
Flow cytometry, 42 (2.3)
Blood–spinal cord barrier permeability, 34 (1.9)
Cell Count, 30 (1.6)
Behaviorc, 1383 (62.6)
Locomotor tests, 1234 (89.2)
Sensory tests, 225 (16.3)
Sensory–motor tests, 184 (13.3)
Autonomic tests, 92 (6.7)
Reﬂex–response based tests, 78 (5.6)
Neurophysiology, 393 (17.8)
SSEPs, 162 (41.3)
Motor-evoked potentials, 129 (32.8)
Electromyography, 113 (28.8)
Electroneurogram, 39 (9.9)
Membrane potentials, 29 (7.4)
Imaging, 151 (6.8)
MRI, 108 (71.5)
Computerized tomography, 19 (12.6)
Functional MRI, 11 (7.3)
X-ray, 8 (5.3)
Ultrasonography, 6 (4)
Positron emission tomography, 4 (2.6)
Cardiovascular evaluation, 61 (2.8)
Musculoskeletal evaluation, 41 (1.9)
Respiratory evaluation, 17 (0.8)
Abbreviations: MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; SCI, spinal cord injury; SSEP, somatosensory
evoked potentials.
aSome studies used more than one outcome assessment, simultaneously (See Table 5).
bExpanded in Table 3.
cExpanded in Table 4.
Figure 4 Schematic drawing of outcome assessments based on frequency
and coincidence in 2209 animal model studies of SCI.
Animal models of spinal cord injury
M Sharif-Alhoseini et al
716
Spinal Cord

isolation and study of white matter deﬁcits.14 On the other hand,
cervical SCIs can result in respiratory compromise and are associated
with a high mortality rate due to interruption of the bulbospinal
respiratory drive to phrenic motoneuron pools and diaphragm
impairment.14,15 However, cervical and thoracic spinal levels differ
with respect to various anatomical aspects such as spinal cord
diameter, distance between the cell bodies of injured axons and the
injury site, relative dedication of the cord to speciﬁc ascending and
descending pathways, degree of vascularization, size of the sensory and
motor neuron populations and white/gray matter composition.16
Therefore, thoracic SCI models may not be readily translatable to
cervical injury patterns.16 In the cervical region, white matter
disruption leads to spastic paralysis below the level of injury, sensory
loss and chronic pain, as well as gastrointestinal, cardiovascular and
sexual dysfunction.11 Furthermore, use of the hind limb paws and
digits cannot be assessed as carefully as in the forelimb. Thus, forelimb
evaluation could overestimate the efﬁcacy of potential therapies,
particularly when improvements are mild.16,17 These differences and
region-speciﬁc properties justify the development of cervical SCI
models in recent years.18 On the basis of these data, however, cervical
SCI was done in only 12% of the studies considered.
Pattern of injury
In general, SCI models are selected based on the aims of the
researchers. Every animal model and injury pattern is designed to
focus on a speciﬁc question, and hence has associated consideration,
advantages and disadvantages. Most human SCIs happen due to blunt
trauma (for example, motor vehicle crash), where the spinal cord is
damaged by an object or displaced bone or other tissue. On the basis
of our data, 62% of included studies used a blunt trauma injury
pattern such as contusion, compression, distraction, dislocation or
existing
traumatic
SCI
(for
example,
dogs
injured
in
trafﬁc
accidents; Table 2). These models were developed in order to study
post-traumatic lesional processes, and repair processes after spinal
cord decompression or neuroprotective treatment.19
If the aim of study is investigation of pathophysiologic changes, a
contusion and/or compression model is preferred, because most
human SCIs involve contusion or compression.20 Contusion is the
oldest and most commonly used for SCI models. The ﬁrst reported
SCI model was presented by Allen in 1911, where a mass was dropped
from a prescribed height onto the dorsal surface of the canine dura.
Most data available concerning induction of a contusive SCI are
modiﬁcations of the injury model proposed by Allen.21 The contusive
models can make SCI in several severities which have been character-
ized by inﬂammation, ischemia, hemorrhagic necrosis and central
cavitation. Our study showed that Weight Drop was the most
common method of contusion (37.5%), followed by New York
University (NYU) impactor (27.4%) and inﬁnite horizon impactor
(20.6%). Although the New York University impactor is rather easier
to use, due to electromagnetic driving the inﬁnite horizon and Ohio
State University impactors have greater precision and more reliably
produce SCIs.22 Unilateral contusion or hemicontusion is typically
used in cervical regions because life-threatening adverse effects could
occur after complete cervical lesions. As motor dysfunction is more
apparent in the forelimbs, pain-related behavior is difﬁcult to estimate,
and hence cervical contusion is frequently utilized only for motor
functional analysis.11
Compression models are helpful to simulate the constant spinal
canal occlusion that is common in human SCIs and study the effects
of compression or the optimal timing of decompression. Appropriate
devices for compressive SCI are shown in Table 2. On the basis of our
data, more than half of the compression models use the aneurism clip
that causes ischemia and mimics common clinical injuries.23,24 The
balloon-induction method is a simple technique that does not cause
any damage to the surrounding structures.25 Calibrated forceps can be
used to produce a lateral compression injury by insertion on either
side of the spinal cord.1 A spacer can produce a precise degree
of narrowing of the spinal canal and mimic an anteroposterior
compression.26
Dislocation models cause injury by lateral displacement of vertebra,
whereas distraction models apply opposing traction forces to stretch
the spinal cord.4
Transection models are useful to study the effects of scaffolds,
biomaterials and neurotrophic factors in SCI and may be more
appropriate to investigate regeneration, degeneration, tissue engineer-
ing strategies or neuroplasticity.27 Sometimes transection models are
Table 3 Staining and Labeling, and Chemistry Techniques in 2209 animal model studies of SCI, classiﬁed using MeSH database and sorted by
frequency
Main technique, N (%)
Speciﬁc technique, N (% of main technique)
Reﬂects
Staining and labeling, 1089 (49.3)
H&E, 511 (46.9)
Spared tissue
Luxol fast blue, 229 (21)
Myelin
Cresyl violet, 223 (20.5)
Nissl bodies
Tract tracing, 216 (19.9)
Neural pathways
Osmium tetroxide, 210 (19.3)
Myelin, for electron microscopy
Eriochrome (solochrome) cyanine, 75 (6.9)
Myelin
Toluidine blue, 46 (4.2)
Nissl bodies
Silver, 35 (3.2)
Axon distribution and vascularity
Masson's Trichrome, Van Gieson or Sirius Red, 17 (1.6)
Collagen ﬁbers
Kluver–Barrera or Weil, 16 (1.5)
Myelin
In Situ hybridization, 15 (1.4)
Nucleic acid
Prussian blue, 4 (0.4)
Iron in the tissue
Chemistry techniques, 644(29.2)
Identiﬁcation of proteins (western blotting, electrophoresis), 480 (74.5)
Protein interactions
Peroxidase activity, 110 (17.1)
Leukocyte accumulation
Biochemical analysis, 103 (16)
Chemical reactions or enzymatic activities
High performance liquid chromatography, 23 (3.6)
Substance P
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid analysis, 18 (2.8)
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid properties
Abbreviations: H&E, hematoxylin and eosin; SCI, spinal cord injury.
Animal models of spinal cord injury
M Sharif-Alhoseini et al
717
Spinal Cord

used to study the role of neuronal circuitries in locomotion.28–31 On
the other hand, transected spinal cords are rarely encountered in
clinical practice, and thus the transection models do not truly reﬂect
the pathophysiology of SCI and are not appropriate as a basis to test
neuroprotective treatment.32 Spinal cord transection is performed after
laminectomy with ﬁne surgical scissors (iridectomy scissors) to induce
complete or targeted interruption of the spinal cord.22 Therefore to
maintain tissue continuity, a researcher can interrupt selective path-
ways via partial transections and preserve a tissue connection between
the rostral and caudal ends of the spinal cord.33 On the basis of our
study, almost half of the transection models are incomplete or partial.
(Table 2) Since a complete transection makes such a destructive tissue
milieu, incomplete transection reduces the physical harm to the cord
and the major cavitation and physical separation. Several studies have
revealed different plasticity in the spinal cord after complete and
incomplete transections.31 Therefore, the researchers should be careful
in the interpretation results focusing the extent of injury. A dorsal
hemisection for selective interruption of the corticospinal tract can be
performed with some feedback from the change in texture and color
between the white and gray matter, giving an indication of the degree
of hemisection.1,34 However, dorsal hemisection cannot be used
speciﬁcally to evaluate true axon regeneration.33 Dorsolateral quadrant
Table 4 Behavior assessment tests in 2209 animal model studies of SCI sorted by frequency
Main test, N (%)
Speciﬁc test, N (% of main test)
Reﬂects
Locomotor, 1234 (55.9)
BBB, 609 (49.3)
Locomotion
Open-ﬁeld activity, 200 (16.2)
Locomotion
Inclined plane, 145 (11.8)
Muscle strength
Basso mouse scale, 115 (9.3)
Locomotion
Automated walkway, 86 (7)
Locomotion
Tarlov, 81 (6.6)
Locomotion
Kinematic analysis during treadmill, 74 (6)
Locomotion
Forelimb locomotor scale, 66 (5.3)
Locomotion
Footprint, 55 (4.5)
Motor coordination
Hind limb function, 41 (3.3)
Locomotion
Swim, 36 (2.9)
Swimming ability
Limb grip strength, 36 (2.9)
Muscle strength
Food pellet reaching, 36 (2.9)
Motor coordination
Forelimb asymmetry, 31 (2.5)
Paw preference
Rotarod, 31 (2.5)
Locomotion
Combined behavioral score, 29 (2.4)
Locomotion
Rearing, 25 (2)
Paw preference
Limb hanging, 14 (1.1)
Grasping
Tail position, 4 (0.3)
Locomotion
Eshkol–Wachmann notation, 1 (0.1)
Locomotion
Sensory, 225 (10.2)
Von Frey or Semmes–Weinstein, 128 (56.9)
Mechanical allodynia
Pinch reﬂex, 109 (48.4)
Reﬂex
Hot plate, 58 (25.8)
Temperature
Cold tests, 17 (7.6)
Temperature
Paw compression, 12 (5.3)
Pain
Sensory–motor, 184 (8.3)
Grid walking (foot fault), 80 (43.5)
Sensory–motor coordination
Foot slip (horizontal ladder), 61 (33.2)
Sensory–motor coordination
Grooming, 28 (15.2)
Sensory–motor connection
Narrow beam walking, 28 (15.2)
Balance
Rope walk testing, 10 (5.4)
Balance
Autonomic, 92 (4.2)
Urinary bladder function, 69 (75)
Bladder function
Autonomic dysreﬂexia, 13 (14.1)
Autonomic dysreﬂexia
Erection-based tests or mating, 6 (6.5)
Erection
Telemetric monitoring, 6 (6.5)
Micturition erection
Manometric or balloon Test, 4 (4.3)
Sphincter control
Gastric motility, 3 (3.3)
Gastric function
Reﬂex–response, 78 (3.5)
Contact placing response, 43 (55.1)
Reﬂex
Toe spread reﬂex, 28 (35.9)
Reﬂex
Righting reﬂex (Static), 18 (23.1)
Reﬂex
Hoffmann's reﬂex, 12 (15.4)
Reﬂex
Abbreviations: BBB, Basso, Beattie, Bresnahan scale; SCI, spinal cord injury.
Table 5 Applied types of outcome assessments in 2209 animal
model studies of SCI
Types of outcome
assessments, N (%)
The most common mode, N (%)
One type, 823 (37.3)
Biology, 574 (26)
Two types, 1122 (50.8)
Biology+behavior, 886 (40.1)
Three types, 245 (11.1)
Biology+behavior+neurophysiology, 148 (6.7)
Four types, 19 (0.9)
Biology+behavior+neurophysiology+imaging, 18 (0.8)
Abbreviation: SCI, spinal cord injury.
Animal models of spinal cord injury
M Sharif-Alhoseini et al
718
Spinal Cord

lesions are used to disrupt the rubrospinal tract, and lateral hemisec-
tions interrupt all tracts on one side while sparing some or all tracts on
the opposite side. The transection model is the most appropriately
combined with neuroanatomical tract tracing and electrophysiological
studies.22,34
Ischemic models are established using an anterior sternotomy with
temporary aortic occlusion created by aneurysm clips. Spinal cord
ischemia remains an unknown clinical dilemma which mostly occurs
after aortic problems.35–37 The present study showed that more
ischemic models (63%) were performed to the test effects of drug's
or growth factor's interventions after SCI.
Excitotoxic models replicate selected components of the secondary
injury cascade. They are produced through intraspinal or intrathecal
injection of some excitotoxins.38
Photochemical models are among the most reproducible ischemic
models of SCI.39 There is no need for laminectomy or mechanical
trauma to the cord. After spinal column exposure and appropriate
beam placement, a photosensitizing dye (for example, rose Bengal) is
administrated systemically. The resultant photochemical reaction leads
to vascular stasis and congestion, edematous pale-staining white
matter tracts and hemorrhagic necrosis of the central gray matter.7
Electrolytic injury is used to study the neuronal pathways in the
central nervous system. The technique involves the insertion of a ﬁne
metal electrode into the spinal cord. Restricted damage of cells in this
region is accomplished by heating the electrode tip by passage of a
high electric current.40 On the basis of our review, 84% of electrolytic
injury models were composed in the spinothalamic tract of rats to
study behavioral outcomes, especially with central neuropathic pain.
Animal species
Our analysis demonstrated that rodents were the most commonly
used species (92%; Figure 3). Although rodents are best suited for
preliminary SCI studies,41 large animal and non-human primate
experiments better approximate human SCIs.42 Nonetheless, due to
expensive
care and
housing, rigorous
regulatory requirements,
and ethical considerations, larger mammals are rarely used.27 Other
vertebrates, such as ﬁsh and lamprey, have been studied to test novel
strategies for human SCI due to their distinctive regenerative
capacities.43
Rat models were the most widely used to study SCIs (72.4%).
The rat is low cost and easy to care for with a well-understood
anatomy,
relatively
uncommon
surgical
infections,
and
well-
established functional analysis techniques.7,34 Furthermore, similar to
human pathology, rats often develop large cystic cavities at the site of
injury. For these reasons, more rats are typically preferable to mimic
the human pathology.44 However, rats are quadrupeds not bipeds, and
their corticospinal tract is mainly dorsal,45 and these differences must
be properly accounted for.
Mice models are being implemented increasingly to study the basic
cellular and molecular biology of SCIs.44 These data estimate that 16%
of SCI models used mice. Advantages of mice models include the
similar genomes to humans, ease of handling, high reproductive rates
and low cost of use.46 Conversely, the small working size prohibits
many surgical maneuvres and device implantations.7,34 The injury site
in mice is densely packed with cells and actually decreases in size over
time due to absence of the cyst. Knockout models as genetically
modiﬁed animal studies mainly use mice. Using rats for knockout
models is so difﬁcult.47
Outcome assessments
Seven types of outcome assessments and the rate of use of each type of
the included studies are presented in Tables 2,3,4 and 5. Nearly
two-thirds of these studies used two or more types of outcome
assessments with the most common assessment being biology plus
behavior tests (1122 studies, 50.8%). Greater variety of outcome
assessments improves the study signiﬁcance and provides the possi-
bility of observing changes from different perspectives. With respect to
the testing methods used in 1528, rat models of mechanical traumatic
SCI (as the most widespread models), the three most common
outcome assessments, are presented in Table 6.
Biological analysis can yield helpful information on the extent of
the primary injury, preservation of particular ﬁber tracts, cellular
inﬁltration, secondary degeneration and molecular changes. At later
stages it can be used to evaluate the scar and cyst formation.22 Besides
traditional histological stainings, there is a broad variety of immuno-
histochemistry methods that allow for the investigation of cells,
structures and processes. The cell phenotype expressing a particular
protein in the injured spinal cords could be visualized using
immunohistochemical analysis. Also, the identiﬁcation of proteins is
done to evaluate differential gene expression involved in SCI and
treatment
models
thereof.
Neuroanatomical
tract
tracing
gives
a detailed visualization of speciﬁc neuronal connections. Tract tracing
Table 6 The three most commonly used outcome assessments in rat model studies with cervical and thoracic SCI
Level of Injury
Injury Pattern
Outcome assessments
Biology
Behavior
1
2
3
1
2
3
Cervical
Transection
IHC
Tract tracing
Cresyl violet
Food pellet
reaching
Forelimb
asymmetry
Kinematic analysis during treadmill
locomotion
Contusion
IHC
Cresyl violet
H&E
BBB
Limb grip strength
Forelimb asymmetry
Compression
IHC
H&E
Tract tracing
BBB
Food pellet
reaching
Forelimb asymmetry or Limb grip
strength
Thoracic
Transection
IHC
Identiﬁcation of
proteinsa
Tract tracing
BBB
Open-ﬁeld activity
Inclined plane
Contusion
IHC
Identiﬁcation of proteins
H&E
BBB
Open-ﬁeld activity
Inclined plane
Compression
IHC
H&E
Identiﬁcation of proteins
BBB
Open-ﬁeld activity
Inclined plane
Abbreviations: BBB, Basso, Beattie, Bresnahan scale; H&E, hematoxylin and eosin; IHC, immunohistochemistry; SCI, spinal cord injury.
aWestern blotting, electrophoresis.
Animal models of spinal cord injury
M Sharif-Alhoseini et al
719
Spinal Cord

demonstrates regeneration and plasticity after deﬁned ﬁber lesions,
and augments functional and physiological studies.34 In traditional
methods, histological outcomes, including sparing, quantiﬁcation of
myelin loss and motor neuron counts, are demonstrated via staining
sections of the spinal cord.11 Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) is
a well-known general structural stain used in many tissues. Cresyl
violet stains both neurons and glia and connects to acidic parts of cells
such as ribosomes, nuclei and nucleoli and also demonstrates the Nissl
substance. The myelin could be displayed using different techniques
such as Luxol Fast Blue, Osmium Tetroxide, Eriochrome Cyanine and
Kluver–Barrera or Weil. Table 3 presents the frequency and utilization
of histological and chemical techniques used in the animal models of
SCI classiﬁed according to MeSH terms.
Behavioral outcomes in experimental SCI models are important for
evaluating the extent of injury and treatment efﬁcacy. Activity levels
are related to the extent of neuronal destruction in the gray matter at
the injury region, the loss of descending and ascending axons in the
white matter and the reorganization of the remaining functional
nervous system.48 The locomotion could be assessed using different
tests. Observing and evaluating animal activity in an open ﬁeld, for
example, by the Basso–Beattie–Bresnahan (BBB) score, is a simple way
to assess locomotion. Table 4 presents the frequency and utilization of
behavior assessment tests used in the animal models of SCI.
To discern small changes in motor recovery requires more accurate
and particular tests. Video recording-based kinematic analysis is one of
the most sensitive behavioral evaluation tools and permits the
perception of functional changes that are undetectable by visual
observation alone.22 The upper limb movements could be evaluated
from home-cage activity49 and reaching/grasping behavior including
the food pellet reaching, the Montoya staircase and the isometric pull
task.50 The forelimb asymmetry test during vertical exploration
(cylinder test) can measure the recovery of forelimb function following
cervical SCI.11
Neurophysiology is a broader ﬁeld that includes evoked potentials,
electromyography,
electroencephalography,
electroneurography,
membrane potentials and nerve conduction studies. These evoked
potential assessments are useful for surveying the deﬁcits and
functional recovery in the neural substrates, and neural pathway
integrity.51,52 Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP) are helpful for
the assessment of sensory spinal axon conduction.53 Motor-evoked
potentials offer valuable insight into the physiological status of motor
tracts within the spinal cord and are appropriate for animal studies;
these are a complementary for SSEP monitoring, not an alternative.
All evoked potential methods take little time and cause only minimal
distress or pain and can safely be done without anesthesia.54
Electromyography
can
be
achieved
both
by
intramedullary
manipulation and rapidly applied transaxial spinal cord compression,
and can be used to study autonomic dysreﬂexia.55 According to our
data, neurophysiology was assessed in 17.8% of related studies.
Imaging.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been conveniently
applied in rodent SCI models. MRI can discriminate between white
and gray matter, and approximate the size of lesions and discern the
formation of scars and cavities. MR images also can be used on living
animals.22 Functional MRI is a precise method used to distinguish
between the recovery of sensory and motor function.56
Limitations
In general, a systematic review requires a comprehensive literature
involving at least two databases. However, PubMed is the most
complete bibliographic database of biomedicine.57 Furthermore,
MeSH-based queries return more relevant articles compared with
keyword searching and are generally recommended by librarians.57
Although it is desirable to include the greatest possible number of
applicable articles, using two databases to retrieve all articles with a
high yield, low speciﬁcity approach could result in an unreasonably
large number of irrelevant articles at tremendous burden to the
investigators. Hence a crucial balance must be found, and it does not
appear that a more widespread search leads to a signiﬁcant difference
in the overall results. In addition, a comprehensive survey involving
even unpublished work is beyond the scope of this study.
Gender and transgenic animals were not addressed in this
systematic review. On the basis of the checklist of Hassannejad
et al.9 about potential variables affecting the quality of animal SCI
studies, gender was not included. Also, gender was not mentioned in
many animal studies, especially about ﬁsh, reptiles and birds.
CONCLUSION
Animal
models
of
SCI
have
been
tremendously
helpful
for
understanding of the pathophysiology, potentials for recovery, and
implementations of new therapeutic strategies, and will continue to
play an essential role in the investigation into such injuries. These
models provide an opportunity for researchers to determine the
characteristic pattern of cell death and sparing, and measurement of
any demyelination, collateral sprouting, regeneration, neuroprotection
and recovery of locomotor or other deﬁcits. However, prior to
choosing an animal model, the goals and objectives of the proposed
study must precisely be deﬁned. Various injury mechanisms and study
designs can be useful depending on the information that is desired.
Contusion and compression models better simulate the biomechanics
and neuropathology of human injury. Transection models are valuable
for studying anatomic regeneration. Newer SCI models require further
improvement and validation. Rodents are the most commonly
used and probably best-suited species for preliminary SCI studies.
Controlling
and
monitoring
injury
mechanism
techniques
for
evaluating outcomes should be continually improved as technology
progresses.
DATA ARCHIVING
There were no data to deposit.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was a part of PhD thesis of the ﬁrst author and was funded by Sina
Trauma and Surgery Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences.
The authors thank Prof. Alexander R. Vaccaro (The Rothman Institute at
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA) for his precious edit of
the manuscript, Dr Ayat Ahmadi (Research Development Center, Sina
Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences) for performing the statistical
analyses, Farhad Shokraneh for his valuable comments in the search strategy,
and Dr Mina Tajvidi, Masoud Hassanabadi and Dr Seyedmehdi
Nourashrafeddin for providing full-texts.
1
Blight AR. Animal models of spinal cord injury. Top Spinal Cord Inj Rehabil 2000; 6:
1–13.
2
Blight AR, Tuszynski MH. Clinical trials in spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 2006; 23:
586–593.
3
Akhtar AZ, Pippin JJ, Sandusky CB. Animal models in spinal cord injury: a review. Rev
Neurosci 2008; 19: 47–60.
Animal models of spinal cord injury
M Sharif-Alhoseini et al
720
Spinal Cord

4
Cheriyan T, Ryan DJ, Weinreb JH, Cheriyan J, Paul JC, Lafage V et al. Spinal cord injury
models: a review. Spinal Cord 2014; 52: 588–595.
5
Filli L, Schwab ME. The rocky road to translation in spinal cord repair. Ann Neurol
2012; 72: 491–501.
6
Battistuzzo CR, Callister RJ, Callister R, Galea MP. A systematic review of exercise
training to promote locomotor recovery in animal models of spinal cord injury.
J Neurotrauma 2012; 29: 1600–1613.
7
Nakae A, Nakai K, Yano K, Hosokawa K, Shibata M, Mashimo T. The animal model of
spinal cord injury as an experimental pain model. J Biomed Biotechnol 2011; 2011:
939023.
8
Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG. Preferred reporting items for systematic
reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Int J Surg 2010; 8: 336–341.
9
Hassannejad Z, Sharif-Alhoseini M, Shakouri-Motlagh A, Vahedi F, Zadegan SA,
Mokhatab M et al. Potential variables affecting the quality of animal studies regarding
pathophysiology of traumatic spinal cord injuries. Spinal Cord 2015; 54: 579–583.
10 Ferguson AR, Irvine KA, Gensel JC, Nielson JL, Lin A, Ly J et al. Derivation of
multivariate syndromic outcome metrics for consistent testing across multiple models of
cervical spinal cord injury in rats. PLoS ONE 2013; 8: e59712.
11 Gensel JC, Tovar CA, Hamers FP, Deibert RJ, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC. Behavioral and
histological characterization of unilateral cervical spinal cord contusion injury in rats.
J Neurotrauma 2006; 23: 36–54.
12 Soblosky JS, Song J-H, Dinh DH. Graded unilateral cervical spinal cord injury in the rat:
evaluation of forelimb recovery and histological effects. Behav Brain Res 2001; 119:
1–13.
13 Rahimi-Movaghar V. Clinical trials for the treatment of spinal cord injury: cervical and
lumbar enlargements versus thoracic area. Brain 2009; 132: e115.
14 Lane MA, Fuller DD, White TE, Reier PJ. Respiratory neuroplasticity and cervical spinal
cord injury: translational perspectives. Trends Neurosci 2008; 31: 538–547.
15 Goshgarian HG, Koistinen JM, Schmidt ER. Cell death and changes in the retrograde
transport of horseradish peroxidase in rubrospinal neurons following spinal cord
hemisection in the adult rat. J Comp Neurol 1983; 214: 251–257.
16 Pearse DD, Lo TP Jr, Cho KS, Lynch MP, Garg MS, Marcillo AE et al. Histopathological
and behavioral characterization of a novel cervical spinal cord displacement contusion
injury in the rat. J Neurotrauma 2005; 22: 680–702.
17 Ohta K, Fujimura Y, Nakamura M, Watanabe M, Yato Y. Experimental study on MRI
evaluation of the course of cervical spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord 1999; 37: 580–584.
18 Dunham KA, Siriphorn A, Chompoopong S, Floyd CL. Characterization of a graded
cervical hemicontusion spinal cord injury model in adult male rats. J Neurotrauma
2010; 27: 2091–2106.
19 Baussart B, Stamegna JC, Polentes J, Tadie M, Gauthier P. A new model of upper
cervical spinal contusion inducing a persistent unilateral diaphragmatic deﬁcit in the
adult rat. Neurobiol Dis 2006; 22: 562–574.
20 Nobunaga AI, Go BK, Karunas RB. Recent demographic and injury trends in people
served by the model spinal cord injury care systems. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1999; 80:
1372–1382.
21 Vijayaprakash K, Sridharan N. An experimental spinal cord injury rat model using
customized impact device: a cost-effective approach. J Pharmacol Pharmacother 2013;
4: 211–213.
22 Brösamle C, Huber AB. Cracking the black box–and putting it back together again:
animal models of spinal cord injury. Drug Discov Today Dis Models 2007; 3: 341–347.
23 Rahimi-Movaghar V, Yazdi A, Karimi M, Mohammadi M, Firouzi M, Zanjani LO et al.
Effect of decompression on complete spinal cord injury in rats. Int J Neurosci 2008;
118: 1359–1373.
24 Jazayeri SB, Firouzi M, Abdollah Zadegan S, Saeedi N, Pirouz E, Nategh M et al.
The effect of timing of decompression on neurologic recovery and histopathologic
ﬁndings after spinal cord compression in a rat model. Acta Med Iran 2013; 51:
431–437.
25 Lim JH, Jung CS, Byeon YE, Kim WH, Yoon JH, Kang KS et al. Establishment of a
canine spinal cord injury model induced by epidural balloon compression. J Vet Sci
2007; 8: 89–94.
26 Dimar JRI, Glassman SD, Raque GH, Zhang YP, Shields CB. The inﬂuence of spinal
canal narrowing and timing of decompression on neurologic recovery after spinal cord
contusion in a rat model. Spine 1999; 24: 1623.
27 Kundi S, Bicknell R, Ahmed Z. Spinal cord injury: current mammalian models. Am J
Neurosci 2013; 4: 1–12.
28 Lavrov I, Gerasimenko YP, Ichiyama RM, Courtine G, Zhong H, Roy RR et al. Plasticity
of spinal cord reﬂexes after a complete transection in adult rats: relationship to stepping
ability. J Neurophysiol 2006; 96: 1699–1710.
29 Courtine G, Gerasimenko Y, van den Brand R, Yew A, Musienko P, Zhong H et al.
Transformation of nonfunctional spinal circuits into functional states after the loss of
brain input. Nat Neurosci 2009; 12: 1333–1342.
30 Shah PK, Gerasimenko Y, Shyu A, Lavrov I, Zhong H, Roy RR et al. Variability in step
training enhances locomotor recovery after a spinal cord injury. Eur J Neurosci 2012;
36: 2054–2062.
31 Edgerton VR, Tillakaratne NJ, Bigbee AJ, de Leon RD, Roy RR. Plasticity of the spinal
neural circuitry after injury. Annu Rev Neurosci 2004; 27: 145–167.
32 Schwab ME, Bartholdi D. Degeneration and regeneration of axons in the lesioned
spinal cord. Physiol Rev 1996; 76: 319–370.
33 Steward O, Zheng B, Tessier-Lavigne M. False resurrections: distinguishing regenerated
from spared axons in the injured central nervous system. J Comp Neurol 2003; 459:
1–8.
34 Talac R, Friedman JA, Moore MJ, Lu L, Jabbari E, Windebank AJ et al. Animal models
of spinal cord injury for evaluation of tissue engineering treatment strategies.
Biomaterials 2004; 25: 1505–1510.
35 Lang-Lazdunski L, Matsushita K, Hirt L, Waeber C, Vonsattel J-PG, Moskowitz MA.
Spinal cord ischemia: development of a model in the mouse. Stroke 2000; 31:
208–213.
36 Gaviria M, Haton H, Sandillon F, Privat A. A mouse model of acute ischemic spinal
cord injury. J Neurotrauma 2002; 19: 205–221.
37 Nouri M, Rasouli M, Shaﬁei S, Tavasoly A, Dehpour AR, Rahimi-Movaghar V. Does
abdominal aorta clamping, as a method of spinal ischemia in rats, really work? Surg
Neurol 2006; 66: 332–333.
38 Yezierski RP, Liu S, Ruenes GL, Kajander KJ, Brewer KL. Excitotoxic spinal cord injury:
behavioral and morphological characteristics of a central pain model. Pain 1998; 75:
141–155.
39 Piao MS, Lee JK, Jang JW, Kim SH, Kim HS. A mouse model of photochemically
induced spinal cord injury. J Korean Neurosurg Soc 2009; 46: 479–483.
40 Masri R, Quiton RL, Lucas JM, Murray PD, Thompson SM, Keller A. Zona incerta: a role
in central pain. J Neurophysiol 2009; 102: 181–191.
41 Simmons D. The use of animal models in studying genetic disease: transgenesis and
induced mutation. Nat Educ 2008; 1: 70.
42 Friedli L, Rosenzweig ES, Barraud Q, Schubert M, Dominici N, Awai L et al. Pronounced
species divergence in corticospinal tract reorganization and functional recovery
after lateralized spinal cord injury favors primates. Sci Transl Med 2015; 7:
302ra134.
43 Doyle LMF, Stafford PP, Roberts BL. Recovery of locomotion correlated with axonal
regeneration after a complete spinal transection in the eel. Neuroscience 2001; 107:
169–179.
44 Lee D-H, Lee J. Animal models of axon regeneration after spinal cord injury. Neurosci
Bull 2013; 29: 436–444.
45 Sharif-Alhoseini M, Rahimi-Movaghar V. in Topics in Paraplegia. (ed. Dionyssiotis Y)
209–228 (InTechOpen, 2014).
46 Jakeman L, Ma M, Stokes B. Considering the Use of Transgenic Mice in Spinal Cord
Injury Research. In: Marwah J, Dixo E, Banik N (eds). Traumatic CNS Injury. Prominent
Press: New York, USA, 2001, pp 180–202.
47 Pilcher HR. It's a knockout. Nature 2003; 425: 570–571.
48 Basso DM. Behavioral testing after spinal cord injury: congruities, complexities, and
controversies. J Neurotrauma 2004; 21: 395–404.
49 Wu R, Su L, Yang PF, Min Chen L. Altered spatiotemporal dynamics of cortical activation
to tactile stimuli in somatosensory area 3b and area 1 of monkeys after spinal cord injury.
eNeuro. (e-pub ahead of print 29 Sep 2016. doi:10.1523/ENEURO.0095-16.2016).
50 Fenrich KK, May Z, Torres-Espín A, Forero J, Bennett DJ, Fouad K et al. Single pellet
grasping following cervical spinal cord injury in adult rat using an automated full-time
training robot. Behav Brain Res 2016; 299: 59–71.
51 Šedý J, Urdzíková L, Jendelová P, Syková E. Methods for behavioral testing of spinal
cord injured rats. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2008; 32: 550–580.
52 Onifer SM, Rabchevsky AG, Scheff SW. Rat models of traumatic spinal cord injury to
assess motor recovery. ILAR J 2007; 48: 385–395.
53 Onifer SM, Zhang YP, Burke DA, Brooks DL, Decker JA, McClure NJ et al. Adult rat
forelimb dysfunction after dorsal cervical spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol 2005; 192:
25–38.
54 Blight AR. Motor evoked potentials in CNS trauma. Cent Nerv Syst Trauma 1986; 3:
207–214.
55 Skinner SA, Transfeldt EE. Electromyography in the detection of mechanically induced
spinal motor tract injury: observations in diverse porcine models. J Neurosurg Spine
2009; 11: 369–374.
56 Li S, Kim JE, Budel S, Hampton TG, Strittmatter SM. Transgenic inhibition of Nogo-66
receptor function allows axonal sprouting and improved locomotion after spinal injury.
Mol Cell Neurosci 2005; 29: 26–39.
57 Kim
S,
Yeganova
L,
Wilbur
WJ.
Meshable:
searching
PubMed
abstracts
by
utilizing
MeSH
and
MeSH-derived
topical
terms.
Bioinformatics
2016;
32:
3044–3046.
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on the Spinal Cord website (http://www.nature.com/sc).
Animal models of spinal cord injury
M Sharif-Alhoseini et al
721
Spinal Cord

===== Sharima2021_FrontCellDev_Microglia+InterSpecies =====
REVIEW
published: 01 April 2021
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.652748
Edited by:
Ryan B. MacDonald,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Mariko Bennett,
Department of Pediatrics, Children’s
Hospital of Philadelphia, United States
Noemie Hamilton,
The University of Shefﬁeld,
United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Ukpong B. Eyo
ube9q@virginia.edu
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Molecular Medicine,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental
Biology
Received: 13 January 2021
Accepted: 10 March 2021
Published: 01 April 2021
Citation:
Sharma K, Bisht K and Eyo UB
(2021) A Comparative Biology
of Microglia Across Species.
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9:652748.
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.652748
A Comparative Biology of Microglia
Across Species
Kaushik Sharma1,2†, Kanchan Bisht1,2† and Ukpong B. Eyo1,2*
1 Center for Brain Immunology and Glia, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States, 2 Department
of Neuroscience, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States
Microglia are unique brain-resident, myeloid cells. They have received growing interest
for their implication in an increasing number of neurodevelopmental, acute injury, and
neurodegenerative disorders of the central nervous system (CNS). Fate-mapping studies
establish microglial ontogeny from the periphery during development, while recent
transcriptomic studies highlight microglial identity as distinct from other CNS cells and
peripheral myeloid cells. This evidence for a unique microglial ontogeny and identity
raises questions regarding their identity and functions across species. This review will
examine the available evidence for microglia in invertebrate and vertebrate species
to clarify similarities and differences in microglial identity, ontogeny, and physiology
across species. This discussion highlights conserved and divergent microglial properties
through evolution. Finally, we suggest several interesting research directions from
an evolutionary perspective to adequately understand the signiﬁcance of microglia
emergence. A proper appreciation of microglia from this perspective could inform the
development of speciﬁc therapies geared at targeting microglia in various pathologies.
Keywords: microglia, evolution, vertebrates, invertebrates, ontogeny, identity, zebraﬁsh
INTRODUCTION
Microglia were ﬁrst described as a distinct glial cell type in 1919 by Pío del Río Hortega. They
were recognized as very diﬀerent from the neuroectoderm-derived macroglia, which includes
astrocytes and oligodendrocytes (Rio-Hortega, 1920; Penﬁeld, 1932). Studies in mice suggest that
microglia originate primarily from the embryonic yolk sac, and this has been conﬁrmed even in
humans (Cuadros et al., 1993; Alliot et al., 1999; Rezaie et al., 1999; Chan et al., 2007; Monier
et al., 2007; Ginhoux et al., 2010; Schulz et al., 2012; Kierdorf et al., 2013). Yolk sac-derived
microglial precursor cells enter the developing mouse brain at around embryonic day (E)8.5
through extravascular routes since the ﬁrst brain capillaries appear only at E10 (Kurz and Christ,
1998; Navascues et al., 2000; Ginhoux et al., 2010; Swinnen et al., 2013). After taking up residence
in the brain, microglia rapidly increase their numbers (Swinnen et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2015;
Nikodemova et al., 2015; Eyo et al., 2016). Early entry and subsequent colonization of the brain
make microglia well-suited to perform critical roles in regulating crucial events of early brain
Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; dpf, days post-fertilization; E(), embryonic day (); AGM, aorto-gonad-
mesonephros; CD, cluster of diﬀerentiation; P(), postnatal day (); HSC, hematopoietic stem cells; RBI, rostral blood island;
Iba1, ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1; NO, nitric oxide; NOS, nitric oxide synthase; ATP, adenosine triphosphate;
SPNO, spermine NOate; IL, interleukin; CD11b, cluster of diﬀerentiation 11b protein; DAP12, DNAX-activating protein of
12 kDa; BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; IGF1, insulin-like growth factor 1.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
1
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
development, including the phagocytosis-mediated regulation
of neural precursor cell numbers, promotion of neuronal cell
survival, phagocytosis of dying neurons, synaptic pruning,
angiogenesis, axon guidance, synaptogenesis, as well as the
reﬁnement and maturation of the developing circuits (Ashwell,
1991; Cuadros et al., 1993; Monier et al., 2007; Wakselman et al.,
2008; Fantin et al., 2010; Schafer et al., 2012; Cunningham et al.,
2013; Parkhurst et al., 2013; Swinnen et al., 2013; Ueno et al., 2013;
Pont-Lezica et al., 2014; Squarzoni et al., 2014).
After a brief period of reduced interest in microglial research
following Río Hortega and Penﬁeld, the groundbreaking work
of Georg Kreutzberg in 1968 revitalized research interest in
microglia by highlighting them as cells responding to facial
nerve lesions in mice (Blinzinger and Kreutzberg, 1968). These
results were pioneering studies to suggest that microglia can
displace synaptic connections following injury. For a long time
afterward, microglia in their activated states were identiﬁed as
neuroinﬂammatory cells in the context of brain injury, trauma,
and disease. Gradually, depending upon the driving stimulus’
context, they were identiﬁed with both neuroprotective and
neuroinﬂammatory roles in the brain (Hanisch and Kettenmann,
2007). In maintaining brain homeostasis, microglia constantly
survey
their
external
environment
continuously
sampling
neuronal activity through their close physical interactions with
neurons, synapses, and other parenchymal brain elements
(Davalos et al., 2005; Nimmerjahn et al., 2005; Wake et al.,
2009; Tremblay et al., 2010; Schafer et al., 2012; Uweru and Eyo,
2019). They sense their external environment through changes
in critical signaling mechanisms that ensure healthy microglia –
neuron bidirectional crosstalk that is crucial for maintaining
brain homeostasis (Ransohoﬀand Perry, 2009; Li et al., 2012; Eyo
and Dailey, 2013; Eyo and Wu, 2013; Nayak et al., 2014). Subtle
changes in this microglia - neuron crosstalk allow microglia
to respond to activity-dependent changes, thereby modulating
neuronal activity. Microglia remodel synapses in physiology as
well as contexts where brain homeostasis is disturbed, such as
stress, infection, or injury. Thus, microglia in the mammalian
brain serve critical functions in regulating brain homeostasis and
immune response to pathology, trauma, or infection (Hong et al.,
2016a,b; Fekete et al., 2018; Weinhard et al., 2018). Research over
the years has identiﬁed microglia to be performing a wide variety
of these functions. With the advent of new imaging tools and
transgenic models, further insights into the roles of microglia in
homeostasis and pathology are being described.
Despite
increasing
descriptions
of
microglial
roles
in
physiology and pathology, insight into the evolution of such
a specialized cell type is limited primarily because of the lack
of comparative microglia studies across diﬀerent organisms.
Among invertebrates, the existence of microglia has been
described mainly in the case of phyla Annelida (Rio-Hortega,
1920; Coggeshall and Fawcett, 1964; Morgese et al., 1983;
Sonetti et al., 1994), although microglia-like cell types capable
of phagocytosis and eliciting an immune response have been
described in some other invertebrate such as Drosophila (Leung
et al., 2015; Hartenstein and Giangrande, 2018). Therefore,
this review highlights some of the important characteristics of
microglia that are unique and conserved or divergent across
diﬀerent species with a focus on their molecular identity. We
believe that such considerations will facilitate our understanding
of the signiﬁcance of microglia to regulate brain development,
facilitate brain homeostatic maintenance, and contribute to
brain pathology. In the following pages, we synthesize some of
the available evidence for microglia in diﬀerent species along
four lines: their self-renewing capacity, transcriptional identity,
developmental ontogeny as well as their roles in physiology and
pathology. In doing so, we provide a resource that we hope will
generate future research studies in this area.
MICROGLIA ACROSS SPECIES: A
SELF-RENEWING BRAIN-RESIDENT
MYELOID POPULATION
Microglia have been identiﬁed in various invertebrate and all
vertebrate species. However, investigations into their ontogeny
and maintenance have been especially established in rodents.
In the past, there was a serious debate over whether microglia
were of neuroectodermal origin as other central nervous system
(CNS) cells or of mesodermal origin like other cells of the
periphery (Ginhoux and Prinz, 2015). That debate has been
largely resolved from studies performed in the mouse. Initial
studies revealed that like cells of the myeloid lineage in the
periphery, a PU.1 deﬁciency prevented the development of
brain-resident microglia (McKercher et al., 1996; Beers et al.,
2006). These ﬁndings suggested that microglia and myeloid
cells share a similar origin. Although myeloid in origin, the
question remained regarding the potential myeloid source(s) of
microglia. Resident myeloid cell populations in peripheral organs
often consist of circulating bone marrow-derived monocytes that
inﬁltrate into speciﬁc tissues and transform into macrophages
where they can become tissue-resident. As brain macrophages,
it was hypothesized that microglia could originate from ongoing
inﬁltration of circulating monocytes that invade the brain
throughout life. Alternatively, a speciﬁc source of microglia could
exist that seed the brain and maintain microglial populations
through cell-autonomous self-renewal.
To begin to address these possibilities, earlier studies used
multiple approaches and showed that microglial maintenance
does not require inﬁltration of myeloid cells into the brain in
the steady state in mice (Ajami et al., 2007, 2011; Ginhoux
et al., 2010). Moreover, more recent studies indicate that when
microglia are eliminated from the brain by pharmacological
treatment, the subsequent repopulation that ensues does not
result from inﬁltrating myeloid cells but rather from an expansion
of the residual brain-resident microglial pool (Huang et al.,
2018; Zhan et al., 2019). Moreover, longitudinal visualization of
microglia in the adult brain through life repeatedly indicates that
individual microglia are long-lived in the mouse (Askew et al.,
2017; Fuger et al., 2017; Eyo et al., 2018). Together, these results
strongly suggest that microglia are a self-renewing brain-resident
population of cells that seed the brain some time in development
and are maintained by self-renewal subsequently.
Although the above is true in mice, the extent to which
microglial maintenance results from self-renewal rather than
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
2
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
peripheral replacement in other species has not been suﬃciently
explored. It should be noted that at least one study has conﬁrmed
that, like mouse microglia, human microglia are long-lived and
persist for decades (Reu et al., 2017). Nevertheless, questions of
microglial maintenance in the invertebrate leech as well as the
vertebrate zebraﬁsh and human need to be further explored.
MICROGLIA ACROSS SPECIES –
INSIGHT FROM GENE EXPRESSION
STUDIES
The advancement of next-generation sequencing techniques over
the last decade has facilitated the study of cellular identity and
transcriptional expression, especially in the CNS (Dong et al.,
2016; Stark et al., 2019). These studies have provided insights into
neural cell states and potential functions that can be subsequently
validated by other molecular and functional approaches. For
microglial identity, these studies over the last 7 years have
provided important information on microglial identity at two
levels. First, they have clariﬁed a unique microglial transcriptional
signature that distinguishes them from other brain-resident cells
on the one hand and peripheral myeloid cells on the other.
Second, comparative transcriptomics are highlighting conserved
and divergent aspects of microglial transcriptional identity across
species. In this section, we consider the available data on these
two points in turn.
The Unique Microglial Transcriptional
Identity
The question of microglial identity has been clariﬁed in the
last decade by the advent of transcriptional proﬁling. The
ﬁrst microglial transcriptome studies using RNA sequencing
compared microglia to other cells of the brain and determined a
unique microglial transcriptional signature, including genes such
as P2ry12, Tmem119, and Hexb in mice (Hickman et al., 2013;
Butovsky et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2014). Furthermore, when
microglia were compared to peripheral macrophages, despite
similarities in their myeloid origins and molecular identity, some
of the same genes were still uniquely expressed by microglia and
lacking in macrophages (Hickman et al., 2013). Further work
comparing microglia, monocytes, and perivascular macrophages
resident in the brain revealed transcriptional diﬀerences between
these cells and microglia with the same speciﬁc gene set
(Goldmann et al., 2016). Therefore, these studies suggest a unique
microglial cell signature compared to other brain and immune
(including brain-resident immune) cells.
In 2018, to address whether this distinction results from
environmental or ontogenic factors, four independent groups
arrived at similar conclusions using slightly diﬀerent approaches.
In the ﬁrst study, using three diﬀerent approaches to trigger
peripheral cells to naturally engraft the adult mouse brain, studies
showed that despite long-term residence in the brain, engrafted
peripherally derived macrophages fail to adopt the microglial
signature including the inability to express microglial speciﬁc
genes like P2ry12, Tmem119, and Sall1 (Cronk et al., 2018).
Similarly, a subsequent study using a forced transplantation
approach revealed that transplantation of isolated brain-derived
microglia fully recapitulated the microglial transcriptional
signature. In contrast, transplantation of peripherally derived
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) failed to do so (Bennett
et al., 2018). Engrafted cells also show functionally and
transcriptionally distinct responses to stimuli compared to
resident microglia (Lund et al., 2018; Shemer et al., 2018).
Therefore, these studies indicate that microglia and peripherally
derived macrophages are distinct populations in light of their
ontogeny though they often exhibit overlapping molecular
markers. Together, these studies clarify microglial molecular
identity as comprising especially P2ry12, Tmem119, and Sall1
among several microglial-speciﬁc genes and we use this as the
predominant microglial description (It should be noted, though,
that one study shows monocyte-derived microglial-like cells with
the capacity to express lower levels of P2ry12 and Tmem119 but
these studies suggest Sall1 as more deﬁning of microglia).
Despite these ﬁndings, more recent studies provide novel
insights suggesting that mature microglia are at least partly
monocyte-derived. E17 labeled peripheral cells were found in
the brain at P2 and P24 expressing microglial-speciﬁc P2ry12,
Tmem119, and Sall1 (Chen et al., 2020). Although the extent to
which these monocyte-derived cells contribute to the microglial
adult population (i.e., % of total cells and their maintenance
into adulthood) is not clear, this ﬁnding raises possibilities of
converging sources (HSC-dependent and independent sources)
of brain microglia in mice (see Section “Microglia across species –
insights from microglia in development”). Interestingly, brain
transplantation of induced pluripotent stem cells derived from
human HSCs into humanized mice showed the ability of these
human cells to generate microglia, including the expression
of microglial-speciﬁc genes (Hasselmann et al., 2019; Svoboda
et al., 2019). This suggests that the capacity of HSC-to-microglial
transition persists in human cells. Together, these results indicate
that endogenous mouse HSCs and exogenous human HSCs
retain the capacity to generate microglia during development.
Although these results conﬂict with a previously discussed study
during development (Bennett et al., 2018), they may reﬂect an
ancestral capacity for HSC-to-microglial transition that persist
in murine and human microglia reminiscent of the situation
observed during zebraﬁsh development (Xu et al., 2015; Ferrero
et al., 2018). Well-designed studies to ascertain this possibility
should, therefore, be conducted.
Conserved and Divergent Transcriptional
Identity Across Species
While the microglial transcriptome has been extensively studied
in mice, gene expression studies are beginning to be elucidated in
other vertebrates as well. An extensive analysis of the microglial
transcriptome across several vertebrate species highlighted the
relative homogeneity of microglia among vertebrates. While
microglia from various mammalian species like the mouse
(including wild mice and four laboratory strains), macaque,
marmoset, and hamster showed a single dominant cluster,
microglia in humans showed multiple clusters indicating greater
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
3
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
heterogeneity (Masuda et al., 2019; Geirsdottir et al., 2020).
These results suggest accelerated changes in microglia over
the course of human evolution when compared to other non-
human vertebrates.
Despite greater microglial diversity in humans than other
mammals, microglial transcriptional analysis between vertebrates
revealed the conservation of a core set of homeostatic genes.
For example, adult zebraﬁsh microglia, like mouse microglia,
possess toll-like receptors, chemokine receptors, purinergic
receptors, MHC class II, and complement receptor genes
among core microglial genes (Oosterhof et al., 2017) suggesting
that developmental, homeostatic, and physiological microglial
functions regulated by these genes were present in early
vertebrates. Similarly, developing zebraﬁsh microglia show a
highly conserved transcriptional signature to mouse microglia
(Mazzolini et al., 2020). Here, in the latter stages of early
development (7 days post-fertilization), microglia exhibit a
more diverse clustering than in earlier stages (3 and 5 days
post-fertilization), indicating rapid changes in the microglial
transcriptome during maturation (Mazzolini et al., 2020).
Interestingly, this is reminiscent of the condition in mice
where developing microglia are more heterogeneous than adult
microglia (Hammond et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019).
In addition to general heterogeneity, microglia in mice show
some level of regional diversity. For example, while cerebellar
microglia show a more robust phagocytic transcriptional
proﬁle, striatal microglia show a weak phagocytic proﬁle
in the homeostatic state. These transcriptional observations
are consistent with corresponding diﬀerences in microglial
phagocytic clearance (Ayata et al., 2018). Furthermore, mouse
microglia show transcriptional diﬀerences by sex (Guneykaya
et al., 2018; Villa et al., 2018). However, the extent to which
these regional and sex diﬀerences in the microglial transcriptome
are conserved in lower vertebrates and humans remains
to be determined.
In conclusion, assessing the available data for microglial gene
expression across species indicates a distinct proﬁle between
microglia and peripheral myeloid cells in mice. Although these
diﬀerences have not been suﬃciently explored in other species,
microglia in zebraﬁsh and humans show a largely conserved
transcriptional proﬁle.
MICROGLIA ACROSS SPECIES –
INSIGHTS FROM MICROGLIA IN
DEVELOPMENT
Microglial Morphology, Surveillance, and
Patrolling Capacities
Microglia exhibit a structure consisting of a central soma
and branched processes that emanate from this soma. In all
species examined so far, microglia display a ramiﬁed structure
with their process complexity varying across species. In the
invertebrate leech, microglia display a very reduced structural
complexity compared to vertebrate microglia (Geirsdottir et al.,
2020). However, among vertebrates, while microglia exhibit
robust ramiﬁcations, each species shows varying degrees of
morphological complexity, with marmosets exhibiting the
greatest complexity. Humans show an intermediate level of
morphological complexity amongst various species examined
(Geirsdottir et al., 2020). These results suggest that while there
has been a trend toward greater morphological complexity
between invertebrate and vertebrate species, vertebrate microglia
show highly diverse levels of complexity that is not directly
correlated with increasing complexity in phylogenetic evolution.
This is unlike the situation with astrocytes that are larger
and more complex in humans when compared to mice
(Oberheim et al., 2012).
In addition to their complex morphology, microglia are the
most morphologically dynamic cells of the vertebrate brain
(Davalos et al., 2005; Nimmerjahn, 2012). Microglial basal
morphological activity have been characterized with regards
to their process dynamics (surveillance) and soma dynamics
(migration or patrol). These dynamic features seem to have
been well conserved in vertebrates since both zebraﬁsh (Peri and
Nusslein-Volhard, 2008; Sieger et al., 2012) and rodent microglia
(Petersen and Dailey, 2004; Davalos et al., 2005; Eyo et al., 2016,
2018) exhibit surveillance and patrol. Moreover, chimeric mice
with transplanted human microglia also show dynamic process
surveillance (Hasselmann et al., 2019).
On microglial patrol, speciﬁc developmental features also
seem to be conserved across species. For example, in the
mouse, microglia display immense migratory capacities in
early development in the embryonic cortex (Swinnen et al.,
2013) and the early postnatal hippocampus (Eyo et al., 2016).
Interestingly, with age, these capacities are rapidly downregulated
(Swinnen et al., 2013; Eyo et al., 2016). Similarly, while zebraﬁsh
microglia exhibit robust patrol in early development (Peri
and Nusslein-Volhard, 2008; Sieger et al., 2012), this patrol is
signiﬁcantly reduced with increasing age during development
(Svahn et al., 2013).
Although this progressive reduction in tissue patrol has
been documented in mice and ﬁsh, neither the reason(s) nor
the underlying mechanism(s) for this reduction is clear. One
possibility is that intrinsic factor(s) in microglial maturation
could account for these changes. Evidence from the zebraﬁsh
suggests that between 3 and 5 or 7 days post fertilization (dpf),
a time window that corresponds with reduced tissue patrol in
zebraﬁsh (Svahn et al., 2013), there is a progressive reduction in
migration gene expression (Mazzolini et al., 2020). Conversely,
there is an upregulation of Plxnb2a in zebraﬁsh (Mazzolini
et al., 2020) which in mice negatively regulates macrophage
motility (Roney et al., 2011). Therefore, a combination of intrinsic
upregulation of migration-inhibition genes and downregulation
of migration-promoting genes could be the underlying basis
for changes in migration during development. However, this
hypothesis remains to be rigorously tested and similar features
of the mouse (and human) microglial development need to be
carefully explored.
Alternative to intrinsic maturation factor(s) that may regulate
microglial patrol in development, extrinsic brain-derived factors
could be proposed as instructive cues. One important cue
that has been tested is developmental apoptosis. In both mice
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
4
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
(Wakselman et al., 2008; Eyo et al., 2016) and zebraﬁsh (Peri and
Nusslein-Volhard, 2008; Svahn et al., 2013), microglia aggregate
around apoptotic cells in development. Since developmental
apoptosis is a transient feature of the developing brain, apoptotic
signals could serve as an instructive cue to mobilize microglia.
In the ﬁsh, independent back-to-back studies showed that
apoptosis indeed regulates microglial entry into the brain at a
time coincident with high migration (Casano et al., 2016; Xu
et al., 2016). However, in mice, while peak microglial patrol
occurred with periods of peak apoptosis, elimination of apoptosis
did not alter microglial patrol or brain colonization suggesting
that apoptosis was not a driving factor in microglial migratory
capacity (Peng et al., 2016). Therefore, current evidence indicates
that conserved features of microglial dynamic activity during
development may be diﬀerentially regulated across species.
The Prevailing Model or Microglial
Ontogeny in Mice
In
addition
to
understanding
microglial
morphological
dynamics, studies have been conducted to elucidate microglial
ontogeny in development. Microglia were detected in primitive
mouse brain tissue as early as E9 (Ginhoux et al., 2010). Myeloid
cell populations in the body originate from two broad waves
of hematopoiesis termed primitive hematopoiesis (from E7 to
E9 in mice) and deﬁnitive hematopoiesis (after E9 in mice).
To determine which of these sources give rise to brain-resident
microglia, Ginhoux et al., 2010 fate-mapped Runx+ macrophages
at diﬀerent embryonic ages from E6.5 to E10.5 (Ginhoux et al.,
2010). The authors of this study made two notable observations.
First, they noted that once labeled as primitive macrophages
during these embryonic stages, macrophages persisted into
adulthood as microglia at the same ratio as embryonic microglia.
Here, E7 labeled macrophages comprised a third of the brain
macrophages at both E10 and adulthood, indicating that
macrophages that seed the brain in development persist to give
rise to adult microglia. Secondly, when primitive macrophages
were labeled between E6.5 and E10.5, the percent of adult
labeled microglia was low (E6.5 labeling), peaked (E7–E7.5) and
then declined (E7.5–E10.5). Together, these results provided
powerful evidence that murine microglia seed the brain from
embryonically derived yolk sac macrophages that once in the
brain give rise to the adult microglial population. Moreover,
these studies suggested that later sources of myeloid progenitor
cells from the aorto-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) or fetal liver,
which are sources of deﬁnitive hematopoiesis do not contribute
signiﬁcantly to the adult microglial pool.
Subsequent work has expanded these ﬁndings to show that
multi-lineage c-kit+ erythromyeloid yolk sac precursor cells ﬁrst
originate in blood islands in the embryonic yolk sac at around
E7.25 (Ginhoux et al., 2010; Kierdorf et al., 2013). These early
yolk sac precursors undergo maturation from A1 (CD45+ c-kitlo
CX3CR1−F4/80−) to A2 (CD45+ c-kit−CX3CR1+ F4/80hi)
amoeboid macrophages that enter and colonize the developing
mouse brain at around E8.5 through extravascular routes (Kurz
and Christ, 1998; Arnold and Betsholtz, 2013). The ﬁrst microglia
enter the mouse brain through the ventricles or from the
meninges by crossing the pial surface and rapidly proliferate
and reside in the parenchyma throughout life as brain-resident
immune cells (Navascues et al., 2000; Ginhoux et al., 2010;
Swinnen et al., 2013; Reemst et al., 2016). They rapidly proliferate
between E14 and E16, while slowly peaking until E17.5, and then
distribute themselves throughout the brain (Santos et al., 2008;
Swinnen et al., 2013).
Revising the Model for Microglial
Ontogeny in Mice
The prevailing hypothesis of microglial origin described above
emphasized that adult microglia are solely derived from early
yolk sac primitive macrophages generated through primitive
hematopoiesis without contributions from latter deﬁnitive
hematopoietic lineage cells that go through the fetal liver
(Ginhoux and Prinz, 2015). However, one important feature of
the initial study was the fact that at its peak, only a third of
the microglial population were labeled in adulthood once fate
mapped from the yolk sac in development (Ginhoux et al., 2010).
Two explanations could be given for this observation. First, it is
possible that the labeling approach ineﬃciently labels only a third
of the primitive hematopoietic macrophage population, which
then gives rise to the adult microglial pool. This is the possibility
suggested by the Ginhoux et al. (2010). However, an alternative
possibility is that adult microglia are composites of both primitive
macrophages and alternatively sourced progenitors which would
account for the incomplete labeling of adult microglia by
primitive macrophages. Interestingly, some recent studies are
suggesting alternative aspects of microglial invasion patterns
consistent with the second possibility above.
Selective interference with deﬁnitive hematopoiesis using
Vav1-Cre+:dicerﬂ/ﬂmice revealed a drastic 40% reduction in
microglia at postnatal day (P)1, though not between E16.5-P0
(Fehrenbach et al., 2018) suggesting that a wave of non-yolk sac-
derived HSCs contribute to the microglial population through
a massive invasion shortly after birth. However, the study also
failed to adequately fate map these cells, leaving the possibility
that interfering with HSCs may reduce the microglial pool by
mechanisms other than direct cell entry. Moreover, whether these
“missing” cells are required to constitute the adult microglial
pool or whether they are a transient perinatal microglial pool
was not addressed. Some of these points were addressed in a
diﬀerent study that labeled liver cells by electroporation at E14
and detected them in the brain at P0 then at P3 when they peaked.
However, they were signiﬁcantly eliminated by P6 (Askew et al.,
2017). Therefore, these liver-derived HSCs did not persist as
microglia in the mature brain. Whether these are the same
cells as those “missing” in the Vav1-Cre+:dicerﬂ/ﬂmice remains
to be determined.
A
more
deﬁnitive
fate-mapping
study
conducted
by
generating CCR2-CreER mice has recently been performed
(Chen et al., 2020). CCR2 is a monocyte marker that is not
expressed by microglia. Chen et al. (2020) labeled CCR2-
derivatives at E14 and E17 when deﬁnitive hematopoiesis
is ongoing. At P2 and also at P24, CCR2-derivatives could
be detected in the brain parenchyma, suggesting that these
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
5
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
monocytic-derived cells are present in the brain shortly after
birth and persist in the brain. Interestingly, these cells take on
microglial identity (e.g., expression of P2ry12, Tmem119, and
Sall1, see section “Microglia across species – insight from gene
expression studies”) once inside the brain and presumably lose
their monocytic identity, which may explain why they had not
been detected by previous studies.
In agreement with the foregoing, a diﬀerent study documents
that a speciﬁc lineage of adult microglia that express Hoxb8
transiently in embryonic development when fate-mapped are
generated in the yolk sac, then are present in the AGM, then the
fetal liver before subsequently taking up residence in the brain
(De et al., 2018). In this study, the authors suggested another
wave of microglia progenitors that inﬁltrates the brain at E12.5
and are positive for Hoxb8, unlike the microglia progenitor cells
seeded at E8.5 (De et al., 2018). But before seeding into the brain,
the Hoxb8 microglia progenitors originating during the second
wave of yolk sac hematopoiesis greatly proliferate in the AGM
and fetal liver prior to inﬁltrating the E12.5 brain. Interestingly,
the transcriptional analysis indicated that canonical microglia
and Hoxb8+ microglia were highly homogeneous, sharing all but
21 diﬀerentially expressed genes. These diﬀerences did not aﬀect
basal microglial functions in synaptic pruning or chemotaxis
(De et al., 2018).
Despite these independent ﬁndings, it is still not clear whether
the Hoxb8+ microglia (De et al., 2018) and the monocyte-turned-
microglial cells (Chen et al., 2020) are identical. Nevertheless,
these results suggest a necessary revision to the original model of
microglial ontogeny in mice such that while the yolk sac seems to
be the initial source for brain-resident microglia, two routes are
employed for microglial colonization of the brain, i.e., a direct
route from the yolk sac to the brain and an indirect route from
the yolk sac through hematopoietic intermediates like the AGM
and fetal liver before brain arrival (Figure 1A). However, more
research is required to make these ﬁndings more deﬁnitive since
for example, the Hoxb8 line used in these studies is a constitutive
line what may alter developmental programming. Moreover, the
generation of the CCR2-CreER mice is new and is yet to be widely
validated to conﬁrm.
An Alternative Model for Microglial
Ontogeny in the Zebraﬁsh
Although more work is needed to clarify the picture of microglial
ontogeny in the mouse, the evidence provided for microglial
ontogeny in the zebraﬁsh is uniform and clearly distinct from
that documented in the mouse (Figure 1B). Hematopoiesis in
the zebraﬁsh is similar to the mouse in that both primitive
and deﬁnitive hematopoiesis occur (Davidson and Zon, 2004;
Bertrand et al., 2007) (Figure 1B). Primitive hematopoiesis
occurs in the rostral blood island (RBI), a region analogous
to the mammalian yolk sac, while deﬁnitive hematopoiesis
occurs in the ventral wall of the dorsal aorta (VDA), a region
analogous to the mammalian AGM (Herbomel et al., 1999, 2001;
Lieschke et al., 2002; de Jong and Zon, 2005; Bertrand and
Traver, 2009; Warga et al., 2009). Microglia are present in the
zebraﬁsh brain by 60 h post-fertilization. Using a spatio-temporal
light-induced fate-mapping approach, Xu et al. (2015), were ﬁrst
able to show that photolabeling of primitive macrophages in
distinct anatomical regions in the zebraﬁsh gave rise to diﬀerent
microglial populations. Early photolabeling of RBI cells gave
rise to a high percent of brain-resident microglia at 4 dpf that
persisted by 15 dpf but declined by 1.5 months and was virtually
eliminated by 3 months. Conversely, photo-labeled VDA cells
did not contribute to the microglial population at 4 dpf, began
to contribute at 15 dpf, and stably contributed from 1.5 months
throughout life (Xu et al., 2015).
Congruent with these observations, another study recently
showed that adult microglia from deﬁnitive hematopoiesis
replace embryonic microglia that originate from primitive
hematopoiesis (Ferrero et al., 2018). Interestingly, in the
zebraﬁsh, the cMyb transcription factor is required for adult
microglial development (Ferrero et al., 2018). However, in the
mouse, while cMyb is required for seeding macrophages in other
body tissues through the fetal liver, it was not required for seeding
microglia in the adult brain (Hoeﬀel et al., 2015). Nevertheless,
given the recent evidence for an indirect colonization route
involving transient passage through the liver by a subset of
microglia (De et al., 2018), it is possible that at least a subset of
mouse microglia indeed require cMyb.
Interrogating the Model of Microglial
Ontogeny in Humans
In humans, amoeboid microglia ﬁrst penetrate the human
cerebral cortex at about 4.5 gestation weeks via the meninges,
ventricles, and the choroid plexus. They distribute themselves in
the brain through tangential and radial migration (Monier et al.,
2007; Verney et al., 2010). For obvious reasons, the ontogeny of
human microglia has been poorly interrogated. However, using
single-cell transcriptional proﬁling approaches, a recent study on
macrophages from aborted fetuses suggests that human microglia
are derived largely from yolk sac progenitors (Bian et al., 2020).
Although monocyte-derived cells were detected in the head
region, these were only detected at later stages and in smaller
proportions (consistent with the revised model in mice), leading
the authors to suggest that their contribution to the microglial
pool is only slight. Nevertheless, since this study was obtained
from only fetal tissues and human studies lack the requisite fate-
mapping approach, one cannot rule out a possible expansion of
this pool during development as it occurs in mice.
In summary, mouse and zebraﬁsh microglia show salient
diﬀerences in ontogenic colonization. First, while the zebraﬁsh
has a model of replacement of (the equivalent of) yolk sac derived
microglia during embryonic development by HSC-derived adult
microglia, mouse microglia seem to be derived from the yolk sac
but go through at least two routes. Second, the two microglial
sources in the zebraﬁsh do not co-exist extensively while they do
in the mouse. Thirdly, there may be some molecular distinctions
between mouse and zebraﬁsh microglia in mechanisms of brain
seeding, especially as relates to the requirement of cMyb.
Finally, while incomplete, the picture from human microglial
ontogeny suggests features congruent with the situation in mice.
Taken from the evolutionary perspective, these diﬀerences are
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
6
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
FIGURE 1 | Microglial ontogeny models. (A) Mouse: Primitive hematopoiesis in the embryonic yolk sac blood islands at E7.5–E8.0 results in the formation of not just
erythrocytes but also highly proliferative macrophage progenitor cells that migrate to the brain. The primitive macrophages colonizing the early developing brain at
E8.5 proliferate and give rise to the brain-resident microglia population. A second wave, the transient deﬁnitive hematopoiesis in the yolk sac, gives rise to
erythromyeloid progenitor cells by E8.0–E8.5 and to T- and B-lymphoid progenitor cells by E9.0. On reaching the fetal liver by E10.5, these cells undergo deﬁnitive
hematopoiesis to result in the formation of all hematopoietic lineage cells, including monocytes. Recent studies now indicate that deﬁnitive hematopoiesis also partly
contribute to the brain resident microglia population through hoxb8+ and CCR2+ monocyte populations taking up residence in the early developing brain
parenchyma by E12.5 and E17.0, respectively. (B) Zebraﬁsh: Embryonic microglia originating in the rostral blood islands through primitive hematopoiesis by 4 dpf
migrates to and populates the embryonic brain until 15 dpf, they disappear entirely by 45 dpf. In essence, the embryonic microglia are replaced by another wave of
incoming microglia that arise as a result of deﬁnitive hematopoiesis occurring in the ventral walls of the dorsal aorta beginning at 15 dpf. They are the dominant
microglia population by 45 dpf and serve as adult microglia throughout the ﬁsh’s life.
signiﬁcant and would require some explanation that could be
better helped by microglial ontogenic studies in other (including
invertebrate) species.
MICROGLIA ACROSS SPECIES:
INSIGHTS FROM DESCRIBED ROLES IN
PHYSIOLOGY
All organisms with a CNS have brain cells of increasing
complexity and diversity, including glial cell types that have
evolved to take up specialized functions in the brain. In
some species, specialized glial cell types have evolved to help
with the nourishment and survival of neurons, structural
support, removal of metabolic by-products and toxic wastes, and
phagocytic needs during pathology or injury conditions. During
evolution, microglia emerged as specialized immune cells that
function to perceive and respond to pathology and perform
a number of homeostatic functions that are essential for the
proper functioning of the brain. Although some research has
been conducted on microglia in invertebrate mollusks (Peruzzi
and Sonetti, 2004; Peruzzi et al., 2004; Sonetti and Peruzzi, 2004),
these have been less extensive and we focus our discussion mainly
on the invertebrate leech.
Evidence From Invertebrates (Annelida)
Microglia have been described in annelids in the CNS
preparations of the medicinal leech Hiruda medicinalis by Pio del
Rio-Hortega using silver carbonate staining (Rio-Hortega, 1920).
The connective tissue joining neurons of the segmented
ganglia of the leech is populated with hundreds of microglia
that resemble vertebrate microglia both morphologically in
terms of their ramiﬁed processes, as well as in terms of
showing phagocytic capacity (Coggeshall and Fawcett, 1964;
Morgese et al., 1983). However, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and
inﬁltrating macrophages are virtually absent from the leech CNS
(Le Marrec-Croq et al., 2013). In in vivo studies, leech microglia
have also been observed to respond to neuronal injury by showing
directed migration toward the injury site within minutes, similar
to the microglial response seen in vertebrates (Morgese et al.,
1983; McGlade-McCulloh et al., 1989). However, unlike microglia
in mammals, leech microglia physically translocate their cell
bodies in response to injury in minutes while mouse microglia
only translocate their processes in the acute response to injury
(Davalos et al., 2005; Nimmerjahn et al., 2005).
In the medicinal leech, weak silver carbonate staining can
be used to label small amoeboid cells capable of phagocytosis,
migration toward the site of injury, expression of nitric oxide
synthase (NOS), secretion of antimicrobial peptides in response
to infection, as well as in expression of purinergic receptors
that induce migration in response to adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) (Morgese et al., 1983; Shafer et al., 1998; Schikorski et al.,
2008; Duan et al., 2009). In vertebrates, microglia/macrophages
during an immunological response upregulate the expression
of ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1 (Iba1), also
known as allograft inﬂammatory factor 1 (Aif-1), which also
serves as a reliable marker to label these cells (Ito et al.,
1998; Beschorner et al., 2000; Schwab et al., 2001). Similarly,
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
7
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
Drago et al. (2014) ﬁrst reported the expression of an invertebrate
counterpart of Iba1, HmIba1, in leech microglia that were seen
migrating and accumulating at the lesion site upon injury or
ATP stimulation. However, HmIba1 expression was very low in
naïve or unstimulated conditions but rapidly increased following
an immunological insult (Drago et al., 2014). Therefore, most
of the strong immunoreactivity toward HmIba1 was localized to
microglia migrating or accumulating at the injury or stimulation
site in the leech CNS preparations.
The migration and clustering phenotype of leech microglia is
especially evident in experimentally induced nerve lesion studies
in the segmental ganglia, where microglia migrate to and cluster
at the injury site to phagocytose and remove dead neurons
(Morgese et al., 1983). This not only facilitates clearance of the
debris from the injury site but also aids in the initiation or
completion of any subsequent repair mechanisms. Microglial
chemotaxis to the injury site is mediated by nitric oxide (NO)
signaling, as is evident by the increased NOS immunoreactivity
at the injury site at 24 h corresponding to the peak in microglia
numbers at that time (Chen et al., 2000). This is further supported
because prior inhibition of NO synthesis using NOS inhibitor
L-NAME eﬀectively prevents microglial chemotaxis response and
clustering at the injury site. Similarly, increasing NO levels using
spermine NOate (SPNO), a NO donor, also inhibits microglia
accumulation, possibly due to reduced chemotaxis resulting
from the loss of NO gradient and saturation in the microglial
microenvironment (Chen et al., 2000).
The leech microglia resemble vertebrate microglia in their
capacity of demonstrating chemotaxis and response to injury
and clearing of the dead neurons by phagocytosis to aid in
the initiation of neuronal repair mechanisms. Experiments
using isolated leech nerve cord preparations of leech have
also demonstrated the basal process movement and chemotaxis
of leech microglia to ATP gradients, much like that seen in
vertebrates. Based on the experimental evidence, basal level
movement of leech microglial cells is thought to be regulated by
levels of ATP, ADP, and UTP, and several candidate receptors,
including P2RY2- or P2RY4-like receptors, are thought to be
involved in mediating this response (Duan et al., 2009). Using the
nerve crush model in the isolated nerve cord preparations, leech
microglia were also demonstrated to show chemotaxis to ATP
application at the injury site and is mediated through P2 receptors
since its pharmacological inhibition using reactive blue 2, a non-
selective antagonist for P2Y, resulted in a decline in microglia
accumulation at the injury site (Duan et al., 2009).
Just like the mammalian proinﬂammatory cytokine IL-16,
leech microglia show chemotactic activity toward HmIL-16, a
cytokine possibly ﬁrst released by damaged neurons leading
to microglial activation and subsequent release of HmIL-16
molecules to recruit more microglia to the site of injury (Croq
et al., 2010). Furthermore, in an in vitro chemotaxis assay, anti-
human IL-16 antibody or anti-HmIL-16 antibody preincubation
of microglial cells led to a signiﬁcant decline in microglia
migration induced by CNS-conditioned medium collected from
injured leech (Le Marrec-Croq et al., 2013).
HmC1q is another key molecule critical for microglial
functions in the leech, just as its vertebrate counterpart C1q
is important for microglial activity in vertebrates (Tahtouh
et al., 2012). Leech neurons and glial cells release HmC1q
that serves as a dose-dependent chemoattractant for microglia
to aid in further microglia recruitment and is sensitive to
treatment with anti-HmC1q antibodies. Also, microglia at the
nerve injury site in leech strongly express the receptor HmgC1qR
or HmC1qBP for HmC1q, and treatment with anti- HmC1qBP
antibodies leads to the inhibition of HmC1q-mediated microglial
migration in in vitro preparations (Tahtouh et al., 2012). Leech
HmC1q can also interact with calreticulin (HmCalR), expressed
by a small population of microglial cells at the injury site.
This interaction can result in HmC1q-dependent microglia
accumulation (Le Marrec-Croq et al., 2014).
In
summary,
several
features
of
vertebrate
microglia,
including Iba1 protein expression, purinergic, cytokine- and NO-
dependent responses, seem to be conserved in the invertebrate
leech as in vertebrates indicating that core features of microglial
identity and function were present early in microglia during
evolution and have been preserved through evolution. Because
the medicinal leech has not been extensively investigated,
future work will be needed to clarify the speciﬁcs and extent
of divergence in microglial function between invertebrates and
vertebrates. Therefore, there is a need to develop of tools to
eﬀectively study microglia in invertebrates as has been done for
vertebrate species.
Evidence From Vertebrates
Microglia are specialized neuroimmune cells that exhibit
neuroprotective traits throughout development and adulthood.
Abnormal and dysregulated microglia could play a part in the
occurrence and maintenance of neurological and degenerative
disorders and psychiatric illnesses due to their closeness
to other cellular elements of the brain, including neurons.
The neuroprotective invertebrate microglia seem to have
evolved ampliﬁed neuroprotective capabilities to participate in
diﬀerent roles in vertebrates, including crucial roles in brain
development and maintenance of brain homeostasis. Within this
context, vertebrate microglia oﬀer model systems to investigate
underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in
the maintenance of higher-order neuroimmune functions by
mammalian microglia. Below we consider a few of these
established functions of microglia.
Apoptosis and Brain Development
Microglia actively eliminate excess neurons during early brain
development by inducing apoptosis, or they may respond to
the ongoing neuronal cell death by phagocytosis. In work done
by Lang and Bishop (1993) on the role of macrophages in the
mouse developing eye, Diphtheria toxin-mediated ablation of
microglia resulted in the persistence of two ocular tissues, namely,
the hyaloid vasculature and the pupillary membrane. During
normal eye development, these issues are typically removed by
macrophage-mediated apoptosis, thus providing evidence for the
role of macrophages in actively inducing apoptosis of excessive
cells before phagocytosing them. Wakselman et al. (2008) also
demonstrated superoxide-induced neuronal apoptosis in the
hippocampus by microglia as a result of cluster of diﬀerentiation
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
8
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
molecule 11b (CD11b) and DNAX-activating protein of 12 kDa
(DAP12) activity. They further observed a decline in neuronal
apoptosis in the developing hippocampus in both transgenic mice
deﬁcient for microglial proteins CD11b or DAP12 or in wild-type
mice treated with function-blocking antibodies. Furthermore, in
the mouse cerebellum, microglia have also been implicated in the
induction of apoptosis of developing purkinje cells via superoxide
ion release (Marin-Teva et al., 2004).
As in the mouse, microglia display phagocytic activities in the
developing chick retina (Frade and Barde, 1998) and macaque
brain (Cunningham et al., 2013). In the zebraﬁsh, microglia are
also highly phagocytic in development. Indeed, available evidence
suggests that they may be more eﬃcient at phagocytosis than
microglia in mice since virtually all apoptotic debris can be found
within microglia in the normal zebraﬁsh during development
(Peri and Nusslein-Volhard, 2008; Svahn et al., 2013) unlike
in mice where some apoptotic debris remains unengulfed by
microglia at any given moment (Wakselman et al., 2008; Eyo
et al., 2016). These ﬁndings may suggest downregulation of
phagocytic clearance eﬃciency across evolution, requiring more
careful characterization of phagocytic mechanisms across species.
However, the presumed eﬃciency in phagocytosis between
zebraﬁsh and mouse microglia might result from the amount
of available debris, i.e., mouse microglia may be “less eﬃcient”
at clearance because there is more debris in the mouse brain
than in the zebraﬁsh brain during development. Indeed, in the
neurogenic niche where apoptosis is not overwhelming, mouse
microglia are more eﬃcient at clearance (Sierra et al., 2010;
Abiega et al., 2016).
During brain development, microglia have also been observed
to promote neuronal cell survival by the secretion of supporting
neurotrophic factors. Ueno et al. (2013) found that inhibiting
microglial activity resulted in an increase in neuronal apoptosis
in layer V of the postnatal day 3 – 5 aged mouse cerebral
cortex in minocycline treated mice. Primary cultures prepared
from embryonic E12/E13 Pu.1 knockout mice brains show a
decreased proliferation of neural precursor cells (Antony et al.,
2011). Furthermore, microglia are critical in circuit wiring of
the developing mouse brain (Squarzoni et al., 2014; Zhan et al.,
2014). The extent to which these features of microglial function
are present in zebraﬁsh, chick, macaques, and humans remains to
the determined and should be an interesting line of future work.
In addition, microglia are also instrumental in vascular
development and maintenance of vascular integrity following
injury. In mouse embryonic development, microglia were shown
to associate with the vasculature and suggested to promote the
connection of blood vessel tips, otherwise known as anastomosis
(Fantin et al., 2010). This was deduced in the mouse embryo
by analyzing ﬁxed embryonic tissue or imaging in ex vivo slices,
leaving the possibility that such actions were an artifact. However,
the authors further conﬁrmed these observations in the zebraﬁsh
with the power of live imaging of the developing organism
(Fantin et al., 2010). Similarly, in both the mouse (Lou et al., 2016)
and the zebraﬁsh (Liu et al., 2016), microglia were shown to repair
the injured vasculature. In both species, the purinergic P2RY12
receptor was required for microglial process (mouse) or cell body
(zebraﬁsh) migration to the injured vessel, suggesting vascular
complexity development, vascular targeting mechanisms, and
vascular repair functions are conserved between ﬁsh and mice.
Synapse Reﬁnement and Formation
In the postnatal brain, microglia also function to reﬁne excessive
synaptic connections formed as a result of synaptogenesis
via synaptic pruning mechanisms that involve the selective
elimination of synapses by phagocytosis of pre- or post-
synaptic elements (Chechik et al., 1998; Kano and Hashimoto,
2009; Schafer and Stevens, 2013). Microglia and astrocyte-
mediated synaptic pruning was ﬁrst observed during local
neural circuit reﬁnement in the developing cat brain corpus
callosum (Berbel and Innocenti, 1988). Similarly, in the P5
retinogeniculate
system,
C3
receptor-expressing
microglia
prune out synapses expressing high levels of C3 protein via a
complement-dependent phagocytosis mechanism. Disruption
of this synaptic pruning of retinal axons (as in mice lacking
the C3 complement or its receptor) showed a sustained deﬁcit
in eye-speciﬁc segregation, thus stressing the crucial synaptic
pruning roles of microglia in sculpting neural circuitry and
reﬁning the neuronal landscape in the early postnatal brain
(Gasque, 2004; Stevens et al., 2007; Schafer et al., 2012).
While remodeling and reﬁning neuronal circuitry in the brain,
microglia also use their ramiﬁed processes to perform synaptic
stripping function that involves the physical separation of pre-
and post-synaptic elements (Blinzinger and Kreutzberg, 1968;
FIGURE 2 | Suggested future comparative studies on microglia across
species. Studies describing microglia in invertebrates are sparse and usually
focus on microglia seen in phyla Annelida (in leeches and earthworms) and
Mollusca (in mussels). However, the ontogeny and detailed characterization of
invertebrate microglia are still lacking. Contrary to this, vertebrate microglia,
especially zebraﬁsh and mammalian microglia have been extensively studied
and characterized for their origin, identity, and function. Additional study of
microglia in the existing invertebrate models in conjunction with expanding the
search to other invertebrate species and examining them with respect to their
ontogeny, identity, and function in relation to vertebrate microglia could help
us gain insight on the signiﬁcance of microglial emergence in evolution.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
9
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
Tremblay and Majewska, 2011).
While
synaptic
pruning
by
microglia
has
been
extensively
investigated
in
the
mouse, this work has not been explored in other species,
including the zebraﬁsh.
In addition to their pruning activity, microglia can also induce
new ﬁlopodia extension that may stabilize to form new synapses.
Miyamoto et al. demonstrated microglia-induced new ﬁlopodia
extension in layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons of the developing
mouse somatosensory cortex due to increased Ca2+ transients
and actin accumulation at the microglia contact sites on the
dendrite (Miyamoto et al., 2016). Furthermore, minocycline-
induced microglia inhibition or pharmacogenetic ablation of
microglia resulted in a marked decline in dendritic spine density
and functional excitatory synapse numbers (Miyamoto et al.,
2016). In the adult mouse brain, synapse formation following a
motor learning task was also promoted by microglia (Parkhurst
et al., 2013). Nevertheless, similar to synaptic pruning, microglial
regulation of synapse formation has not been explored in other
species. Therefore, the extent to which these notable functional
microglial activities are conserved across vertebrates cannot be
currently ascertained.
CONCLUSION AND OUTSTANDING
QUESTIONS
Microglia play critical roles in the brain, serving as the
ﬁrst responders to trauma or pathogens in invertebrates
and vertebrates. Based on the limited invertebrate microglia
studies available, microglial functions in invertebrates are
largely restricted to responding to pathogenic invasion, neural
protection, and repair in injury. However, microglia have been
shown to play additional crucial roles in the wiring of the
vertebrate CNS and the maintenance of brain homeostasis.
With the increasing complexity of the CNS through evolution
both in terms of structural organization and functions, glial
cells arose in response to the need for specialized supporting
cells to assist neurons in their survival in conditions of injury
or pathological invasion (Hartline, 2011). Specialized immune
cells of mesodermal origin like professional macrophages are
known to circulate in the body cavity of the Drosophila, where
they are often found closely adjacent to sensory neurons in
the body cavity. Based on this observation, Hartenstein and
Giangrande (2018) raised the possibility of invading immune
system cells taking up residence in the CNS to display microglia-
like functions such as phagocytosis. The need for additional
mechanisms mediating the entry of macrophage progenitors
into the CNS to become microglia suggests an important
evolutionary advantage that microglia provide to the vertebrate
CNS. With growing interest in microglia during development and
neurodegeneration, a better understanding of microglial biology
as it has developed through evolution is important.
Examining microglia from an evolutionary perspective is
in its infancy but our current summary of salient aspects of
comparative microglial biology across species is essential to such
an evolutionary understanding. To conclude this review, we
discuss some of the outstanding questions that need to be tackled
to move the ﬁeld forward. Much work needs to be done to
understand microglial identity, ontogeny and physiology across
diﬀerent species. These questions have only been studied so far
in a limited number of model organisms. Although microglia
have been identiﬁed in both vertebrates and invertebrates (phyla
Annelida), it is not clear that these are identical cells since they are
not present in all shared phyla (e.g., Arthropoda, which includes
Drosophila) that emerged from the common ancestral groups
that include both annelids and vertebrates. This suggests that
it is likely that these cells emerged independently (Hartenstein
and Giangrande, 2018). If so, similarities and diﬀerences between
invertebrate and vertebrate microglia would be of interest to
indicate added, lost or independently converging functions
across evolution.
The leech remains the most extensively studied invertebrate
species for microglia, making our knowledge of invertebrate
microglia severely limited. Explorations into other invertebrate
microglia
will
thus
provide
a
better
understanding
of
invertebrate-evolved
microglia.
Among
vertebrates,
our
understanding of microglial cell functions is largely derived from
studies in mice and growing investigations in the zebraﬁsh. While
there were some developmental microglial studies in the chick
at the end of the last and the beginning of this century, chick
models to interrogate microglia have lost favor with the wealth of
tools available for mice and zebraﬁsh as model systems. However,
comparative (i) identity, (ii) ontogenic, and (ii) functional studies
across vertebrate species are of pressing need. Several questions
remain along these three lines (Figure 2).
Identity
First, the question of microglia identity across species remains to
be comprehensively tackled. Since microglial identity has now
been clariﬁed at the molecular level (P2ry12, Tmem119, and
Sall1 along with several microglial-speciﬁc genes), they can be
identiﬁed across species and adequately compared. Microglial
heterogeneity is now well-documented in mice at the molecular
level (Chen et al., 2010; Ayata et al., 2018; Kana et al., 2019),
between development and adulthood (Hammond et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2019) as well as on the basis of sex (Guneykaya et al.,
2018; Hanamsagar et al., 2018). However, this heterogeneity pales
when compared to the heterogeneity in humans (Geirsdottir
et al., 2020). Furthermore, microglial heterogeneity is recognized
in zebraﬁsh (Wu et al., 2020). However, the extent to which
these heterogenous microglial populations are already present in
ancestral species remains to be adequately clariﬁed. Moreover,
certain classical molecular identiﬁers may not be present in all
microglial species e.g., Iba1 (which labels brain macrophages
and microglia) fails to label ﬁsh or chick microglia (Geirsdottir
et al., 2020) though it labels leech microglia (Drago et al.,
2014). Does this render the microglia from these species
diﬀerentially functional from others, and is this feature (lack of
Iba1 expression) speciﬁc to these species (zebraﬁsh and chick) or
are they features of other microglia from other species? Moreover,
there is growing evidence of sexually dimorphic transcriptional
and translational expression in mouse microglia (Guneykaya
et al., 2018; Hanamsagar et al., 2018; Villa et al., 2018). To what
extent this is conserved across both vertebrate and invertebrate
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
10
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
species remains to be determined. With the currently available
tools and background knowledge provided above, these questions
can now begin to be addressed.
Ontogeny
Thus far, species-speciﬁc microglial ontogenic studies have been
conducted in the mouse and zebraﬁsh. Results with cell fate-
mapping approaches indicate distinct mechanisms employed in
these species in brain colonization during development. For
example, while mouse microglia are derived from yolk sac
macrophages, seed the brain and persist therein through life,
zebraﬁsh microglia have distinct waves of embryonic and adult
microglia in which the latter replace the former. These are
fundamentally distinct ontogenic mechanisms. Whether these
mechanisms are uniquely employed by each of these species and
how these mechanisms evolved will have to be a focus of future
research. Moreover, while it is clear that mouse microglia are a
self-renewing population in adulthood, i.e., lacking homeostatic
contributions from peripheral cells, it is not clear whether this
is the case for microglia from non-mammalian vertebrate (or
invertebrate) species. Therefore, clarifying microglial ontogenic
and homeostatic maintenance mechanisms across vertebrate
(and invertebrate) species should be a subject of future research.
Functional
As a third and ﬁnal area of research interest, cross-species
functional microglial studies need to be conducted. The
majority of our understanding of microglial functions in health
and pathology comes from rodent systems with additional
insights from zebraﬁsh and humans. While certain features of
microglial physiology, e.g., phagocytic clearance and chemotactic
response to purines have been conﬁrmed in vertebrates and
invertebrates, (a) comparative abilities between species remain
to be determined, and (b) the extent of salient rodent microglia
functions remains to be conﬁrmed in other species including, e.g.,
synapse elimination/formation (Parkhurst et al., 2013; Miyamoto
et al., 2016) or memory/forgetting (Wang et al., 2020). While
we now know many of the roles employed by microglia in the
mouse such as recent evidence for microglial maintenance of
myelin (Olah et al., 2012; Hagemeyer et al., 2017), it remains
unclear whether these roles have been employed by microglia
since their emergence or whether they are newly added roles. Are
microglia in the ﬁsh or the leech equally capable of the functions
attributed to them in the mouse? This would be an interesting
line of research focus for the future.
In summary, we have evaluated microglia from a comparative
species perspective highlighting several insights obtained from
primarily
rodent
models
on
their
maintenance,
identity,
ontogeny, and function, while comparing this knowledge to the
little we know on these points from other species. Our assessment
suggests there are intriguing unanswered questions from this
perspective, which we have highlighted and recommend for
future studies. We trust that with this knowledge, we will have a
better understanding of the signiﬁcance of microglial emergence
in evolution.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct and intellectual
contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.
FUNDING
This manuscript was funded by grants from the NIH including a
K22 (NS104392) and an R21 (NS119727).
REFERENCES
Abiega, O., Beccari, S., Diaz-Aparicio, I., Nadjar, A., Laye, S., Leyrolle, Q.,
et al. (2016). Neuronal hyperactivity disturbs ATP microgradients, impairs
microglial motility, and reduces phagocytic receptor expression triggering
apoptosis/microglial phagocytosis uncoupling. PLoS Biol. 14:e1002466. doi: 10.
1371/journal.pbio.1002466
Ajami, B., Bennett, J. L., Krieger, C., Mcnagny, K. M., and Rossi, F. M. (2011).
Inﬁltrating monocytes trigger EAE progression, but do not contribute to the
resident microglia pool. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1142–1149. doi: 10.1038/nn.2887
Ajami, B., Bennett, J. L., Krieger, C., Tetzlaﬀ, W., and Rossi, F. M. (2007). Local
self-renewal can sustain CNS microglia maintenance and function throughout
adult life. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1538–1543. doi: 10.1038/nn2014
Alliot, F., Godin, I., and Pessac, B. (1999). Microglia derive from progenitors,
originating from the yolk sac, and which proliferate in the brain. Dev. Brain
Res. 117, 145–152. doi: 10.1016/s0165-3806(99)00113-3
Antony, J. M., Paquin, A., Nutt, S. L., Kaplan, D. R., and Miller, F. D. (2011).
Endogenous microglia regulate development of embryonic cortical precursor
cells. J. Neurosci. Res. 89, 286–298. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22533
Arnold, T., and Betsholtz, C. (2013). The importance of microglia in the
development of the vasculature in the central nervous system. Vasc. Cell 5:4.
doi: 10.1186/2045-824x-5-4
Ashwell, K. (1991). The distribution of microglia and cell death in the fetal rat
forebrain. Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 58, 1–12.
doi: 10.1016/0165-3806(91)
90231-7
Askew, K., Li, K., Olmos-Alonso, A., Garcia-Moreno, F., Liang, Y., Richardson, P.,
et al. (2017). Coupled proliferation and apoptosis maintain the rapid turnover
of microglia in the adult brain. Cell Rep. 18, 391–405. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.
12.041
Ayata, P., Badimon, A., Strasburger, H. J., Duﬀ, M. K., Montgomery, S. E., Loh,
Y. E., et al. (2018). Epigenetic regulation of brain region-speciﬁc microglia
clearance activity. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1049–1060.
doi: 10.1038/s41593-018-
0192-3
Beers, D. R., Henkel, J. S., Xiao, Q., Zhao, W., Wang, J., Yen, A. A., et al. (2006).
Wild-type microglia extend survival in PU.1 knockout mice with familial
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 16021–16026.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0607423103
Bennett, F. C., Bennett, M. L., Yaqoob, F., Mulinyawe, S. B., Grant, G. A., Hayden
Gephart, M., et al. (2018). A combination of ontogeny and CNS environment
establishes microglial identity. Neuron 98, 1170–1183.e1178.
Berbel, P., and Innocenti, G. M. (1988). The development of the corpus callosum
in cats: a light- and electron-microscopic study. J. Comp. Neurol. 276, 132–156.
doi: 10.1002/cne.902760109
Bertrand, J. Y., Kim, A. D., Violette, E. P., Stachura, D. L., Cisson, J. L., and
Traver, D. (2007). Deﬁnitive hematopoiesis initiates through a committed
erythromyeloid progenitor in the zebraﬁsh embryo. Development 134, 4147–
4156. doi: 10.1242/dev.012385
Bertrand, J. Y., and Traver, D. (2009). Hematopoietic cell development in the
zebraﬁsh embryo. Curr. Opin. Hematol. 16, 243–248.
doi: 10.1097/moh.
0b013e32832c05e4
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
11
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
Beschorner, R., Engel, S., Mittelbronn, M., Adjodah, D., Dietz, K., Schluesener, H. J.,
et al. (2000). Diﬀerential regulation of the monocytic calcium-binding peptides
macrophage-inhibiting factor related protein-8 (MRP8/S100A8) and allograft
inﬂammatory factor-1 (AIF-1) following human traumatic brain injury. Acta
Neuropathol. 100, 627–634. doi: 10.1007/s004010000232
Bian, Z., Gong, Y., Huang, T., Lee, C. Z. W., Bian, L., Bai, Z., et al. (2020).
Deciphering human macrophage development at single-cell resolution. Nature
582, 571–576. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2316-7
Blinzinger, K., and Kreutzberg, G. (1968). Displacement of synaptic terminals from
regenerating motoneurons by microglial cells. Z. Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat. 85,
145–157. doi: 10.1007/bf00325030
Butovsky, O., Jedrychowski, M. P., Moore, C. S., Cialic, R., Lanser, A. J., Gabriely,
G., et al. (2014). Identiﬁcation of a unique TGF-beta-dependent molecular and
functional signature in microglia. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 131–143. doi: 10.1038/nn.
3599
Casano, A. M., Albert, M., and Peri, F. (2016). Developmental apoptosis mediates
entry and positioning of microglia in the zebraﬁsh brain. Cell Rep. 16, 897–906.
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.06.033
Chan, W. Y., Kohsaka, S., and Rezaie, P. (2007). The origin and cell lineage
of microglia: new concepts. Brain Res. Rev. 53, 344–354.
doi: 10.1016/j.
brainresrev.2006.11.002
Chechik, G., Meilijson, I., and Ruppin, E. (1998). Synaptic pruning in development:
a computational account. Neural Comput. 10, 1759–1777.
doi: 10.1162/
089976698300017124
Chen, A., Kumar, S. M., Sahley, C. L., and Muller, K. J. (2000). Nitric oxide
inﬂuences injury-induced microglial migration and accumulation in the leech
CNS. J. Neurosci. 20, 1036–1043. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.20-03-01036.2000
Chen, H. R., Sun, Y. Y., Chen, C. W., Kuo, Y. M., Kuan, I. S., Tiger Li, Z. R., et al.
(2020). Fate mapping via CCR2-CreER mice reveals monocyte-to-microglia
transition in development and neonatal stroke. Sci. Adv. 6:eabb2119.
doi:
10.1126/sciadv.abb2119
Chen, S. K., Tvrdik, P., Peden, E., Cho, S., Wu, S., Spangrude, G., et al. (2010).
Hematopoietic origin of pathological grooming in Hoxb8 mutant mice. Cell
141, 775–785. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.03.055
Coggeshall, R. E., and Fawcett, D. W. (1964). The ﬁne structure of the central
nervous system of the leech, Hirudo medicinalis. J. Neurophysiol. 27, 229–289.
doi: 10.1152/jn.1964.27.2.229
Cronk, J. C., Filiano, A. J., Louveau, A., Marin, I., Marsh, R., Ji, E., et al.
(2018). Peripherally derived macrophages can engraft the brain independent of
irradiation and maintain an identity distinct from microglia. J. Exp. Med. 215,
1627–1647. doi: 10.1084/jem.20180247
Croq, F., Vizioli, J., Tuzova, M., Tahtouh, M., Sautiere, P.-E., Van Camp, C., et al.
(2010). A homologous form of human interleukin 16 is implicated in microglia
recruitment following nervous system injury in leech Hirudo medicinalis. Glia
58, 1649–1662. doi: 10.1002/glia.21036
Cuadros, M. A., Martin, C., Coltey, P., Almendros, A., and Navascues, J.
(1993). First appearance, distribution, and origin of macrophages in the early
development of the avian central nervous system. J. Comp. Neurol. 330, 113–
129. doi: 10.1002/cne.903300110
Cunningham, C. L., Martinez-Cerdeno, V., and Noctor, S. C. (2013). Microglia
regulate the number of neural precursor cells in the developing cerebral cortex.
J. Neurosci. 33, 4216–4233. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.3441-12.2013
Davalos, D., Grutzendler, J., Yang, G., Kim, J. V., Zuo, Y., Jung, S., et al. (2005). ATP
mediates rapid microglial response to local brain injury in vivo. Nat. Neurosci.
8, 752–758. doi: 10.1038/nn1472
Davidson, A. J., and Zon, L. I. (2004). The ’deﬁnitive’ (and ’primitive’) guide to
zebraﬁsh hematopoiesis. Oncogene 23, 7233–7246. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207943
De, S., Van Deren, D., Peden, E., Hockin, M., Boulet, A., Titen, S., et al.
(2018). Two distinct ontogenies confer heterogeneity to mouse brain microglia.
Development 145:dev152306. doi: 10.1242/dev.152306
de Jong, J. L., and Zon, L. I. (2005). Use of the zebraﬁsh system to study primitive
and deﬁnitive hematopoiesis. Annu. Rev. Genet. 39, 481–501. doi: 10.1146/
annurev.genet.39.073003.095931
Dong, X., You, Y., and Wu, J. Q. (2016). Building an RNA sequencing
transcriptome of the central nervous system. Neuroscientist 22, 579–592. doi:
10.1177/1073858415610541
Drago, F., Sautière, P.-E., Le Marrec-Croq, F., Accorsi, A., Van Camp, C., Salzet,
M., et al. (2014). Microglia of medicinal leech (Hirudo medicinalis) express a
speciﬁc activation marker homologous to vertebrate ionized calcium-binding
adapter molecule 1 (Iba1/alias aif-1). Dev. Neurobiol. 74, 987–1001. doi: 10.
1002/dneu.22179
Duan, Y., Sahley, C. L., and Muller, K. J. (2009). ATP and NO dually control
migration of microglia to nerve lesions. Dev. Neurobiol. 69, 60–72. doi: 10.1002/
dneu.20689
Eyo, U. B., and Dailey, M. E. (2013). Microglia: key elements in neural
development, plasticity, and pathology. J. Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 8, 494–
509. doi: 10.1007/s11481-013-9434-z
Eyo, U. B., Miner, S. A., Weiner, J. A., and Dailey, M. E. (2016). Developmental
changes in microglial mobilization are independent of apoptosis in the neonatal
mouse hippocampus. Brain Behav. Immun. 55, 49–59. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2015.
11.009
Eyo, U. B., Mo, M., Yi, M. H., Murugan, M., Liu, J., Yarlagadda, R., et al. (2018).
P2Y12R-dependent translocation mechanisms gate the changing microglial
landscape. Cell Rep. 23, 959–966. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.04.001
Eyo, U. B., and Wu, L. J. (2013). Bidirectional microglia-neuron communication in
the healthy brain. Neural Plast. 2013:456857.
Fantin, A., Vieira, J. M., Gestri, G., Denti, L., Schwarz, Q., Prykhozhij, S., et al.
(2010). Tissue macrophages act as cellular chaperones for vascular anastomosis
downstream of VEGF-mediated endothelial tip cell induction. Blood 116, 829–
840. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-12-257832
Fehrenbach, M. K., Tjwa, M., Bechmann, I., and Krueger, M. (2018). Decreased
microglial numbers in Vav1-Cre(+):dicer knock-out mice suggest a second
source of microglia beyond yolk sac macrophages. Ann. Anat. 218, 190–198.
doi: 10.1016/j.aanat.2018.03.004
Fekete, R., Cserep, C., Lenart, N., Toth, K., Orsolits, B., Martinecz, B., et al.
(2018). Microglia control the spread of neurotropic virus infection via P2Y12
signalling and recruit monocytes through P2Y12-independent mechanisms.
Acta Neuropathol. 136, 461–482. doi: 10.1007/s00401-018-1885-0
Ferrero, G., Mahony, C. B., Dupuis, E., Yvernogeau, L., Di Ruggiero, E., Miserocchi,
M., et al. (2018). Embryonic microglia derive from primitive macrophages and
are replaced by cmyb-dependent deﬁnitive microglia in zebraﬁsh. Cell Rep. 24,
130–141. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.05.066
Frade, J. M., and Barde, Y. A. (1998). Microglia-derived nerve growth factor causes
cell death in the developing retina. Neuron 20, 35–41. doi: 10.1016/s0896-
6273(00)80432-8
Fuger, P., Hefendehl, J. K., Veeraraghavalu, K., Wendeln, A. C., Schlosser, C.,
Obermuller, U., et al. (2017). Microglia turnover with aging and in an
Alzheimer’s model via long-term in vivo single-cell imaging. Nat. Neurosci. 20,
1371–1376. doi: 10.1038/nn.4631
Gasque, P. (2004). Complement: a unique innate immune sensor for danger signals.
Mol. Immunol. 41, 1089–1098. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2004.06.011
Geirsdottir, L., David, E., Keren-Shaul, H., Weiner, A., Bohlen, S. C., Neuber, J.,
et al. (2020). Cross-Species single-cell analysis reveals divergence of the primate
microglia program. Cell 181:746. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.002
Ginhoux, F., Greter, M., Leboeuf, M., Nandi, S., See, P., Gokhan, S., et al. (2010).
Fate mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia derive from primitive
macrophages. Science 330, 841–845. doi: 10.1126/science.1194637
Ginhoux, F., and Prinz, M. (2015). Origin of microglia: current concepts and
past controversies. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 7:a020537. doi: 10.1101/
cshperspect.a020537
Goldmann, T., Wieghofer, P., Jordao, M. J., Prutek, F., Hagemeyer, N., Frenzel,
K., et al. (2016). Origin, fate and dynamics of macrophages at central nervous
system interfaces. Nat. Immunol. 17, 797–805. doi: 10.1038/ni.3423
Guneykaya, D., Ivanov, A., Hernandez, D. P., Haage, V., Wojtas, B., Meyer, N.,
et al. (2018). Transcriptional and translational diﬀerences of microglia from
male and female brains. Cell Rep. 24, 2773–2783.e2776.
Hagemeyer, N., Hanft, K. M., Akriditou, M. A., Unger, N., Park, E. S., Stanley,
E. R., et al. (2017). Microglia contribute to normal myelinogenesis and to
oligodendrocyte progenitor maintenance during adulthood. Acta Neuropathol.
134, 441–458. doi: 10.1007/s00401-017-1747-1
Hammond, T. R., Dufort, C., Dissing-Olesen, L., Giera, S., Young, A., Wysoker, A.,
et al. (2019). Single-Cell RNA sequencing of microglia throughout the mouse
lifespan and in the injured brain reveals complex cell-state changes. Immunity
50, 253–271.e256.
Hanamsagar, R., Alter, M. D., Block, C. S., Sullivan, H., Bolton, J. L., and Bilbo,
S. D. (2018). Generation of a microglial developmental index in mice and in
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
12
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
humans reveals a sex diﬀerence in maturation and immune reactivity. Glia
66:460. doi: 10.1002/glia.23277
Hanisch, U. K., and Kettenmann, H. (2007). Microglia: active sensor and versatile
eﬀector cells in the normal and pathologic brain. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1387–1394.
doi: 10.1038/nn1997
Hartenstein, V., and Giangrande, A. (2018). Connecting the nervous and the
immune systems in evolution. Commun. Biol. 1:64.
Hartline, D. K. (2011). The evolutionary origins of glia. Glia 59, 1215–1236. doi:
10.1002/glia.21149
Hasselmann, J., Coburn, M. A., England, W., Figueroa Velez, D. X., Kiani
Shabestari, S., Tu, C. H., et al. (2019). Development of a chimeric model to study
and manipulate human microglia in vivo. Neuron 103, 1016–1033.e1010. .
Herbomel, P., Thisse, B., and Thisse, C. (1999). Ontogeny and behaviour of early
macrophages in the zebraﬁsh embryo. Development 126, 3735–3745.
Herbomel, P., Thisse, B., and Thisse, C. (2001). Zebraﬁsh early macrophages
colonize cephalic mesenchyme and developing brain, retina, and epidermis
through a M-CSF receptor-dependent invasive process. Dev. Biol. 238, 274–288.
doi: 10.1006/dbio.2001.0393
Hickman, S. E., Kingery, N. D., Ohsumi, T. K., Borowsky, M. L., Wang, L. C.,
Means, T. K., et al. (2013). The microglial sensome revealed by direct RNA
sequencing. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1896–1905. doi: 10.1038/nn.3554
Hoeﬀel, G., Chen, J., Lavin, Y., Low, D., Almeida, F. F., See, P., et al. (2015). C-
Myb(+) erythro-myeloid progenitor-derived fetal monocytes give rise to adult
tissue-resident macrophages. Immunity 42, 665–678. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.
2015.03.011
Hong, S., Beja-Glasser, V. F., Nfonoyim, B. M., Frouin, A., Li, S., Ramakrishnan,
S., et al. (2016a). Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in
Alzheimer mouse models. Science 352, 712–716. doi: 10.1126/science.aad8373
Hong, S., Dissing-Olesen, L., and Stevens, B. (2016b). New insights on the role of
microglia in synaptic pruning in health and disease. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 36,
128–134. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2015.12.004
Huang, Y., Xu, Z., Xiong, S., Sun, F., Qin, G., Hu, G., et al. (2018). Repopulated
microglia are solely derived from the proliferation of residual microglia
after acute depletion. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 530–540. doi: 10.1038/s41593-018-
0090-8
Ito, D., Imai, Y., Ohsawa, K., Nakajima, K., Fukuuchi, Y., and Kohsaka, S. (1998).
Microglia-speciﬁc localisation of a novel calcium binding protein, Iba1. Brain
Res. Mol. Brain Res. 57, 1–9. doi: 10.1016/s0169-328x(98)00040-0
Kana, V., Desland, F. A., Casanova-Acebes, M., Ayata, P., Badimon, A., Nabel,
E., et al. (2019). CSF-1 controls cerebellar microglia and is required for motor
function and social interaction. J. Exp. Med. 216, 2265–2281. doi: 10.1084/jem.
20182037
Kano, M., and Hashimoto, K. (2009). Synapse elimination in the central nervous
system. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 19, 154–161. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2009.05.002
Kierdorf, K., Erny, D., Goldmann, T., Sander, V., Schulz, C., Perdiguero, E. G.,
et al. (2013). Microglia emerge from erythromyeloid precursors via Pu.1- and
Irf8-dependent pathways. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 273–280. doi: 10.1038/nn.3318
Kim, I., Mlsna, L. M., Yoon, S., Le, B., Yu, S., Xu, D., et al. (2015). A postnatal
peak in microglial development in the mouse hippocampus is correlated with
heightened sensitivity to seizure triggers. Brain Behav. 5:e00403.
Kurz, H., and Christ, B. (1998). Embryonic CNS macrophages and microglia do
not stem from circulating, but from extravascular precursors. Glia 22, 98–102.
doi: 10.1002/(sici)1098-1136(199801)22:1<98::aid-glia10>3.0.co;2-v
Lang, R. A., and Bishop, J. M. (1993). Macrophages are required for cell death
and tissue remodeling in the developing mouse eye. Cell 74, 453–462. doi:
10.1016/0092-8674(93)80047-i
Le Marrec-Croq, F., Bocquet-Garcon, A., Vizioli, J., Vancamp, C., Drago, F.,
Franck, J., et al. (2014). Calreticulin contributes to C1q-dependent recruitment
of microglia in the leech Hirudo medicinalis following a CNS injury. Med. Sci.
Monit. 20, 644–653. doi: 10.12659/msm.890091
Le Marrec-Croq, F., Drago, F., Vizioli, J., Sautière, P.-E., and Lefebvre, C. (2013).
The leech nervous system: a valuable model to study the microglia involvement
in regenerative processes. Clin. Dev. Immunol. 2013:274019.
Leung, B. P., Doty, K. R., and Town, T. (2015). Cerebral innate immunity in
Drosophila melanogaster. AIMS Neurosci. 2, 35–51.
Li, Q., Cheng, Z., Zhou, L., Darmanis, S., Neﬀ, N. F., Okamoto, J., et al. (2019).
Developmental heterogeneity of microglia and brain myeloid cells revealed by
deep single-cell RNA sequencing. Neuron 101, 207–223.e210.
Li, Y., Du, X. F., Liu, C. S., Wen, Z. L., and Du, J. L. (2012). Reciprocal regulation
between resting microglial dynamics and neuronal activity in vivo. Dev. Cell 23,
1189–1202. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.10.027
Lieschke, G. J., Oates, A. C., Paw, B. H., Thompson, M. A., Hall, N. E., Ward,
A. C., et al. (2002). Zebraﬁsh SPI-1 (PU.1) marks a site of myeloid development
independent of primitive erythropoiesis: implications for axial patterning. Dev.
Biol. 246, 274–295. doi: 10.1006/dbio.2002.0657
Liu, C., Wu, C., Yang, Q., Gao, J., Li, L., Yang, D., et al. (2016). Macrophages
mediate the repair of brain vascular rupture through direct physical adhesion
and mechanical traction. Immunity 44, 1162–1176.
doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.
2016.03.008
Lou, N., Takano, T., Pei, Y., Xavier, A. L., Goldman, S. A., and Nedergaard, M.
(2016). Purinergic receptor P2RY12-dependent microglial closure of the injured
blood-brain barrier. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 1074–1079. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1520398113
Lund, H., Pieber, M., Parsa, R., Han, J., Grommisch, D., Ewing, E., et al. (2018).
Competitive repopulation of an empty microglial niche yields functionally
distinct subsets of microglia-like cells. Nat. Commun. 9:4845.
Marin-Teva, J. L., Dusart, I., Colin, C., Gervais, A., Van Rooijen, N., and Mallat, M.
(2004). Microglia promote the death of developing Purkinje cells. Neuron 41,
535–547. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(04)00069-8
Masuda, T., Sankowski, R., Staszewski, O., Bottcher, C., Amann, L., Sagar, et al.
(2019). Spatial and temporal heterogeneity of mouse and human microglia at
single-cell resolution. Nature 566, 388–392. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-0924-x
Mazzolini, J., Le Clerc, S., Morisse, G., Coulonges, C., Kuil, L. E., Van Ham, T. J.,
et al. (2020). Gene expression proﬁling reveals a conserved microglia signature
in larval zebraﬁsh. Glia 68, 298–315. doi: 10.1002/glia.23717
McGlade-McCulloh, E., Morrissey, A. M., Norona, F., and Muller, K. J. (1989).
Individual microglia move rapidly and directly to nerve lesions in the leech
central nervous system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 86, 1093–1097. doi: 10.
1073/pnas.86.3.1093
McKercher, S. R., Torbett, B. E., Anderson, K. L., Henkel, G. W., Vestal, D. J.,
Baribault, H., et al. (1996). Targeted disruption of the PU.1 gene results in
multiple hematopoietic abnormalities. EMBO J. 15, 5647–5658. doi: 10.1002/
j.1460-2075.1996.tb00949.x
Miyamoto, A., Wake, H., Ishikawa, A. W., Eto, K., Shibata, K., Murakoshi,
H., et al. (2016). Microglia contact induces synapse formation in developing
somatosensory cortex. Nat. Commun. 7:12540.
Monier, A., Adle-Biassette, H., Delezoide, A. L., Evrard, P., Gressens, P., and
Verney, C. (2007). Entry and distribution of microglial cells in human
embryonic and fetal cerebral cortex. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 66, 372–382.
doi: 10.1097/nen.0b013e3180517b46
Morgese, V. J., Elliott, E. J., and Muller, K. J. (1983). Microglial movement to sites
of nerve lesion in the leech CNS. Brain Res. 272, 166–170. doi: 10.1016/0006-
8993(83)90375-x
Navascues, J., Calvente, R., Marin-Teva, J. L., and Cuadros, M. A. (2000).
Entry, dispersion and diﬀerentiation of microglia in the developing central
nervous system. An. Acad. Bras. Cienc. 72, 91–102.
doi: 10.1590/s0001-
37652000000100013
Nayak, D., Roth, T. L., and Mcgavern, D. B. (2014). Microglia development and
function. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 32, 367–402.
Nikodemova, M., Kimyon, R. S., De, I., Small, A. L., Collier, L. S., and Watters, J. J.
(2015). Microglial numbers attain adult levels after undergoing a rapid decrease
in cell number in the third postnatal week. J. Neuroimmunol. 278, 280–288.
doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2014.11.018
Nimmerjahn, A. (2012). Two-photon imaging of microglia in the mouse cortex
in vivo. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc. 2012:db.rot069294.
Nimmerjahn, A., Kirchhoﬀ, F., and Helmchen, F. (2005). Resting microglial cells
are highly dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo. Science 308,
1314–1318. doi: 10.1126/science.1110647
Oberheim, N. A., Goldman, S. A., and Nedergaard, M. (2012). Heterogeneity of
astrocytic form and function. Methods Mol. Biol. 814, 23–45. doi: 10.1007/978-
1-61779-452-0_3
Olah, M., Amor, S., Brouwer, N., Vinet, J., Eggen, B., Biber, K., et al. (2012).
Identiﬁcation of a microglia phenotype supportive of remyelination. Glia 60,
306–321. doi: 10.1002/glia.21266
Oosterhof, N., Holtman, I. R., Kuil, L. E., Van Der Linde, H. C., Boddeke,
E. W., Eggen, B. J., et al. (2017). Identiﬁcation of a conserved and acute
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
13
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
neurodegeneration-speciﬁc microglial transcriptome in the zebraﬁsh. Glia 65,
138–149. doi: 10.1002/glia.23083
Parkhurst, C. N., Yang, G., Ninan, I., Savas, J. N., Yates, J. R. III, Lafaille, J. J., et al.
(2013). Microglia promote learning-dependent synapse formation through
brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Cell 155, 1596–1609.
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.
2013.11.030
Penﬁeld, W. (1932). Cytology & Cellular Pathology of the Nervous System.
New York, NY: P.B. Hoeber, inc.
Peng, J., Gu, N., Zhou, L., Ukpong, B. E., Murugan, M., Gan, W. B., et al. (2016).
Microglia and monocytes synergistically promote the transition from acute to
chronic pain after nerve injury. Nat. Commun. 7:12029.
Peri, F., and Nusslein-Volhard, C. (2008). Live imaging of neuronal degradation by
microglia reveals a role for v0-ATPase a1 in phagosomal fusion in vivo. Cell 133,
916–927. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.04.037
Peruzzi, E., Fontana, G., and Sonetti, D. (2004). Presence and role of nitric oxide in
the central nervous system of the freshwater snail Planorbarius corneus: possible
implication in neuron-microglia communication. Brain Res. 1005, 9–20. doi:
10.1016/j.brainres.2003.12.042
Peruzzi, E., and Sonetti, D. (2004). Microglia proliferation as a response to
activation in the freshwater snail Planorbarius corneus: a BrdU incorporation
study. Acta Biol. Hung. 55, 287–291. doi: 10.1556/abiol.55.2004.1-4.34
Petersen, M. A., and Dailey, M. E. (2004). Diverse microglial motility behaviors
during clearance of dead cells in hippocampal slices. Glia 46, 195–206. doi:
10.1002/glia.10362
Pont-Lezica, L., Beumer, W., Colasse, S., Drexhage, H., Versnel, M., and Bessis,
A. (2014). Microglia shape corpus callosum axon tract fasciculation: functional
impact of prenatal inﬂammation. Eur. J. Neurosci. 39, 1551–1557. doi: 10.1111/
ejn.12508
Ransohoﬀ, R. M., and Perry, V. H. (2009). Microglial physiology: unique stimuli,
specialized responses. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 27, 119–145. doi: 10.1146/annurev.
immunol.021908.132528
Reemst, K., Noctor, S. C., Lucassen, P. J., and Hol, E. M. (2016). The indispensable
roles of microglia and astrocytes during brain development. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 10:566. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00566
Reu, P., Khosravi, A., Bernard, S., Mold, J. E., Salehpour, M., Alkass, K., et al.
(2017). The lifespan and turnover of microglia in the human brain. Cell Rep.
20, 779–784. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.07.004
Rezaie, P., Patel, K., and Male, D. K. (1999). Microglia in the human fetal spinal
cord–patterns of distribution, morphology and phenotype. Brain Res. Dev.
Brain Res. 115, 71–81. doi: 10.1016/s0165-3806(99)00043-7
Rio-Hortega, P. D. (1920). Estudios sobre la neuroglía. La microglía y su
transformación en células en bastoncito y cuerpos granuloadiposos. Trab. Lab.
Invest. Biol. Univ. Madrid 18, 37–82.
Roney, K. E., O’connor, B. P., Wen, H., Holl, E. K., Guthrie, E. H., Davis, B. K., et al.
(2011). Plexin-B2 negatively regulates macrophage motility, Rac, and Cdc42
activation. PLoS One 6:e24795. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024795
Santos, A. M., Calvente, R., Tassi, M., Carrasco, M. C., Martin-Oliva, D., Marin-
Teva, J. L., et al. (2008). Embryonic and postnatal development of microglial
cells in the mouse retina. J. Comp. Neurol. 506, 224–239. doi: 10.1002/cne.21538
Schafer, D. P., Lehrman, E. K., Kautzman, A. G., Koyama, R., Mardinly, A. R.,
Yamasaki, R., et al. (2012). Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an
activity and complement-dependent manner. Neuron 74, 691–705. doi: 10.
1016/j.neuron.2012.03.026
Schafer, D. P., and Stevens, B. (2013). Phagocytic glial cells: sculpting synaptic
circuits in the developing nervous system. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 23, 1034–
1040. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2013.09.012
Schikorski, D., Cuvillier-Hot, V., Leippe, M., Boidin-Wichlacz, C., Slomianny,
C., Macagno, E., et al. (2008). Microbial challenge promotes the regenerative
process of the injured central nervous system of the medicinal leech by inducing
the synthesis of antimicrobial peptides in neurons and microglia. J. Immunol.
181, 1083–1095. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.2.1083
Schulz, C., Gomez Perdiguero, E., Chorro, L., Szabo-Rogers, H., Cagnard, N.,
Kierdorf, K., et al. (2012). A lineage of myeloid cells independent of Myb and
hematopoietic stem cells. Science 336, 86–90. doi: 10.1126/science.1219179
Schwab, J. M., Frei, E., Klusman, I., Schnell, L., Schwab, M. E., and
Schluesener, H. J. (2001). AIF-1 expression deﬁnes a proliferating and
alert microglial/macrophage phenotype following spinal cord injury in rats.
J. Neuroimmunol. 119, 214–222. doi: 10.1016/s0165-5728(01)00375-7
Shafer, O. T., Chen, A., Kumar, S. M., Muller, K. J., and Sahley, C. L. (1998). Injury-
induced expression of endothelial nitric oxide synthase by glial and microglial
cells in the leech central nervous system within minutes after injury. Proc. Biol.
Sci. 265, 2171–2175. doi: 10.1098/rspb.1998.0555
Shemer, A., Grozovski, J., Tay, T. L., Tao, J., Volaski, A., Suss, P., et al.
(2018). Engrafted parenchymal brain macrophages diﬀer from microglia in
transcriptome, chromatin landscape and response to challenge. Nat. Commun.
9:5206.
Sieger, D., Moritz, C., Ziegenhals, T., Prykhozhij, S., and Peri, F. (2012). Long-
range Ca2+ waves transmit brain-damage signals to microglia. Dev. Cell 22,
1138–1148. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.04.012
Sierra, A., Encinas, J. M., Deudero, J. J., Chancey, J. H., Enikolopov, G., Overstreet-
Wadiche, L. S., et al. (2010). Microglia shape adult hippocampal neurogenesis
through apoptosis-coupled phagocytosis. Cell Stem Cell 7, 483–495. doi: 10.
1016/j.stem.2010.08.014
Sonetti, D., Ottaviani, E., Bianchi, F., Rodriguez, M., Stefano, M. L., Scharrer, B.,
et al. (1994). Microglia in invertebrate ganglia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91,
9180–9184. doi: 10.1073/pnas.91.19.9180
Sonetti, D., and Peruzzi, E. (2004). Neuron-microglia communication in the CNS
of the freshwater snail Planorbarius corneus. Acta Biol. Hung. 55, 273–285.
doi: 10.1556/abiol.55.2004.1-4.33
Squarzoni, P., Oller, G., Hoeﬀel, G., Pont-Lezica, L., Rostaing, P., Low, D., et al.
(2014). Microglia modulate wiring of the embryonic forebrain. Cell Rep. 8,
1271–1279. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.042
Stark, R., Grzelak, M., and Hadﬁeld, J. (2019). RNA sequencing: the teenage years.
Nat. Rev. Genet. 20, 631–656. doi: 10.1038/s41576-019-0150-2
Stevens, B., Allen, N. J., Vazquez, L. E., Howell, G. R., Christopherson, K. S., Nouri,
N., et al. (2007). The classical complement cascade mediates CNS synapse
elimination. Cell 131, 1164–1178. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.10.036
Svahn, A. J., Graeber, M. B., Ellett, F., Lieschke, G. J., Rinkwitz, S., Bennett, M. R.,
et al. (2013). Development of ramiﬁed microglia from early macrophages in
the zebraﬁsh optic tectum. Dev. Neurobiol. 73, 60–71.
doi: 10.1002/dneu.
22039
Svoboda, D. S., Barrasa, M. I., Shu, J., Rietjens, R., Zhang, S., Mitalipova, M., et al.
(2019). Human iPSC-derived microglia assume a primary microglia-like state
after transplantation into the neonatal mouse brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
116, 25293–25303. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1913541116
Swinnen, N., Smolders, S., Avila, A., Notelaers, K., Paesen, R., Ameloot, M., et al.
(2013). Complex invasion pattern of the cerebral cortex bymicroglial cells
during development of the mouse embryo. Glia 61, 150–163. doi: 10.1002/glia.
22421
Tahtouh, M., Garçon-Bocquet, A., Croq, F., Vizioli, J., Sautière, P.-E., Van
Camp, C., et al. (2012). Interaction of HmC1q with leech microglial cells:
involvement of C1qBP-related molecule in the induction of cell chemotaxis.
J. Neuroinﬂamm. 9, 37–37.
Tremblay, M. E., Lowery, R. L., and Majewska, A. K. (2010). Microglial interactions
with synapses are modulated by visual experience. PLoS Biol. 8:e1000527. doi:
10.1371/journal.pbio.1000527
Tremblay, M. E., and Majewska, A. K. (2011). A role for microglia in synaptic
plasticity? Commun. Integr. Biol. 4, 220–222. doi: 10.4161/cib.4.2.14506
Ueno, M., Fujita, Y., Tanaka, T., Nakamura, Y., Kikuta, J., Ishii, M., et al.
(2013). Layer V cortical neurons require microglial support for survival
during postnatal development. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 543–551. doi: 10.1038/nn.
3358
Uweru, J. O., and Eyo, U. B. (2019). A decade of diverse microglial-neuronal
physical interactions in the brain (2008-2018). Neurosci. Lett. 698, 33–38. doi:
10.1016/j.neulet.2019.01.001
Verney, C., Monier, A., Fallet-Bianco, C., and Gressens, P. (2010). Early
microglial colonization of the human forebrain and possible involvement in
periventricular white-matter injury of preterm infants. J. Anat. 217, 436–448.
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2010.01245.x
Villa, A., Gelosa, P., Castiglioni, L., Cimino, M., Rizzi, N., Pepe, G., et al. (2018).
Sex-speciﬁc features of microglia from adult mice. Cell Rep. 23, 3501–3511.
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.05.048
Wake, H., Moorhouse, A. J., Jinno, S., Kohsaka, S., and Nabekura, J. (2009).
Resting microglia directly monitor the functional state of synapses in vivo
and determine the fate of ischemic terminals. J. Neurosci. 29, 3974–3980. doi:
10.1523/jneurosci.4363-08.2009
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
14
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

Sharma et al.
Comparing Microglia Across Species
Wakselman, S., Bechade, C., Roumier, A., Bernard, D., Triller, A., and Bessis, A.
(2008). Developmental neuronal death in hippocampus requires the microglial
CD11b integrin and DAP12 immunoreceptor. J. Neurosci. 28, 8138–8143. doi:
10.1523/jneurosci.1006-08.2008
Wang, C., Yue, H., Hu, Z., Shen, Y., Ma, J., Li, J., et al. (2020). Microglia mediate
forgetting via complement-dependent synaptic elimination. Science 367, 688–
694. doi: 10.1126/science.aaz2288
Warga, R. M., Kane, D. A., and Ho, R. K. (2009). Fate mapping embryonic blood in
zebraﬁsh: multi- and unipotential lineages are segregated at gastrulation. Dev.
Cell 16, 744–755. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.04.007
Weinhard, L., Di Bartolomei, G., Bolasco, G., Machado, P., Schieber, N. L.,
Neniskyte, U., et al. (2018). Microglia remodel synapses by presynaptic
trogocytosis and spine head ﬁlopodia induction. Nat. Commun. 9:1228.
Wu, S., Nguyen, L. T. M., Pan, H., Hassan, S., Dai, Y., Xu, J., et al. (2020).
Two phenotypically and functionally distinct microglial populations in adult
zebraﬁsh. Sci. Adv. 6:eabd1160. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abd1160
Xu, J., Wang, T., Wu, Y., Jin, W., and Wen, Z. (2016). Microglia colonization
of developing zebraﬁsh midbrain is promoted by apoptotic neuron and
lysophosphatidylcholine. Dev. Cell 38, 214–222. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2016.06.
018
Xu, J., Zhu, L., He, S., Wu, Y., Jin, W., Yu, T., et al. (2015). Temporal-spatial
resolution fate mapping reveals distinct origins for embryonic and adult
microglia in zebraﬁsh. Dev. Cell 34, 632–641. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.08.018
Zhan, L., Krabbe, G., Du, F., Jones, I., Reichert, M. C., Telpoukhovskaia, M.,
et al. (2019). Proximal recolonization by self-renewing microglia re-establishes
microglial homeostasis in the adult mouse brain. PLoS Biol. 17:e3000134. doi:
10.1371/journal.pbio.3000134
Zhan, Y., Paolicelli, R. C., Sforazzini, F., Weinhard, L., Bolasco, G., Pagani, F., et al.
(2014). Deﬁcient neuron-microglia signaling results in impaired functional
brain connectivity and social behavior. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 400–406. doi: 10.
1038/nn.3641
Zhang, Y., Chen, K., Sloan, S. A., Bennett, M. L., Scholze, A. R., O’keeﬀe, S.,
et al. (2014). An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of glia,
neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci. 34, 11929–11947.
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.1860-14.2014
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Sharma, Bisht and Eyo. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
15
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 652748

===== Shaw2021_DevCell_SCI+Zebrafish+EMT =====
Article
Localized EMT reprograms glial progenitors to
promote spinal cord repair
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Bulk and single cell transcriptomes of regenerative zebraﬁsh
glia were generated
d Pathways that distinguish regenerative zebraﬁsh glia from
mammalian glia were deﬁned
d An injury-induced EMT transcriptional module localizes to
zebraﬁsh glial progenitors
d EMT transcription factors direct mesenchymal fate and
regenerative bridging in zebraﬁsh
Authors
Dana Klatt Shaw,
Vishnu Muraleedharan Saraswathy,
Lili Zhou, ..., Samantha A. Morris,
Sabine Dietmann, Mayssa H. Mokalled
Correspondence
mmokalled@wustl.edu
In Brief
Shaw et al. deﬁned the molecular identity
of regenerative zebraﬁsh glia and
performed cross-species comparisons
with mammalian glia. They found that
EMT localizes to zebraﬁsh glial
progenitors and distinguishes
mammalian and zebraﬁsh glia. They
uncovered evidence that an EMT
transcriptional module reprograms glial
progenitors and promotes spinal cord
repair in zebraﬁsh.
Klatt Shaw et al., 2021, Developmental Cell 56, 613–626
March 8, 2021 ª 2021 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2021.01.017
ll

Article
Localized EMT reprograms glial
progenitors to promote spinal cord repair
Dana Klatt Shaw,1,3 Vishnu Muraleedharan Saraswathy,1,3 Lili Zhou,1,3 Anthony R. McAdow,1 Brooke Burris,1
Emily Butka,1 Samantha A. Morris,1 Sabine Dietmann,1 and Mayssa H. Mokalled1,2,4,*
1Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA
2Center of Regenerative Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA
3These authors contributed equally
4Lead contact
*Correspondence: mmokalled@wustl.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2021.01.017
SUMMARY
Anti-regenerative scarring obstructs spinal cord repair in mammals and presents a major hurdle for regener-
ative medicine. In contrast, adult zebraﬁsh possess specialized glial cells that spontaneously repair spinal
cord injuries by forming a pro-regenerative bridge across the severed tissue. To identify the mechanisms
that regulate differential regenerative capacity between mammals and zebraﬁsh, we ﬁrst deﬁned the molec-
ular identity of zebraﬁsh bridging glia and then performed cross-species comparisons with mammalian glia.
Our transcriptomics show that pro-regenerative zebraﬁsh glia activate an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transi-
tion (EMT) gene program and that EMT gene expression is a major factor distinguishing mammalian and ze-
braﬁsh glia. Functionally, we found that localized niches of glial progenitors undergo EMT after spinal cord
injury in zebraﬁsh and, using large-scale CRISPR-Cas9 mutagenesis, we identiﬁed the gene regulatory
network that activates EMT and drives functional regeneration. Thus, non-regenerative mammalian glia
lack an essential EMT-driving gene regulatory network that reprograms pro-regenerative zebraﬁsh glia after
injury.
INTRODUCTION
Traumatic spinal cord injuries (SCI) are incurable conditions that
require long-term therapeutic, rehabilitative, and psychological
interventions. Scarring and inherent resistance to neural regen-
eration present major hurdles to regenerative medicine (He and
Jin, 2016; Silver, 2016; Sofroniew, 2018). In contrast to mam-
mals, adult zebraﬁsh possess an elevated regenerative capacity
and reverse paralysis within 6–8 weeks of complete spinal cord
(SC) transection (Becker et al., 1997; Goldshmit et al., 2012; Mo-
kalled et al., 2016; Reimer et al., 2008). Zebraﬁsh elicit efﬁcient
pro-regenerative glial cell responses in the absence of scarring
(Goldshmit et al., 2012; Mokalled et al., 2016). Here, we explore
regenerative processes that distinguish the zebraﬁsh SC from
mammalian SCs and enable its natural repair post injury.
Glial cell responses are thought to dictate SCI outcomes across
species(Mokalledetal.,2016;O’Sheaetal.,2017;Silver,2016;Sil-
ver and Miller, 2004; Sofroniew, 2018). Following SC transection in
zebraﬁsh, specialized glial cells connect the severed SC ends and
facilitate regeneration (Goldshmit et al., 2012; Mokalled et al.,
2016). Conversely, mammalian astrocytes display heterogeneous
and compartmentalized injury responses that are overshadowed
by anti-regenerative scar-forming cells and inhibitory extracellular
molecules (Dias and Go¨ ritz, 2018; Grimpe and Silver, 2004; Sofro-
niew, 2018). Reactive, scar-bordering astrocytes separate spared
neurons fromthe non-neuronal lesioncoreinmammalian SCs.Un-
like reactive astrocytes that localize to the neuronal compartment
of the lesion, scar-bordering astrocytes possess properties of
immature astroglia and their ablation impairs axon regeneration
inmice(Andersonetal., 2016; Wanner etal.,2013).A small fraction
of scar-bordering astrocytes is thought to form astroglial bridges
that correlate with increased axon regrowth under genetic manip-
ulations such as PTEN deletion in mice (Zukor et al., 2013). We
envision that shifting mammalian glia toward a bridging phenotype
could abate scarring and support axon regrowth. Practically, this
outcome requires comprehensive cross-species comparisons
and a detailed understanding of the cell fates and molecular net-
works that induce glial bridge formation.
Unlike CNS injuries, peripheral nerve injuries trigger pro-
regenerative responses and functional repair in mammals. Glial
cells are central to this regeneration process with repair
Schwann cells migrating into the lesion, bridging severed nerve
ends, and supporting distal innervation (Gomez-Sanchez et al.,
2017; McDonald et al., 2006; Parrinello et al., 2010). Schwann
cells undergo partial reprogramming from an epithelial fate to a
more plastic mesenchymal fate to execute these regenerative
functions (Arthur-Farraj et al., 2017; Clements et al., 2017).
Glial bridging in zebraﬁsh shares morphological and functional
similarities
with
Schwann
cell-mediated
bridging
after
mammalian
nerve
injury.
Yet,
the
extent
of
molecular
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021 ª 2021 Elsevier Inc.
613
ll

Figure 1. Molecular proﬁling of bridging glial cells in zebraﬁsh
(A) Schematic representation of zebraﬁsh SCs at 5 and 10 dpi. Ependymal radial glial (ERG) progenitors proliferate rostral and caudal to the lesion and the central
canal expands proximal to the lesion. ctgfa is expressed in a subset of ERGs at 5 dpi (red) and concentrates to ventral ERGs (vERGs) at 10 dpi. Early bridging glia
emerge at 5 dpi and a glial bridge is formed by 10 dpi.
(B) mCherry and EGFP in ctgfa:mCherry;gfap:EGFP dual reporter line. Shown are longitudinal SC sections from adult animals at 5 and 10 dpi. For each time point,
10–12 SC sections were analyzed. Lines delineate the outer edges of the SC. Dashed lines outline the central canal. Arrows and arrowheads point to
mCherry+EGFP+ bridging glia and vERGs, respectively.
(C and D) Capture and deep RNA-seq of bridging glia. ctgfa+gfap+ cells were sorted at 5 dpi. Bulk SC tissues from 5, 10, and 21 dpi, as well as uninjured control
SCs were deep sequenced. mCherry+EGFP+ and EGFP+ cells comprised 3% and 60% of total dissociated cells, respectively (C). PCA scatter plot of gene
expression shows the variances between biological replicates (D). x and y axes represent the percentages of variation explained by the principal components.
(E) Volcano plot representation of genes that are signiﬁcantly enriched or depleted in sorted ctgfa+gfap+ cells at 5 dpi relative to non-sorted uninjured SC controls.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Article
614
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021

similarities between these pro-regenerative glia remains to be
determined.
Glial bridging mechanisms have remained underexplored, pri-
marily due to the scarcity of genetic tools to label bridging glia
and to manipulate bridging pathways in zebraﬁsh. We previously
showed that connective tissue growth factor a (ctgfa) is a central
glial bridging factor and described the emergence of ctgfa+gfap+
bridginggliaafterSCI(Mokalledetal.,2016).Following injury,ctgfa
expression is ﬁrst broadly induced in ependymal radial glial pro-
genitors,liningthecentralcanalproximaltobothendsofthelesion.
Duringsubsequentsteps ofregeneration, ctgfa transcripts localize
to bridging glial cells and ventral ependymal progenitors. Genetic
mutants in zebraﬁsh ctgfa highlight its requirement during bridging
and regeneration. Importantly, genetic and pharmacologic ctgfa
overexpression are sufﬁcient to promote bridging and functional
SC repair. These ﬁndings poised us to provide a comprehensive
understanding of glial bridging cell fate inzebraﬁsh, and to perform
cross-species comparisons between regenerative zebraﬁsh glia
and mammalian glia.
Our understanding and ability to manipulate cell fates boosted
over the last decade. At the center of somatic cell reprogram-
ming, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) emerged as
a principal molecular mechanism that confers stem-like proper-
ties and drives cell fate transitions after injury (Jessen and Arthur-
Farraj, 2019; Wilson et al., 2020; Ye and Weinberg, 2015), in
addition to its established roles during embryogenesis and
tumorigenesis. Twist, Zeb, and Snai transcription factors control
EMT by downregulating cell-cell adhesion molecules, instigating
loss of cell polarity while elevating cellular plasticity (Dongre and
Weinberg, 2019). The transcriptome of zebraﬁsh bridging glia
suggested that ctgfa+ ependymal progenitors undergo EMT-
dependent reprogramming into a proliferative, migratory, and
mesenchymal cell fate (Mendez et al., 2010; Scarpa et al.,
2015). Using CRISPR-Cas9 mutagenesis, here, we identify a
gene regulatory network that activates twist-mediated EMT to
promote glial bridging and show that an inducible twist expres-
sion enhances glial bridging and functional SC repair.
RESULTS
Molecular proﬁling of ctgfa+gfap+ cells after spinal cord
injury
We devised a ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting and RNA deep
sequencing (FACS-seq) strategy to proﬁle the transcriptome of
bridging glial cells using ctgfa and gfap (Figure 1). ctgfa expres-
sion demarcates bridging glia at the lesion core and their pre-
dicted progenitors in the ventral ependyma proximal to the lesion
(Mokalled et al., 2016). To label bridging glia, we generated
transgenic ctgfa:mCherry reporter lines in combination with the
previously established gfap:EGFP transgene (Bernardos and
Raymond, 2006) (Figure 1A). ctgfa:mCherry was broadly ex-
pressed in developing zebraﬁsh animals, co-localizing with gfa-
p:EGFP in the ventral ﬂoor plate at 5 days post fertilization (dpf)
(Figures S1A–S1C). Consistent with its injury-induced expres-
sion, ctgfa:mCherry was not detectable in unlesioned adult
SCs but was upregulated within the SC tissue after injury (Fig-
ure S1D). Longitudinal SC sections from adult ctgfa:mCherry;g-
fap:EGFP animals conﬁrmed mCherry and EGFP expression in
bridging glia as early as 5 days post injury (dpi) (Figure 1B).
mCherry was also broadly induced in gfap+ ependymal progen-
itors at 1 week post injury (wpi) (Figure S1D) and localized to
ventral ependymal cells at 10 dpi (Figure 1B). These expression
patterns recapitulated the expression of endogenous ctgfa tran-
scripts and of previously established ctgfa:EGFP reporters after
SCI (Mokalled et al., 2016). We thus used the ctgfa/gfap dual re-
porter line to isolate ctgfa+gfap+ glial cells.
To deﬁne the molecular signature of pro-regenerative bridging
glia, we performed FACS-seq on ctgfa+gfap+ cells at 5 dpi and
RNA-seq on bulk SC tissue at 5, 10, and 21 dpi (Figures 1C–
1E). Complete SC transection was performed on ctgfa/gfap
dual reporter animals. At 5 dpi, 2-mm SC tissue samples
including the lesion site were harvested for sorting. Single re-
porter and wild-type animals were used as controls. We were
able to collect mCherry+EGFP+ cells from animals with trans-
ected SCs but not from sham-injured animals, conﬁrming the
injury-induced nature of ctgfa and the emergence of ctgfa+gfap+
cells after injury. mCherry+EGFP+ cells comprised 3% of the
cells dissociated at 5 dpi, while 60% of the cells were EGFP+
(Figure 1C). RNA samples from isolated ctgfa+gfap+ cells and
bulk SC tissue at 5 dpi were deep sequenced. SC tissue samples
from 10 and 21 dpi as well as uninjured control samples were
sequenced (Figures 1D and S1E). Principal component and
heatmap analyses revealed clustering of biological replicates,
and highlighted the extent of molecular regeneration between
5, 10, and 21 dpi relative to control samples.
We performed differential gene expression analysis to identify
genes that were enriched or depleted in bridging glia. Our FACS-
seq approach enriched for ctgfa expression (Figure 1E). ctgfa is
expressed in multiple cell types around the lesioned SC; yet, its
expression is primarily conﬁned to bridging glia and ventral
ependymal progenitors within the dissected SC tissue. We
thus observed an elevated ctgfa expression in ctgfa+gfap+ cells
relative to the bulk SC tissue. Conversely, gfap is expressed in
60% of the total cells dissociated from SC tissue, but ctgfa+gfap+
cells comprise only a minor subset of gfap-expressing cells (Fig-
ure 1C). Consequently, gfap expression was attenuated in iso-
lated ctgfa+gfap+ cells relative to that in the bulk SC tissue.
Neuronal and oligodendrocytic markers, such as neurod1 and
mbpa were depleted by FACS-seq, suggesting that isolated
ctgfa+gfap+ cells were devoid of neurons and oligodendrocytes.
We noted that EMT genes such as vimentin (vim), twist1, and
zeb2
were
enriched
in
ctgfa+gfap+
cells.
These
studies
(F–I) Glial cell comparisons between zebraﬁsh ctgfa+gfap+ cells and mammalian glial cells. The transcriptomes of ctgfa+gfap+ cells from zebraﬁsh were cross-
referenced with gene expression changes in bridging Schwann cells after nerve injury in mice (F), and in mouse astrocytes after SCI (H). Log2(fold enrichment) for
zebraﬁsh and mouse glia are shown on the y and x axes, respectively. Genes that are signiﬁcantly changed in zebraﬁsh and mice are shown. Genes that are
enriched or depleted in both zebraﬁsh and mice are shown in blue and red, respectively. Genes that are differentially changed between zebraﬁsh and mice are
shown in gray. Gene ontology analysis was performed on bridging glia enriched genes, subdivided based on their regulation in mouse bridging glia (G) or mouse
SCI astrocytes (I). Scale bars, 50 mm.
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021
615

documented
the
ﬁrst
transcriptome
for
pro-regenerative
bridging glia in zebraﬁsh.
Molecular comparisons between zebraﬁsh bridging glia
and mammalian glia
We ﬁrst investigated whether zebraﬁsh bridging glia harbor mo-
lecular similarities with bridging Schwann cells in mammals. To
test this hypothesis, we compared the transcriptomes of zebraﬁsh
bridging glia and murine repair Schwann cells (Clements et al.,
2017) (Figures 1F and 1G; Table S1). Among genes that were en-
riched in bridging glia, 231 genes were also enriched in bridging
Schwann cells, while 132 genes were depleted (Figure 1F). Simi-
larities between zebraﬁsh bridging glia and murine bridging
Schwann cells included genes related to cell proliferation, wound
healing, and regeneration (Figure 1G). These genes included the
glial bridging factor ctgf (ccn2) and EMT-related genes, including
snai2, tgfb1, and cdh1 (Table S1). Notably, Schwann cell identity
genes (mbpa and sox10) were depleted in zebraﬁsh, while
bridging glia enriched transcription factors (egr1 and nr1d1)
were depleted in murine bridging Schwann cells. These studies
indicated that zebraﬁsh bridging glia and bridging Schwann cells
are distinct cell fates despite their morphological and functional
similarities and suggested that mesenchymal gene expression
correlates with regenerative bridging in both cell types.
We next compared the transcriptional proﬁles of zebraﬁsh
bridging glia to murine scar-bordering astrocytes after SCI (An-
derson et al., 2016) (Figures 1H and 1I; Table S2). Based on
the number of genes regulated in either zebraﬁsh bridging glia
or mouse astrocyte datasets alone, we expected about 3%–
3.25% transcriptional similarities by chance. We found that
1,047 bridging glia enriched genes were signiﬁcantly changed
in mouse astrocytes. 818 of these genes followed similar trends
in mice, accounting for 12% of the transcriptional similarities be-
tween bridging glia and astrocytes (Figure 1H). On the other
hand, 979 bridging glia depleted genes were signiﬁcantly
changed in mouse astrocytes. 619 of these genes were also
depleted in mouse astrocytes, accounting for 9% of the tran-
scriptional similarities between bridging glia and astrocytes. Im-
mune-related genes and transcription factors, including stat3,
were enriched in both cell types (Herrmann et al., 2008; Okada
et
al.,
2006),
whereas
genes
related
to
extracellular
structure organization, supramolecular ﬁber organization, and
N-Glycan elongation were missing in zebraﬁsh bridging glia (Fig-
ure 1I; Table S2). We also noted that bridging glia enriched for
s100a10 expression, a marker of ischemic A2 astrocytes that
are thought to promote neuronal survival and repair (Liddelow
et al., 2017). Thus, despite their seemingly different injury re-
sponses, zebraﬁsh bridging glia and mouse astrocytes possess
vast transcriptional similarities that include astrocytic markers
and
transcription
factors.
Together,
these
genome-wide,
cross-species comparisons highlighted molecular similarities
and differences between zebraﬁsh bridging glia and mammalian
glial cells and provided molecular insights into the pro-regener-
ative cell fates that enable zebraﬁsh SC repair.
Ventral ependymal progenitors undergo EMT during
glial bridging
The transcriptome of zebraﬁsh bridging glia revealed features of a
mesenchymal transition. Hallmarks of EMT include concomitant
downregulation of epithelial E-Cadherin (cdh1) and upregulation
of N-cadherin (cdh2), driven by twist, zeb, and snai transcription
factors. We comprehensively assessed the regulation of 120
epithelial and mesenchymal markers during bridging by FACS-
seq and quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) (Figures 2A–2C, S2A,
and S2B) (Chang et al., 2016). By averaging fold enrichment for
each set of markers, we found that epithelial genes were downre-
gulated (log2 enrichment of 0.2) and mesenchymal genes were
enriched (log2 enrichment of 0.8) in isolated ctgfa+gfap+cells (Fig-
ure 2B). We also grouped EMT genes based on their enrichment
or depletion in isolated ctgfa+gfap+ cells (Figure 2C). 57% of
epithelial markers were downregulated by FACS-seq, with 32%
showing log2 enrichment <1. On the other hand, 68% and
46% of mesenchymal markers were signiﬁcantly enriched and
had log2 enrichment >1, respectively. These ﬁndings suggested
that a mesenchymal program is activated during glial bridging.
To visualize the spatial and temporal activation of EMT during
SC regeneration, we characterized the expression of core EMT
regulators at deﬁned time points after SCI. twist1a transcripts
were not detectable in the uninjured SC tissue (Figure 2D). At 1
wpi, we detected twist1a transcripts in the lesion core. twist1a
expression localized to ventral ependymal progenitors at 1 and
2 wpi (Figures 2D, S2C, and S2D). In contrast with twist1a,
twist1b expression did not show speciﬁc enrichment in ependy-
mal cells after SCI. These results indicated that twist1a and ctgfa
have overlapping gene expression patterns after SCI and sug-
gested that twist1a directs localized mesenchymal transition in
ctgfa+ ependymal progenitors during glial bridging. To test this
hypothesis, we co-labeled mesenchymal Cdh2 or epithelial
Cdh1 with ctgfa:EGFP. By immunohistochemistry, Cdh1 and
Cdh2 showed dynamic and localized gene expression changes
after SCI (Figures 2E–2H). Cdh2 was broadly upregulated at 1
and 2 wpi relative to uninjured controls and was more elevated
in ctgfa+ relative to ctgfa cells at 2 wpi (Figures 2E and
2F). Similarly, the mesenchymal marker Vimentin was globally
upregulated at 1 wpi, showed preferential expression in ventral
ependymal progenitors at 2 wpi, and localized to the progenitor
motor domain by 3 wpi (Figure S2E). On the other hand, Cdh1
expression was increased in lateral ependymal cells after SCI
but was preferentially downregulated in ctgfa+ cells at 1 and 2
wpi (Figures 2G and 2H). These results demonstrated that EMT
is activated in ventral ependymal progenitors after SCI and sug-
gested that twist1 reprograms ctgfa+ ependymal progenitors
into a more mesenchymal cell fate during glial bridging.
Single-cell proﬁling of bridging glial cells after SCI
Our FACS-seq approach provided bulk transcriptional proﬁles for
ctgfa+gfap+ ependymal progenitors and bridging glia. To uncover
the extent of heterogeneity in these signatures, we performed sin-
gle nuclear RNA-sequencing (snRNA-seq) on SC tissues from
gfap:EGFP ﬁsh at 1 wpi using the 10x Genomics platform. This
time point spans the initiation of glial bridges after SCI. 2-mm
SC tissue sections spanning the lesion site were collected, and
nuclei were isolated from 45 pooled SC tissues to account for in-
dividual variation (Matson et al., 2018). 33,185 SC nuclei were pro-
ﬁled and ﬁltered by quality control analysis (Figure S3A). Unsuper-
vised clustering of SC nuclei revealed major clusters of glial cells,
neurons,oligodendrocytes,oligodendrocyteprogenitorcells,and
microglia/macrophages (Figure 3A) (Becht et al., 2018; Butler
ll
Article
616
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021

Figure 2. Ventral ependymal progenitors undergo EMT after SCI
(A) Expression of EMT-related genes by FACS-seq. Heatmap representation of epithelial and mesenchymal gene expression in ctgfa+gfap+ cells. Color scale in
the dendrogram represents log2(fold enrichment) in ctgfa+gfap+ cells relative to control SCs.
(B) Enrichment of EMT markers by FACS-seq. Log2(fold enrichment) was averaged for epithelial and mesenchymal genes.
(C) Distribution of EMT markers by FACS-seq. Upregulated genes were subdivided into log2(FE) >1 (Green) and log2(FE) = 0 to 1 (Light green). Downregulated
genes were subdivided into log2(FE) = 1 to 0 (light red) and log2(FE) < 1 (red). Percent genes within each category are shown.
(D) RNAscope for twist1a in wild-type SCs at 1 and 2 wpi, and in uninjured controls. Hematoxylin staining (blue) was used as a counterstain. At 1 wpi, SC cross
sections at the lesion site and distal to the lesion from the rostral side are shown. Arrowheads point to twist1a expression at the lesion core at 1 wpi. Arrows point
to twist1a expression in ventral ependymal progenitors at 1 and 2 wpi.
(E–H) Cdh2 (E) and Cdh1 (G) immunostaining in ctgfa:EGFP zebraﬁsh at 1 and 2 wpi, and in uninjured controls. SC cross sections are shown, and dotted lines
delineate central canal edges. Arrowheads point to domains of co-expression of Cdh2 and EGFP (E), and domains of diminished Cdh1 expression and increased
EGFP expression (G). Quantiﬁcation of Cdh2 (F) and Cdh1 (H) expression in ctgfa- and ctgfa+ cells at 2 wpi are shown. ****p < 0.0001. Scale bars, 50 mm.
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021
617

Figure 3. Single cell proﬁling of glial cells during SC regeneration
(A) UMAP of snRNA-seq data from SC tissues at 1 wpi.
(B) Sub-clustering and UMAP visualization of glial cell clusters at 1 wpi. Ten clusters of glial cells were identiﬁed and termed as Glial-0 to -9.
(C) Expression of canonical markers in each glial cluster. Dot colors represent average expression levels from low (red) to high (blue). Dot sizes represent the
percent of positive cells for each gene.
(D) Enrichment of snRNA-seq-derived glial cell markers by FACS-seq. Glial cell markers were identiﬁed for each cluster by snRNA-seq analysis. Log2(fold
enrichment) in sorted bridging glia relative to uninjured SCs were then then averaged for each cluster.
(E) Distribution of snRNA-seq-derived glial cell markers by FACS-seq. Markers of clusters Glial-0 to -9 were categorized based on their enrichment in ctgfa+gfap+
cells. Upregulated genes were subdivided into log2(FE) > 1 (Green) and log2(FE) = 0 to 1 (Light green). Downregulated genes were subdivided into log2(FE) = 1 to
0 (light red) and log2(FE) < 1 (red). Percent genes within each category are shown.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Article
618
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021

et al., 2018; Stuart et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2014). Clusters repre-
sentative of glial cells were further grouped into 10 glial clusters
(Glial-0 to Glial-9) (Figure 3B). Initial differential gene expression
highlighted Glial-7 and Glial-8 as putative clusters corresponding
to bridging glia. ctgfa and twist1a were co-expressed in cluster
Glial-8, while ctgfa and twist1b were co-expressed in cluster
Glial-7 (Figure 3C). We noted that Glial-7 and Glial-9 co-clustered
at lower and medium resolutions, suggesting that they share
similar gene expression signatures. In fact, Glial-7 and Glial-9
differed mainly by their proliferative states, with Glial-9 expressing
mki67 in addition to other proliferation markers (Figures 3C and
S3C). To identify clusters of bridging glial cells independent of
ctgf and twist expression, we performed genome-wide compari-
sons between glial cell clusters identiﬁed by snRNA-seq and bulk
transcriptional proﬁles generated by FACS-seq. Markers of clus-
ters Glial-7 and Glial-9 were enriched by FACS-seq with an
averagelog2enrichmentof0.47and1.26,respectively(Figure3D).
When grouped based on their enrichment or depletion in isolated
ctgfa+gfap+ cells, 62.5% and 80.95% of the genes that marked
Glial-7 and Glial-9 clusters were upregulated by FACS-seq (Fig-
ure 3E). These results suggested that glial clusters 7, 8, and 9
encompass bridging glial cells.
FACS-seq analysis of isolated ctgfa+gfap+ cells revealed fea-
tures of EMT during glial bridging. To further evaluate the role of
EMT during bridging, we surveyed the glial cell clusters identiﬁed
by snRNA-seq for mesenchymal marker expression. Focusing
the analysis on markers that were enriched by FACS-seq (Figures
2A–2C), 53.8%, 46.2%, and 35.9% of mesenchymal genes were
enriched in clusters Glial-7, Glial-8, and Glial-9 (Figures 3F and
S3D). These results suggested clusters Glial-7, -8, and -9 have
undergone a mesenchymal transition by 1 wpi. We next used dif-
ferential gene expression to identify the top 10 markers for these
glial clusters (Figure 3G). Concomitant with a pro-regenerative
function for bridging glial cells, gene ontology classiﬁcation sug-
gested an axon guidance-related role for Glial-8 clustered cells
(Figures 3H and S3B; Table S3). This analysis also indicated
that cell adhesion and cell signaling pathways were active in
Glial-7, -8, and -9. Our ﬁndings are consistent with the emer-
gence of 3 subpopulations of bridging glia, suggesting that
sub-clusters of ctgfa+twist1a+ ependymal progenitors, ctgfa+-
twist1b+ glial cells, and a subset of proliferative glial cells adopt
a mesenchymal fate during glial bridging.
An EMT-driving gene regulatory network during glial
bridging
To identify transcriptional regulators necessary for glial bridging,
we tested the roles of transcription factors that are enriched in
bridging glia. A total of 9 transcription factors were chosen for
mutagenesis (bach1a, bach1b, egr1, foxg1c, junba, junbb,
nr1d1, spi1a, spi1b, taz, and yap1) (Figures S3E–S3G). cntf
was selected as a positive control (Qin et al., 2013; Wang
et al., 2014; Ye et al., 2004). For efﬁcient and simultaneous
gene targeting in adult zebraﬁsh, we adapted a modiﬁed
CRISPR-Cas9 protocol that achieved near-complete mutagen-
esis in F0 injected embryos (Hoshijima et al., 2019). CRISPR-
Cas9-targeted animals were raised to adulthood, subjected to
SCI, and swam against increasing water current inside an en-
closed swim tunnel to screen for functional regeneration defects
(Figure 4A) (Mokalled et al., 2016).
We ﬁrst assessed the validity of our CRISPR-Cas9 methods in
the targeted adult animals. To maximize the effect of small indels
on mutant gene function, CRISPR-Cas9 ribonucleoproteins
(RNPs) were designed against genomic regions that encode their
DNA-binding domains. Some genes were targeted using 2 sets
of RNPs to maximize targeting efﬁciency. In addition to targeting
individual genes, we combinatorially targeted transcription factor
paralogs to account for putatively redundant effects on bridging.
At 2 dpf, the rates of mutagenesis averaged to 83.6% per target
site and 93.7% per gene (Figures S4A,S4C, and S4D). We then as-
sessed the possibility and extent of negative selection that could
impact mutagenesis rates in adult animals (Figure S4B). By capil-
lary electrophoresis, the rates of mutagenesis averaged to
91.7% for bach1a, bach1b, foxg1c, junba, junbb, nr1d1, spi1a,
taz, and yap1-targeted adults. However, 22% to 54% of cntf-,
egr1-, and spi1b-injected adults showed lower mutagenesis efﬁ-
ciencies relative to their larval siblings. For these 3 genes, we
selected 18 animals with the highest mutagenesis rates for SCI
and regeneration assessment. The average mutagenesis rate for
experimental animals hereafter was 92.5%. These results
conﬁrmed efﬁcient mutagenesis in CRISPR-Cas9-injected ani-
mals and poised us to screen for adult regeneration phenotypes.
To evaluate the outcomes of these mutations on SC regenera-
tion, we assessed functional recovery in CRISPR-Cas9-injected
animals. At 4 wpi, swim function was diminished in bach1a;-
bach1b, cntf, egr1, junbb, junba;junbb, spi1a, and taz/yap1-tar-
geted animals relative to their respective uninjected siblings (Fig-
ure 4B). While bach1 paralogs and taz/yap were functionally
redundant during SC repair, analysis of single mutants showed
that mutations in junbb impaired functional regeneration. To
conﬁrm the regenerative phenotypes obtained in CRISPR-
Cas9-injected animals, we generated stable mutant lines for
egr1 (egr1stl667; Figure S4E) and junbb (junbbstl671 and junbbstl672;
Figure S4F). Recapitulating egr1 and junbb crispant phenotypes,
swim function was markedly compromised in stable egr1 and
junbb mutants relative to their respective wild-type siblings at 4
wpi (Figure S4G). In the absence of injury, swim function was
comparable between targeted bach1a/b, spi1a, taz/yap1, stable
junbb mutants, and their respective controls under uninjured
conditions (Figures S4G and S4H), suggesting that our CRISPR
approach and phenotyping assays identiﬁed regeneration-spe-
ciﬁc phenotypes. In these assays, egr1 mutants showed a mild
but signiﬁcant decrease in swim function, swimming for
~40 min under increasing current velocity compared with a 55-
min swim time in wild-type siblings. egr1 mutants completely
failed to swim after SCI (Figure S4G). The cross-sectional area
of glial bridges was signiﬁcantly reduced in bach1a;bach1b,
egr1, junbb, and spi1a-targeted animals at 4 wpi (Figures 4C
and 4D), consistent with a glial bridging role for these
(F) Mesenchymal gene expression in glial clusters. A total of 39 mesenchymal markers that are enriched by FACS-seq are shown. Dot colors represent average
expression levels from low (red) to high (blue). Dot sizes represent the percent of positive cells for each gene.
(G) Heatmap of genes enriched in clusters Glial-0 to -9. Blue indicates enriched genes and red indicates depleted genes.
(H) Gene ontology for markers of clusters Glial-7, -8, and -9.
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021
619

transcription factors. These studies identiﬁed transcription fac-
tors that are required for glial bridging and functional SC repair.
bach1, egr1, and junb have been shown to regulate EMT and
Ctgf signaling during development and/or tumorigenesis (Gervasi
et al., 2012; Han et al., 2019; Sato et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2017). We
thus tested whether similar regulatory mechanisms are deployed
to promote tissue regeneration. By RNAscope and qRT-PCR,
twist1a expression was signiﬁcantly attenuated in egr1 and
junbb-targeted animals (Figures 4E, 4F, and S4I). We noted that
targeting spi1 and the bach1 transcriptional repressor resulted in
respective decrease and increase in twist1 expression that ap-
proached signiﬁcance (Figures 4F and S4I). These studies re-
vealedafunctionallyvalidatedgeneregulatorynetworkthatdirects
EMT and glial bridging during SC regeneration.
Localized Yap activation in ependymal progenitors
during glial bridging
Hippo signaling plays important roles in tissue regeneration in
multiple
tissue
contexts.
Yes-associated
protein
(Yap)
and transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif (Taz)
are downstream co-activators of Hippo signaling, regulating
Figure 4. An EMT-driving gene regulatory
network directs glial bridging
(A) Pipeline for an in vivo CRISPR-Cas9 screen for
glial bridging transcription factors.
(B) Functional recovery in CRISPR-Cas9-targeted
animals 4 wpi. For each group of targeted animals,
uninjected siblings were subjected to SCI and swim
assays. Dots represent individual animals. Groups
with signiﬁcantly diminished swim function are
shown in red.
(C and D) Glial bridging in CRISPR-Cas9-targeted
animals. Gfap immunohistochemistry was performed
at 4 wpi (C). Representative micrographs show Gfap+
bridges at the lesion site in bach1a;bach1b, egr1,
junbb, and spi1a-targeted animals. Percent bridging
was quantiﬁed for 10–14 animals per group (D).
(E and F) twist1a expression in CRISPR-Cas9-tar-
geted animals. RNAscope was performed on SC
tissues
at
4
wpi
(E).
Dotted
lines
delineate
central canal edges. Arrows point to ventral epen-
dymal progenitors in distal SC sections. Normalized
twist1a was quantiﬁed from 8–14 sections per group
(F). ***p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05. Scale
bars, 50 mm.
cell plasticity and organ growth during
development and regeneration. Yap and
Taz lack DNA-binding domains and con-
trol transcription by associating with the
Tead DNA-binding transcription factors
to promote cell proliferation and stem
cell maintenance (Vassilev et al., 2001;
Zhao et al., 2008). yap and taz were upre-
gulated in injured SC tissue (Figure S2A).
However, while taz was 2-fold enriched in
isolated ctgfa+gfap+ cells, yap and the
tead transcription factors were only mildly
enriched by FACS-seq (Figure S2B), re-
ﬂecting their ubiquitous expression across
multiple SC cell types. For comprehensive
analysis of Yap signaling, we examined the expression of previ-
ously described canonical and proliferative Yap target genes
during glial bridging (Figures 5A–5C) (Zanconato et al., 2015).
On an average, Yap targets were enriched in sorted ctgfa+gfap+
cells, with log2 enrichment of 0.4 for canonical targets and 1.3
for proliferative targets (Figure 5B). When grouped based on
their enrichment or depletion by FACS-seq, 54% of canonical
targets and 83% of proliferative targets were signiﬁcantly en-
riched in isolated ctgfa+gfap+ cells (Figure 5C), suggesting
that Yap signaling is activated after SCI.
Yap and Taz require nuclear localization to exert their transcrip-
tional regulatory functions. To identify domains of Yap/Taz activa-
tion after SCI, we performed immunohistochemistry for Yap and
Taz on wild-type SC sections at 1, 2, and 3 wpi, as well as on un-
injured controls. Consistent with transcriptomic data, Yap was
broadly expressed in control and lesioned SCs between 1 and 3
wpi (Figure S5A). Yap sub-cellular localization revealed dynamic,
domain-speciﬁc changes during regeneration. At 1 wpi, nuclear
Yap was broadly expressed around the ependyma, suggesting
global activation early after SCI (Figure S5A). At 2 wpi, Yap showed
preferential nuclear localization in ventral ependymal progenitors
ll
Article
620
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021

Figure 5. Localized Yap activation promotes glial bridging and SC regeneration
(A) Expression of Yap target genes in ctgfa+gfap+ cells. Genes were divided into canonical and proliferative genes. Color scale in the dendrogram represents
log2(fold enrichment) by FACS-seq.
(B) Enrichment of Yap target genes by FACS-seq. Log2(fold enrichment) was averaged for canonical and proliferative targets.
(C) Distribution of Yap target genes by FACS-seq. Canonical and proliferative genes were categorized based on their enrichment in Ctgfa+Gfap+ cells. Upre-
gulated genes were subdivided into log2(FE) > 1 (green) and log2(FE) = 0 to 1 (light green). Downregulated genes were subdivided into log2(FE) = 1 to 0 (light red)
and log2(FE) < 1 (red). Percent genes within each category are shown.
(D) Yap expression in wild-type zebraﬁsh at 2 wpi and uninjured controls. Lateral and ventral ependymal progenitors are shown in separate panels at 2 wpi.
Central canals are constricted in uninjured SCs and expanded proximal to the lesion site after SCI. Arrowheads point to nuclei with attenuated Yap expression in
lateral ERGs. Arrows point to nuclei with elevated Yap expression in ventral ERGs.
(E) Quantiﬁcation of Yap expression and localization after SCI. Nuclear and cytoplasmic Yap were quantiﬁed in ventral and lateral ependymal domains at 2 wpi.
Nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratios were averaged for 2 sections per animal and 5 animals were used.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021
621

relativetothelateralependyma(Figures5Dand S5A).At3wpi,Yap
was broadly downregulated but maintained its localization to
ventral ependymal nuclei (Figure S5A). Quantiﬁcation of nuclear
and cytoplasmic Yap in ventral and lateral ependymal cells
conﬁrmed its nuclear enrichment (1.4-fold nuclear-to-cytoplasmic
expression) inventral progenitors at2 wpi (Figure5E). Yap wasuni-
formlydistributed in the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartmentsof
lateral progenitors at the same time point (1-fold nuclear-to-cyto-
plasmic expression) (Figure 5E). On the other hand, we observed
a uniformly elevated Taz expression at 1 and 2 wpi (Figure S5B).
These experiments indicated that Yap and Taz were upregulated
after SCI, and that Yap was preferentiallyactivated inventral epen-
dymal progenitors during glial bridging.
Yap signaling is required for glial bridging and functional
SC repair
Yap and Taz are functionally redundant in zebraﬁsh, and dual Taz/
Yap mutations impair embryonic body elongation during the mid-
latestagesofsomitogenesis (Kimelmanetal.,2017;Miesfeldetal.,
2015). Using CRISPR-Cas9 mutagenesis, the taz/yap1-targeted
animals that survived to adulthood showed SC regeneration de-
fects (Figure 4B). To further understand the role of Yap signaling
during SC regeneration, we expressed dominant negative Yap un-
der the control ofa heat-inducible promoter (hsp70:dsRed-dnYap)
and assessed the outcomes of Yap inactivation on functional and
anatomical SC repair (Mateus et al., 2015). hsp70:dsRed-dnYap
zebraﬁshandwild-typesiblingsweresubjectedtoSCtransections
followed by daily heat shocks to induce transgene expression.
Swim assays revealed impaired functional recovery in dnYap-ex-
pressing ﬁsh at 4 and 6 wpi (Figure 5F). Swim capacity was com-
parable between uninjured dnYap-expressing and wild-type sib-
lings after 6 weeks of daily heat shocks, indicating that dnYap
expression was speciﬁcally detrimental in injury (Figure 5F). At 4
wpi, dnYap-expressing animals showed reduced axon regenera-
tion by anterograde axon tracing (Figure 5G) and less glial bridging
relativetowild-typesiblings(FigureS5C). Toassessthe roleofYap
signaling during glial bridge initiation, we examined glial bridging
upon dnYap expression at 10 dpi (Figures 5H and 5I). At this time
point, Gfap immunostaining revealed the formation of organized,
circular bridges at the lesion core in control SC sections. Glial
bridges were reduced by 50% and were irregularly shaped upon
dnYap expression. These results revealed that Yap signaling pro-
motes glial bridging and functional SC repair.
Yap regulates twist1-mediated EMT and ctgf-dependent
bridging
The dynamics of Yap activation paralleled patterns of ctgfa and
twist1a expression during glial bridging (Figures 2D and 5D) (Mo-
kalled et al., 2016). To examine the correlation between Yap acti-
vation and Ctgfa expression, we injured ctgfa:EGFP transgenic
zebraﬁsh and performed time course analysis for Yap and
EGFP (Figure S5D). At 1 wpi, nuclear Yap localized with
ctgfa:EGFP proximal to the lesion. By 2 wpi, EGFP and nuclear
Yap localized to ventral ependymal progenitors. At this time
point, 38% of ctgfa:EGFP cells expressed nuclear Yap, while
only 6% of EGFP cells showed nuclear Yap expression (Fig-
ure S5E). To examine ctgfa expression upon Yap inactivation,
we combined dnYap-expressing and ctgfa:EGFP transgenes.
hsp70:dsRed-dnYap;ctgfa:EGFP (Tg+) ﬁsh and ctgfa:EGFP
(Tg) controls were subjected to SC transections and daily heat
shocks to induce dnYap expression (Figure 6A). EGFP was ex-
pressed in ventral ependymal progenitors of ctgfa:EGFP controls
at 10 dpi but was attenuated in dnYap-expressing animals (Fig-
ures 6B and 6C). We next assessed twist1a expression in
dnYap-expressing SCs by RNAscope (Figures 6D and 6E). At
10 dpi, twist1a transcripts were detectable in the lesion cores
and ventral ependymal progenitors of control SCs. Upon dnYap
expression, twist1a was diminished in the lesion core and mislo-
calized to the outer edges of the lesion. Distal to the lesion,
twist1a was reduced by 60% in ventral ependymal cells of
dnYap-expressing animals (Figure 6E). These ﬁndings demon-
strated that Yap promotes ctgfa and twist1a expression in ventral
ependymal progenitors. ctgfa and twist1a are essential drivers of
glial bridging and EMT (Dongre and Weinberg, 2019; Mokalled
et al., 2016) (Figures S5F and S5G), indicating that Yap is required
for ctgfa-dependent bridging and twist1a-driven EMT after SCI.
Twist1a expression promotes glial bridging and
functional SC repair
To examine the regenerative effects of EMT activation, we ex-
pressed the EMT-driving Twist1a transcription factor under the
control of a heat-inducible promoter (hsp70:Twist1a-2A-EGFP)
and assessed the outcomes of Twist1a expression on functional
and anatomical SC repair. hsp70:Twist1a-2A-EGFP zebraﬁsh
and wild-type siblings were subjected to SC transections fol-
lowed by daily heat shocks to induce transgene expression (Fig-
ure 6F). Swim assays revealed improved functional recovery in
Twist1a-expressing ﬁsh at 4 and 6 wpi (Figure 6G). Functional re-
covery was even more pronounced in Twist1-expressing animals
by tracking the swim activity under a steady current of 20 cm/s
(Figure 6G). By immunostaining, glial bridging and ependymal
cell proliferation were increased by 2-fold in Twist1a-expressing
animals relative to their wild-type siblings (Figures 6H–6K). These
results indicated that activation of twist1a-driven EMT promotes
glial bridging and functional regeneration after SCI.
DISCUSSION
This study identiﬁed an essential EMT-driving gene regulatory
network
that
regulates
differential
regenerative
capacity
(F) Swim assays determined motor function recovery of hsp70:dsRed-dnYap (Tg+, SCI, red) and wild-type (Tg, SCI, black) siblings at 2, 4, and 6 wpi. For
controls, dnYap overexpressing (Tg+, uninjured, dashed red) and wild-type (Tg, uninjured, dashed black) animals were analyzed. All groups were subjected to
daily heat shocks. Statistical analyses of swim times are shown for injured dnYap relative to injured wild-type siblings.
(G) Anterograde axon tracing in dnYap-expressing zebraﬁsh at 4 wpi. Biocytin axon tracer was applied rostrally and analyzed at 100 mm (proximal) and 500 mm
(distal) caudal to the lesion. Representative traces of biocytin are shown for Tg+ and Tg animals at the proximal level.
(H and I) Glial bridging in dnYap-expressing zebraﬁsh. Gfap immunohistochemistry was performed at 10 dpi (H). Representative micrographs show Gfap+ bridges
at the lesion site relative to the intact SC in dnYap-expressing (Tg+) and control siblings (Tg). Percent bridging was quantiﬁed for 13 Tg and 10 Tg+ animals (I)
**p < 0.01; *p < 0.05. Scale bars, 10 mm (D) and 50 mm (G and H).
ll
Article
622
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021

Figure 6. Yap signaling directs twist1a-driven EMT and ctgfa-dependent glial bridging
(A–C) ctgfa reporter expression in ctgfa:EGFP;hsp70:dsRed-dnYap (Tg+) SCs. ctgfa:EGFP (Tg) siblings were used as controls. All animals were subjected to SCI
and daily heat shocks (+HS) (A). EGFP expression was assessed at 10 dpi (B). Dotted lines delineate central canal edges. For quantiﬁcation, the area of EGFP
ﬂuorescence was calculated for 2 sections per animal (C).
(D and E) twist1a expression in hsp70:dsRed-dnYap and control wild-type siblings. All animals were subjected to daily heat shocks (+HS). RNAscope was
performed at 10 dpi (D). Arrowheads point to the lesion core; arrows point to ventral ependymal progenitors in distal SC sections. For quantiﬁcation, normalized
twist1a area was calculated for 2 sections per animal (E).
(F and G) Swim assays determined motor function recovery of hsp70:Twist1a-2A-EGFP (Tg+, red) and wild-type (Tg, black) siblings at 2, 4, and 6 wpi. Both
groups were subjected to SCI and daily heat shocks (F). Average swim activities are shown for Twist1a-expressing (Tg+, red) and control animals (Tg, teal) at 6
wpi in the absence of water current and at a water current velocity of 20 cm/s (G).
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021
623

between mammals and zebraﬁsh after SC injury (Figures 6L and
S6B). The combination of bulk, single cell, and comparative tran-
scriptomics provided comprehensive characterization of pro-
regenerative glial cell fates in zebraﬁsh and revealed EMT as a
hallmark of glial bridging. At the center of glial bridging is a
multi-nodal gene regulatory network that is necessary and sufﬁ-
cient to promote twist-mediated EMT, ctgf-dependent glial
bridging, and functional SC repair.
Our ﬁndings support the emergence of lineage-restricted
ependymal progenitors during SC regeneration in zebraﬁsh.
Consistent with the lineage restriction within ependymal cells,
domains of ventro-lateral ependymal progenitors reminiscent
of the developing progenitor motor neuron (PMN) domain were
shown to give rise to regenerating motor neurons in injured adult
ﬁsh (Reimer et al., 2008). Our study highlights a niche of ventral
ependymal cells that express activated Yap, Ctgf, and Twist1 af-
ter SCI. Ependymal radial glial cells are organized into a mono-
layer of polarized, epithelial-like cells in uninjured SCs. Shortly
after injury, these cells undergo cell shape changes and become
highly proliferative. Using genetic loss and gain of function, our
study indicates that ventral ependymal progenitors undergo
EMT-mediated reprogramming after injury and that this cellular
reprogramming is required and sufﬁcient to promote glial
bridging. Decreased expression of Cdh1 marks the loss of
epithelial cell fate in a ﬁrst and essential step toward mesen-
chymal transition (Huang et al., 2012). Cdh1 downregulation in
ctgfa+ ependymal cells is concomitant with increased expres-
sion of mesenchymal markers, including Vim and Cdh2 (Wheel-
ock et al., 2008). EMT is often linked to increased plasticity and
stem cell activation during tissue regeneration (Jessen and
Arthur-Farraj, 2019; Wilson et al., 2020). We propose that EMT
plays a dual regenerative role during reprogramming of ependy-
mal progenitors, by suppressing their epitheliality in response to
injury and enhancing their plasticity during regeneration.
Complete SC transection in zebraﬁsh results in pronounced
mechanical stress, manifested by prolonged expansion of the
central canal proximal to the lesion from the rostral and caudal
ends. Our results support a model in which Yap senses these
mechanical stresses, resulting in ependymal cell activation
and glial bridging. Yap is regulated by various upstream regula-
tors, including cell polarity and adhesion proteins. Of high rele-
vance
to
tissue
regeneration,
Yap
relays
cellular
stress
into transcriptional responses by surveying the levels of ﬁlamen-
tous actin (Aragona et al., 2013; Dupont et al., 2011). Active Yap
signaling maintains stemness in various stem cell types,
including neural and glial progenitors, while Yap activation is suf-
ﬁcient to revert differentiated cells back to a tissue-speciﬁc
stem/progenitor cell state (Cao et al., 2008; Panciera et al.,
2016). Our study is consistent with Yap orchestrating regenera-
tive responses and enhancing cell plasticity in response to the
mechanical stresses associated with SCI. Why and how Yap
activation conﬁnes to speciﬁc niches of progenitor cells warrant
further investigation.
Our ﬁndings shed light on glial bridging as an effective, nat-
ural mechanism of SC repair. Transcriptomes of zebraﬁsh
bridging glia were more similar to scar-bordering astrocytes
than to bridging Schwann cells in mammals. The transcription
factors required for glial bridging were enriched in mouse astro-
cytes, while the EMT-related genes identiﬁed in zebraﬁsh were
similarly regulated in mouse Schwann cells (Figure S6). We thus
propose that zebraﬁsh bridging glia possess a hybrid molecular
identity that combines increased EMT-mediated plasticity with
an astrocyte-like cell identity. We suggest that further investiga-
tion into bridging glial cell fate will springboard translational
applications to improve bridging and regeneration in the
mammalian CNS.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
B Lead Contact
B Materials Availability
B Data and Code Availability
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Zebraﬁsh
B Generation of Tg(ctgfa:mCherry) zebraﬁsh
B Generation of Tg(hsp70:Twist1a-2A-EGFP) zebraﬁsh
B Spinal cord transection
d METHOD DETAILS
B FACS sorting and RNA sequencing
B Single nuclear RNA sequencing
B Unbiased cell clustering
B Subsetting glial clusters
B Gene ontology
B Histology
B Swim capacity assays
B Axon tracing
B Protein-Protein network generation
B CRISPR/Cas9 Mutagenesis
B Capillary electrophoresis and NGS
B Quantitative real time PCR
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
B Quantiﬁcation
B Statistical tests
B Molecular comparisons between zebraﬁsh bridging
glia and mammalian glia
d ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
B FACS-seq and snRNA-seq data
(H and I) Glial bridging in Twist1a-expressing zebraﬁsh at 10 dpi. Representative immunohistochemistry shows the Gfap+ bridge at the lesion site relative to the
intact SC in Twist1a-expressing (Tg+) and control siblings (Tg) (H). Percent bridging was calculated for 10 Tg and 9 Tg+ animals (I).
(J and K) Cell proliferation in Twist1a-expressing and control siblings. PCNA staining was performed on Tg and Tg+ animals at 10 dpi (J). Percent PCNA+ cells
was quantiﬁed for 10 Tg and 9 Tg+ animals at the lesion, in whole SC tissues, and around the ependyma (K). Percent
(L) Schematic Model shows injury-induced EMT regulates ependymal cell reprogramming into bridging glia. Transcriptional modulators Egr1, Junbb, Yap, and
Taz direct Ctgfa and Twist1a expression, which then induce the expression of mesenchymal genes, including Cdh2 and Vim, while epithelial markers such as
Cdh1 are reduced. ***p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05; ns, not signiﬁcant. Scale bars, 50 mm.
ll
Article
624
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
devcel.2021.01.017.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank V. Cavalli, A. Johnson, H. McNeill, K. Monk, and L. Solnica-Krezel for
discussion, Y. Hou, D. Grunwald, and A. Stratman for sharing protocols and
reagents, T. Li and B. Zhang for Bioinformatics analysis, and the Washington
University zebraﬁsh Shared Resource for animal care. This research was sup-
ported by the W.M. Keck Post-doctoral Fellowship (to D.K.S), the Washington
University Center of Regenerative Medicine T32 (T32 EB028092 to D.K.S),
grants from NIH (R01 NS113915 to M.H.M.), the Curators of the University of
Missouri (Spinal Cord Injury and Disease Training Program to M.H.M.), the
McDonnell Center for Cellular Neuroscience (to M.H.M.), and the Institute for
Clinical and Translational Sciences at Washington University (to M.H.M.).
AUTHORS CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization and supervision, M.H.M.; methodology, D.K.S., V.M.S.,
L.Z., S.A.M., S.D., and M.H.M.; investigation, D.K.S., V.M.S., L.Z., A.R.M.,
B.B., and E.B.; writing – D.K.S., V.M.S., and M.H.M.; funding, D.K.S. and
M.H.M.; resources, D.K.S., V.M.S., L.Z., and M.H.M.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: June 26, 2020
Revised: November 17, 2020
Accepted: January 22, 2021
Published: February 19, 2021
SUPPORTING CITATION
The following reference appears in the supplemental information: Cao et
al., 2016.
REFERENCES
Anderson, M.A., Burda, J.E., Ren, Y., Ao, Y., O’Shea, T.M., Kawaguchi, R.,
Coppola, G., Khakh, B.S., Deming, T.J., and Sofroniew, M.V. (2016).
Astrocyte scar formation aids central nervous system axon regeneration.
Nature 532, 195–200.
Aragona, M., Panciera, T., Manfrin, A., Giulitti, S., Michielin, F., Elvassore, N.,
Dupont, S., and Piccolo, S. (2013). A mechanical checkpoint controls multicel-
lular growth through YAP/TAZ regulation by actin-processing factors. Cell 154,
1047–1059.
Arthur-Farraj, P.J., Morgan, C.C., Adamowicz, M., Gomez-Sanchez, J.A.,
Fazal, S.V., Beucher, A., Razzaghi, B., Mirsky, R., Jessen, K.R., and Aitman,
T.J. (2017). Changes in the coding and non-coding transcriptome and DNA
methylome that deﬁne the Schwann cell repair phenotype after nerve injury.
Cell Rep. 20, 2719–2734.
Becht, E., McInnes, L., Healy, J., Dutertre, C.A., Kwok, I.W.H., Ng, L.G.,
Ginhoux, F., and Newell, E.W. (2018). Dimensionality reduction for visualizing
single-cell data using UMAP. Nat. Biotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nbt.4314.
Becker, T., Wullimann, M.F., Becker, C.G., Bernhardt, R.R., and Schachner,
M. (1997). Axonal regrowth after spinal cord transection in adult zebraﬁsh.
J. Comp. Neurol. 377, 577–595.
Bernardos, R.L., and Raymond, P.A. (2006). GFAP transgenic zebraﬁsh. Gene
Expr. Patterns 6, 1007–1013.
Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E., and Satija, R. (2018).
Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technol-
ogies, and species. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 411–420.
Cao, J., Navis, A., Cox, B.D., Dickson, A.L., Gemberling, M., Karra, R., Bagnat,
M., and Poss, K.D. (2016). Single epicardial cell transcriptome sequencing
identiﬁes caveolin 1 as an essential factor in zebraﬁsh heart regeneration.
Development 143, 232–243.
Cao, X., Pfaff, S.L., and Gage, F.H. (2008). YAP regulates neural progenitor cell
number via the TEA domain transcription factor. Genes Dev 22, 3320–3334.
Chang, H., Liu, Y., Xue, M., Liu, H., Du, S., Zhang, L., and Wang, P. (2016).
Synergistic action of master transcription factors controls epithelial-to-mesen-
chymal transition. Nucleic Acids Res 44, 2514–2527.
Clements, M.P., Byrne, E., Camarillo Guerrero, L.F., Cattin, A.L., Zakka, L.,
Ashraf, A., Burden, J.J., Khadayate, S., Lloyd, A.C., Marguerat, S., and
Parrinello, S. (2017). The wound microenvironment reprograms Schwann cells
to invasive mesenchymal-like cells to drive peripheral nerve regeneration.
Neuron 96, 98–114.e7.
Dias, D.O., and Go¨ ritz, C. (2018). Fibrotic scarring following lesions to the cen-
tral nervous system. Matrix Biol 68–69, 561–570.
Dongre, A., and Weinberg, R.A. (2019). New insights into the mechanisms of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and implications for cancer. Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 69–84.
Dupont, S., Morsut, L., Aragona, M., Enzo, E., Giulitti, S., Cordenonsi, M.,
Zanconato, F., Le Digabel, J., Forcato, M., Bicciato, S., et al. (2011). Role of
YAP/TAZ in mechanotransduction. Nature 474, 179–183.
Edgar, R., Domrachev, M., and Lash, A.E. (2002). Gene Expression Omnibus:
NCBI gene expression and hybridization array data repository. Nucl Acids Res
30, 207–210, https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/30.1.207.
Gervasi, M., Bianchi-Smiraglia, A., Cummings, M., Zheng, Q., Wang, D., Liu,
S., and Bakin, A.V. (2012). JunB contributes to Id2 repression and the epithe-
lial-mesenchymal transition in response to transforming growth factor-b.
J. Cell Biol. 196, 589–603.
Goldshmit, Y., Sztal, T.E., Jusuf, P.R., Hall, T.E., Nguyen-Chi, M., and Currie,
P.D. (2012). Fgf-dependent glial cell bridges facilitate spinal cord regeneration
in zebraﬁsh. J. Neurosci. 32, 7477–7492.
Gomez-Sanchez, J.A., Pilch, K.S., van der Lans, M., Fazal, S.V., Benito, C.,
Wagstaff, L.J., Mirsky, R., and Jessen, K.R. (2017). After nerve injury, lineage
tracing shows that myelin and Remak Schwann cells elongate extensively
and branch to form repair Schwann cells, which shorten radically on remyeli-
nation. J. Neurosci. 37, 9086–9099.
Grimpe, B., and Silver, J. (2004). A novel DNA enzyme reduces glycosamino-
glycan chains in the glial scar and allows microtransplanted dorsal root ganglia
axons to regenerate beyond lesions in the spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 24,
1393–1397.
Hafemeister, C., and Satija, R. (2019). Normalization and variance stabilization
of single-cell RNA-seq data using regularized negative binomial regression.
Genome Biol 20, 296.
Han, W., Zhang, Y., Niu, C., Guo, J., Li, J., Wei, X., Jia, M., Zhi, X., Yao, L., and
Meng, D. (2019). BTB and CNC homology 1 (Bach1) promotes human ovarian
cancer cell metastasis by HMGA2-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transi-
tion. Cancer Lett 445, 45–56.
Handen, A., and Ganapthiraju, M.K. (2015). LENS: web-based lens for enrich-
ment and network studies of human proteins. BMC Med Genomics 8, https://
doi.org/10.1186/1755-8794-8-S4-S2.
He, Z., and Jin, Y. (2016). Intrinsic control of axon regeneration. Neuron 90,
437–451.
Herrmann, J.E., Imura, T., Song, B., Qi, J., Ao, Y., Nguyen, T.K., Korsak, R.A.,
Takeda, K., Akira, S., and Sofroniew, M.V. (2008). STAT3 is a critical regulator
of astrogliosis and scar formation after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 28,
7231–7243.
Hoshijima, K., Jurynec, M.J., Klatt Shaw, D., Jacobi, A.M., Behlke, M.A., and
Grunwald, D.J. (2019). Highly efﬁcient CRISPR-Cas9-based methods for
generating deletion mutations and F0 embryos that lack gene function in ze-
braﬁsh. Dev. Cell 51, 645–657.e4.
Huang, R.Y., Guilford, P., and Thiery, J.P. (2012). Early events in cell adhesion
and polarity during epithelial-mesenchymal transition. J. Cell Sci. 125,
4417–4422.
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021
625

Ilicic, T., Kim, J.K., Kolodziejczyk, A.A., Bagger, F.O., McCarthy, D.J., Marioni,
J.C., and Teichmann, S.A. (2016). Classiﬁcation of low quality cells from single-
cell RNA-seq data. Genome Biol 17, 29.
Jessen, K.R., and Arthur-Farraj, P. (2019). Repair Schwann cell update: adap-
tive reprogramming, EMT, and stemness in regenerating nerves. Glia 67,
421–437.
Kimelman, D., Smith, N.L., Lai, J.K.H., and Stainier, D.Y. (2017). Regulation of
posterior body and epidermal morphogenesis in zebraﬁsh by localized Yap1
and Wwtr1. eLife 6, e31065.
Labun, K., Montague, T.G., Krause, M., Torres Cleuren, Y.N., Tjeldnes, H., and
Valen, E. (2019). CHOPCHOP v3: expanding the CRISPR web toolbox beyond
genome editing. Nucl Acids Res 47, 171–174, https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gkz365.
Liddelow, S.A., Guttenplan, K.A., Clarke, L.E., Bennett, F.C., Bohlen, C.J.,
Schirmer, L., Bennett, M.L., M€unch, A.E., Chung, W.-S., Peterson, T.C.,
et al. (2017). Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated micro-
glia. Nature 541, 481–487.
Mateus, R., Lourenc¸ o, R., Fang, Y., Brito, G., Farinho, A., Vale´ rio, F., and
Jacinto, A. (2015). Control of tissue growth by Yap relies on cell density and
F-actin in zebraﬁsh ﬁn regeneration. Development 142, 2752–2763.
Matson, K.J.E., Sathyamurthy, A., Johnson, K.R., Kelly, M.C., Kelley, M.W.,
and Levine, A.J. (2018). Isolation of adult spinal cord nuclei for massively par-
allel single-nucleus RNA sequencing. J. Vis. Exp. 140, 58413.
McDonald, D., Cheng, C., Chen, Y., and Zochodne, D. (2006). Early events of
peripheral nerve regeneration. Neuron Glia Biol 2, 139–147.
Mendez, M.G., Kojima, S., and Goldman, R.D. (2010). Vimentin induces
changes in cell shape, motility, and adhesion during the epithelial to mesen-
chymal transition. FASEB J 24, 1838–1851.
Miesfeld, J.B., Gestri, G., Clark, B.S., Flinn, M.A., Poole, R.J., Bader, J.R.,
Besharse, J.C., Wilson, S.W., and Link, B.A. (2015). Yap and Taz regulate
retinal pigment epithelial cell fate. Development 142, 3021–3032.
Mokalled, M.H., Patra, C., Dickson, A.L., Endo, T., Stainier, D.Y., and Poss,
K.D. (2016). Injury-induced ctgfa directs glial bridging and spinal cord regener-
ation in zebraﬁsh. Science 354, 630–634.
Okada, S., Nakamura, M., Katoh, H., Miyao, T., Shimazaki, T., Ishii, K.,
Yamane, J., Yoshimura, A., Iwamoto, Y., Toyama, Y., and Okano, H. (2006).
Conditional ablation of Stat3 or Socs3 discloses a dual role for reactive astro-
cytes after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 12, 829–834.
O’Shea, T.M., Burda, J.E., and Sofroniew, M.V. (2017). Cell biology of spinal
cord injury and repair. J. Clin. Invest. 127, 3259–3270.
Panciera, T., Azzolin, L., Fujimura, A., Di Biagio, D., Frasson, C., Bresolin, S.,
Soligo, S., Basso, G., Bicciato, S., Rosato, A., et al. (2016). Induction of
expandable tissue-speciﬁc stem/progenitor cells through transient expression
of YAP/TAZ. Cell Stem Cell 19, 725–737.
Parrinello, S., Napoli, I., Ribeiro, S., Wingﬁeld Digby, P., Fedorova, M.,
Parkinson, D.B., Doddrell, R.D., Nakayama, M., Adams, R.H., and Lloyd,
A.C. (2010). EphB signaling directs peripheral nerve regeneration through
Sox2-dependent Schwann cell sorting. Cell 143, 145–155.
Qin, S., Zou, Y., and Zhang, C.L. (2013). Cross-talk between KLF4 and STAT3
regulates axon regeneration. Nat. Commun. 4, 2633.
Reimer, M.M., So¨ rensen, I., Kuscha, V., Frank, R.E., Liu, C., Becker, C.G., and
Becker, T. (2008). Motor neuron regeneration in adult zebraﬁsh. J. Neurosci.
28, 8510–8516.
Sato, M., Matsumoto, M., Saiki, Y., Alam, M., Nishizawa, H., Rokugo, M.,
Brydun, A., Yamada, S., Kaneko, M.K., Funayama, R., et al. (2020). BACH1
promotes pancreatic cancer metastasis by repressing epithelial genes and
enhancing epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Cancer Res 80, 1279–1292.
Scarpa, E., Szabo´ , A., Bibonne, A., Theveneau, E., Parsons, M., and Mayor, R.
(2015). Cadherin switch during EMT in neural crest cells leads to contact inhi-
bition of locomotion via repolarization of forces. Dev. Cell 34, 421–434.
Silver, J. (2016). The glial scar is more than just astrocytes. Exp. Neurol. 286,
147–149.
Silver, J., and Miller, J.H. (2004). Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 5, 146–156.
Sofroniew, M.V. (2018). Dissecting spinal cord regeneration. Nature 557,
343–350.
Stuart, T., Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Hafemeister, C., Papalexi, E., Mauck, W.M.,
3rd, Hao, Y., Stoeckius, M., Smibert, P., and Satija, R. (2019). Comprehensive
integration of single-cell data. Cell 177, 1888–1902.e21.
Vassilev, A., Kaneko, K.J., Shu, H., Zhao, Y., and DePamphilis, M.L. (2001).
TEAD/TEF transcription factors utilize the activation domain of YAP65, a
Src/Yes-associated protein localized in the cytoplasm. Genes Dev 15,
1229–1241.
Wang, N., Zhang, S., Zhang, A.F., Yang, Z.Y., and Li, X.G. (2014). Sodium hy-
aluronate-CNTF gelatinous particles promote axonal growth, neurogenesis
and functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord 52, 517–523.
Wanner, I.B., Anderson, M.A., Song, B., Levine, J., Fernandez, A., Gray-
Thompson, Z., Ao, Y., and Sofroniew, M.V. (2013). Glial scar borders are
formed by newly proliferated, elongated astrocytes that interact to corral in-
ﬂammatory and ﬁbrotic cells via STAT3-dependent mechanisms after spinal
cord injury. J. Neurosci. 33, 12870–12886.
Wheelock, M.J., Shintani, Y., Maeda, M., Fukumoto, Y., and Johnson, K.R.
(2008). Cadherin switching. J. Cell Sci. 121, 727–735.
Wilson, M.M., Weinberg, R.A., Lees, J.A., and Guen, V.J. (2020). Emerging
mechanisms by which EMT programs control stemness. Trends Cancer 6,
775–780.
Wu, W.S., You, R.I., Cheng, C.C., Lee, M.C., Lin, T.Y., and Hu, C.T. (2017).
Snail collaborates with EGR-1 and SP-1 to directly activate transcription of
MMP 9 and ZEB1. Sci. Rep. 7, 17753.
Ye, J., Cao, L., Cui, R., Huang, A., Yan, Z., Lu, C., and He, C. (2004). The effects
of ciliary neurotrophic factor on neurological function and glial activity
following contusive spinal cord injury in the rats. Brain Res 997, 30–39.
Ye, X., and Weinberg, R.A. (2015). Epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity: a central
regulator of cancer progression. Trends Cell Biol 25, 675–686.
Zanconato, F., Forcato, M., Battilana, G., Azzolin, L., Quaranta, E., Bodega, B.,
Rosato, A., Bicciato, S., Cordenonsi, M., and Piccolo, S. (2015). Genome-wide
association between YAP/TAZ/TEAD and AP-1 at enhancers drives oncogenic
growth. Nat. Cell Biol. 17, 1218–1227.
Zhang, Y., Chen, K., Sloan, S.A., Bennett, M.L., Scholze, A.R., O’Keeffe, S.,
Phatnani, H.P., Guarnieri, P., Caneda, C., Ruderisch, N., et al. (2014). An
RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of Glia, neurons, and
vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci. 34, 11929–11947.
Zhao, B., Ye, X., Yu, J., Li, L., Li, W., Li, S., Yu, J., Lin, J.D., Wang, C.Y.,
Chinnaiyan, A.M., et al. (2008). TEAD mediates YAP-dependent gene induction
and growth control. Genes Dev 22, 1962–1971.
Zhou, Y., Zhou, B., Pache, L., Chang, M., Khodabakhshi, A.H., Tanaseichuk,
O., Benner, C., and Chanda, S.K. (2019). Metascape provides a biologist-ori-
ented resource for the analysis of systems-level datasets. Nat. Commun.
10, 1523.
Zukor, K., Belin, S., Wang, C., Keelan, N., Wang, X., and He, Z. (2013). Short
hairpin RNA against PTEN enhances regenerative growth of corticospinal tract
axons after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 33, 15350–15361.
ll
Article
626
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626, March 8, 2021

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Chicken anti-GFP
AVES
Cat# AS10 1012; RRID: AB_10754353
Mouse anti-GFAP
ZIRC
Cat# zrf-1; RRID:
AB_10013806
Rabbit anti-dsRed
Clontech
Cat# 632496; RRID:
Rabbit anti-Cdh1
Genetex
Cat# GTX125890; RRID:
AB_11167551
Rabbit anti-Cdh2
Genetex
Cat# GTX125885; RRID: AB_2885609
Mouse anti-Vim
Millipore
Cat# MAB3400; RRID:
AB_10551174
Rabbit anti-Yap
Cell Signaling
Cat# 4912S; RRID:
AB_2218911
Rabbit anti-Taz
Cell Signaling
Cat# 8418S; RRID:
AB_10950494
Rabbit anti-PCNA
Genetex
GTX124496; RRID:
AB_11161916
Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit
Invitrogen
Cat# A-11008; RRID:
AB_143165
Alexa Fluor 594 goat anti-rabbit
Invitrogen
Cat# A-11072; RRID:
AB_142057
Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-chicken
Invitrogen
Cat# A-11039; RRID:
AB_142924
Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse
Invitrogen
Cat# A-21121; RRID:
AB_2535764
Alexa Fluor 594 goat anti-mouse
Invitrogen
Cat# A-21125; RRID:
AB_141593
Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated Streptavidin
Molecular Probes
Cat# S-11227; RRID: AB_2313574
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Gelfoam Gelatin Sponge
Pﬁzer
Cat# 09-0315-08
Biocytin, saturated solution
Sigma
Cat# B4261
Alt-R tracrRNA
IDT
Cat# 1072534
Alt-R crRNA (see Table S4 for sequences)
IDT
N/A
Duplex buffer
IDT
Cat# 11-05-01-03
Alt-R S.p. Cas9 nuclease v3
IDT
Cat# 1081059
Taq Polymerase
NEB
Cat# M0273
Critical Commercial Assays
NucleoSpin RNA Plus XS Kit
Clontech
Cat# 740990
Chromium Single Cell 3’ GEM Library and
Gel Bead Kit v3
10x Genomics
Cat# 1000092
Chromium Chip B Single Cell Kit
10x Genomics
Cat# 1000074
5200 Fragment Analyzer System
Agilent
Cat# M5310AA
Fragment Analyzer Qualitative DNA Kit
Agilent
Cat# DNF-905-K1000
Maxima First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit
ThermoFisher
Cat# K1672
Luna qPCR master mix
NEB
Cat# M3003
(Continued on next page)
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626.e1–e7, March 8, 2021
e1

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead Contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the lead contact, Mayssa
Mokalled (mmokalled@wustl.edu).
Materials Availability
All plasmids and zebraﬁsh mutant and transgenic lines in this study are available upon request.
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Zebraﬁsh, Tg(-5.5Kb-ctgfa:EGFP)pd96
Mokalled et al., 2016
N/A
Zebraﬁsh, Tg(gfap:EGFP)mi2002
Bernardos and Raymond, 2006
N/A
Zebraﬁsh, Tg(hsp:dsRed-dnYap)
Mateus et al., 2015
N/A
Zebraﬁsh, Tg(ctgfa:mCherry-NTR)stl650
This study
N/A
Zebraﬁsh, Tg(hsp70:twist1a-2A-EGFP)stl654
This study
N/A
Oligonucleotides
ctgfa_ClaI_F:
atcgattttggctactttcagctaagactgg
This study
N/A
ctgfa_ClaI_R:
atcgattctttaaagtttgtagcaaaaagaaa
This study
N/A
twist1a_ClaI_F:
ccatcgataggcagcaatagcgtcagat
This study
N/A
twist1a_ClaI_R:
ccatcgatttctttaaagtttgtagcaaaaaaga
This study
N/A
twist1a_ISH_F:
tgtgattgctctgctgttcc
This study
N/A
twist1a_ISH_R:
ggtgaggcgattagcttctg
This study
N/A
qPCR primers (see Table S4 for sequences)
This study
N/A
Recombinant DNA
PCS2-ctgfa:mCherry-Nitroreductase
This study
N/A
PCS2-hsp70:twist1a-2A-EGFP
This study
N/A
PCR2.1-twist1a
This study
N/A
Software and Algorithms
Seurat package v3.1.4
Butler et al., 2018
https://satijalab.org/seurat/
R v3.6.3
https://cran.r-project.org/
Other
100 mm cell strainer
MidSci
Cat# 100ICS
Vannas scissors
World Precision Instruments
Cat# 14003-G
5L swim tunnel respirometer device
Loligo
Cat# SW100605L, 120/60Hz
Vitrectomy Scissors, Vertical Opening, 60
deg, 20G
World Precision Instruments
Cat# WP504240
Pryme PCR Semi-Skirted PCR plates
MidSci
Cat# AVRT1
Metascape Gene Ontology Analysis
Zhou et al., 2019
https://metascape.org/
LENS protein-protein interaction
network tool
Handen and Ganapthiraju, 2015
https://hagrid.dbmi.pitt.edu/LENS
CHOPCHOP
Labun et al., 2019
https://chopchop.cbu.uib.no/
Sequence data
This study
GEO Series accession number GSE164945
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/
acc.cgi?acc=GSE164945)
ll
Article
e2
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626.e1–e7, March 8, 2021

Data and Code Availability
The accession number for the FAC-seq and snRNA-seq data reported in this paper is GEO: GSE164945.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Zebraﬁsh
Adult zebraﬁsh of the Ekkwill, Tubingen, and AB strains were maintained at the Washington University Zebraﬁsh Core Facility. All
animal experiments were performed in compliance with IACUC institutional animal protocols. Male and female animals between 3
and 9 months of ~2 cm in length were used. Experimental ﬁsh and control siblings of similar size and equal sex distribution were
used for all experiments. SC transection surgeries and regeneration analyses were performed in a blinded manner, and 2 to 4 inde-
pendent experiments were repeated using different clutches of animals. Transected animals from control and experimental groups
were housed in equal numbers (4-7 ﬁsh) in 1 liter tanks. The following previously published zebraﬁsh strains were used: Tg(-5.5Kb-
ctgfa:EGFPpd96) (Mokalled et al., 2016), Tg(gfap:EGFPmi2002) (Bernardos and Raymond, 2006), and Tg(hsp:dsRed-dnYap) (Mateus
et al., 2015). Newly constructed strains are described below.
Generation of Tg(ctgfa:mCherry) zebraﬁsh
The following primers were used to amplify a 5.5 Kb genomic region upstream of the ctgfa translational start site: ClaI forward primer
5’-atcgattttggctactttcagctaagactgg-3’ and ClaI reverse primer 5’-atcgattctttaaagtttgtagcaaaaagaaa-3’. The genomic fragment was
cloned into PCR2.1-TOPO vector, then subcloned into ClaI digested PCS2-mCherry-Nitroreductase plasmid to generate ctgfa:m-
Cherry-Nitroreductase clone. The clone was co-injected into one-cell stage wild-type embryos with I-SceI. Three founders were iso-
lated and propagated. This line is referred to hereafter as ctgfa:mCherry as the inducible Nitroreductase cassette was not used in this
study. The full name of this line is Tg(ctgfa:mCherry-NTR)stl650. ctgfa:mCherry animals were analyzed as hemizygotes, or crossed into
gfap:EGFP transgene (mi2002) (Bernardos and Raymond, 2006) to generate ctgfa:mCherry; gfap:EGFP animals.
Generation of Tg(hsp70:Twist1a-2A-EGFP) zebraﬁsh
The following forward primers were used to amplify twist1a cDNA cassette: ClaI forward primer 5’-ccATCGATaggcagcaatagcgtca-
gat-3’ and ClaI reverse primer 5’-ccatcgatttctttaaagtttgtagcaaaaaaga-3’. The genomic fragments were cloned into PCR2.1-TOPO
vector, then subcloned into ClaI digested PCS2-hsp70-2A-EGFP plasmid. Clones were co-injected into one-cell stage wild-type em-
bryos with I-SceI. A minimum of 3 founders were isolated and propagated for each transgene. The full name of these lines are
Tg(hsp70:Twist1a-2A-EGFP)stl654. Animals were analyzed as hemizygotes.
Spinal cord transection
Zebraﬁsh were anaesthetized using MS-222. Fine scissors were used to make a small incision that transects the SC 4 mm caudal to
the brainstem region. Complete transection was visually conﬁrmed at the time of surgery. Injured animals were also assessed at 2 or 3
dpi to conﬁrm loss of swim capacity post-surgery. For sham injuries, animals were anaesthetized and ﬁne scissors were used to tran-
sect skin and muscle tissues without inducing SCI.
METHOD DETAILS
FACS sorting and RNA sequencing
Two mm SC sections, including the lesion site plus additional rostral and caudal tissue proximal to the lesion, were collected from
adult injured zebraﬁsh at 5 dpi. Control tissue sections were collected from uninjured siblings. Three biological replicates were used.
Each replicate represents cells that were sorted from 40-50 pooled SCs. Wild-type, ctgfa:mCherry, and gfap:EGFP animals were
lesioned and dissociated to set up FACS gates. Tissues were dissociated using 0.05% Trypsin for 5 min at room temperature,
and subjected to 3 washes with HBSS solution. Cell supernatants were triturated in DMEM media with 20% fetal bovine serum using
a 1000 mL pipette and applied to a 100 mm cell strainer (MidSci, cat# 100ICS). Dissociated cells were pelleted at 500 G for 5 min,
resuspended in HBSS with 2% serum, and sorted using a MoFlo Cell sorter machine. Sorted cells were collected into serum-sup-
plemented DMEM prior to RNA extraction. Total RNA was prepared using NucleoSpin RNA Plus XS (Clontech, cat# 740990). Total
RNA was also prepared from two mm SC sections at 5, 10, 21 dpi, and from uninjured controls for bulk RNA sequencing. For bulk
sequencing, 10 SCs from wild-type animals were pooled for each replicate and time point. Two biological replicates were used for
control, 10 dpi, and 21 dpi SCs. TruSeq libraries were prepared and sequenced on Illumina HiSeq 3000 using 50 bp single-end
reading strategy. Quality QC and trimming of adapters and short sequences were performed using Fastx. Sequencing reads were
mapped to the zebraﬁsh genome (Zv11) using Bowtie2, then assembled and quantiﬁed using the Cufﬂinks and Cuffdiff algorithms.
Genes with log2(fold enrichment) between -1 and 1, or with -log10(P-value) less than 1 were considered insigniﬁcant. FACS experi-
ments were performed at the Siteman Cancer Center Flow Cytometry shared Resource. RNA sequencing was performed at the
Genome Technology Access Center at Washington University. Analysis was performed in collaboration with the Bioinformatics
Core at the Center for Regenerative Medicine at Washington University. Bulk sequencing data are accessible through GEO Series
accession number GSE164945.
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626.e1–e7, March 8, 2021
e3

Single nuclear RNA sequencing
gfap:EGFP transgenic animals were subjected to SCI and 2-mm SC tissue sections spanning the lesion site were collected at 1 wpi. A
total of 33185 nuclei were isolated from 45 pooled SC tissues as previously described (Matson et al., 2018). For single nuclear library
preparation on the 10x Genomics platform, the Chromium Single Cell 30 GEM Library and Gel Bead Kit v3 (cat# 1000092) and the
Chromium Chip B Single Cell Kit (cat# 1000074) were used according to the manufacturer’s instructions in the Chromium Single
Cell 30 Reagents Kits V3 User Guide. The resulting cDNA libraries were quantiﬁed on an Agilent Tapestation and sequenced on Illu-
mina HiSeq 3000.
Unbiased cell clustering
Sequenced nuclei reads were aligned to a custom zebraﬁsh reference (GRCz11) using Cellranger v3.0.1 software (10X Genomics).
This reference was constructed from the Ensemble genome build (http://www.ensembl.org/Danio_rerio/Info/Index) and modiﬁed to
recognize
reads
containing
introns
(https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/pipelines/latest/
advanced/references). Further, the GFP transgene was appended to the ﬁnal genome reference build. Aligned reads were analyzed
using the Seurat package v3.1.4 (Butler et al., 2018) within R v3.6.3. Cell quality was assessed using commonly used QC matrices
(Ilicic et al., 2016). Cells that have unique number of genes between 200 to 4000 and a mitochondrial gene percentage less than ﬁve
were ﬁltered. The ‘‘SCTransform’’ function was used for normalization, scaling and ﬁnding variable features. SCTransform returned
3000 highly variable features for downstream analysis (Hafemeister and Satija, 2019). During normalization, confounding sources of
variation from mitochondrial mapping percentage were removed. PCA analysis was performed on scaled data using highly variable
genes. Signiﬁcant principal components were determined using ‘‘ElbowPlot’’ function. Forty principal components were selected to
create a Shared Nearest Neighbour (SNN) graph using the ‘‘FindNeighbours’’ function. Next, clustering was performed by the Lou-
vain algorithm using the function ‘‘FindClusters’’ and the resolution parameter was set to one. Uniform Manifold Approximation and
Reduction (UMAP) was used for non-linear dimensional reduction of the ﬁrst 40 principle components and to visualize the data in two-
dimensional space (‘‘RunUMAP’’ function) (Becht et al., 2018). Data was graphed using different plot function (such as ‘‘Dimplot’’,
‘‘VlnPlot’’, ‘‘FeaturePlot’’, ‘‘DoHeatmap’’) to view the cell cluster identity and marker gene expression. Differential gene expression
for individual cluster was identiﬁed using Wilcoxon rank sum tests in the ‘‘FindAllMarkers’’ function. Marker genes detected in
>20% of clustered cells and with a logFC threshold of at least 0.25 were selected. Only positive markers were reported. Cluster iden-
tity was determined by comparing top markers of each clusters with the markers of different cell types identiﬁed in the mouse cerebral
cortex (Zhang et al., 2014).
Subsetting glial clusters
Glial cell clusters (Clusters- 7, 9 & 26, Figure 3A) were identiﬁed in the complete dataset. The function ‘‘subset’’ was used to create a
Seurat object Glial cells. The subset was again normalized and scaled using ‘‘SCTransform’’ function. Twenty principle components
were used for clustering and the resolution parameter was set to 0.9. Further analysis was done as described above for unbiased
clustering. The top 50 markers for cluster Glial-7, -8, ad -9 were obtained using the function ‘‘FindAllMarkers’’. snRNA-seq data
are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE164945.
Gene ontology
Gene Ontology analysis was performed using Metascape (Zhou et al., 2019) (Tables S1–S3). Input and analysis species were set as D.
rerio. Express analysis was performed for the gene ontology. Metascape identiﬁed all statistically enriched terms (includes GO bio-
logical processes, Reactome gene set and KEGG pathway), and calculated accumulative hypergeometric p-values and enrichment
factors. Signiﬁcant terms were hierarchically clustered into a tree based on Kappa-statistical similarities among their gene member-
ships. A kappa score of 0.3 was applied to cast the tree into term clusters. Selected subset of representative terms from this cluster
were used to generate a network layout. Each term is represented by a circle node, where its size is proportional to the number of
input genes fall into that term, and its color represent its cluster identity. Terms with a similarity score > 0.3 are linked by an edge (the
thickness of the edge represents the similarity score). The network is visualized with Cytoscape (v3.1.2) with ‘‘force-directed’’ layout
and with edge bundled for clarity. One term from each cluster is selected to have its term description shown as label.
Histology
Sixteen mm cross or 20 mm longitudinal cryosections of paraformaldehyde-ﬁxed SC tissues were used. Tissue sections were imaged
using a Zeiss AxioVision compound microscope for in situ hybridization and RNAscope, or a Zeiss LSM 800 confocal microscope for
immunoﬂuorescence. in situ hybridization probes for twist1a were subcloned after ampliﬁcation from 2 dpf zebraﬁsh cDNA into
PCR2.1-TOPO vectors (twist1a forward primer 5’- tgtgattgctctgctgttcc-3’, twist1a reverse primer 5’-ggtgaggcgattagcttctg-3’). Line-
arized vectors were used to generate the digoxygenin labeled cRNA probes. in situ hybridizations were performed as previously
described. RNAscope was performed according to the manufacturer’ protocol (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, 322300).
For immunohistochemistry, tissue sections were circumscribed with a hydrophobic barrier pen and rehydrated in PBT (0.1%
Tween-20 in PBS). After 2 x 5 min washes in PBT, sections were treated with blocking agent (5% goat serum in PBT) for 1 hour
at room temperature. For nuclear antigens, sections were treated with 0.2% TritonX-100 in PBT for 5 minutes and washed thoroughly
in PBT prior to the blocking step. Sections were incubated overnight with indicated primary antibodies diluted in blocking agent,
washed in PBT, and treated for 1 hour in secondary antibodies diluted in blocking agent. Following washes, sections were incubated
ll
Article
e4
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626.e1–e7, March 8, 2021

in 1 mg/mL of Hoechst, washed in PBS, and mounted in Fluoromount-G mounting media. Primary antibodies used in this study were
chicken anti-GFP (AVES, 1020, 1:1000), mouse anti-GFAP (ZIRC, Zrf1, 1:1000), rabbit anti-dsRed (Clontech, 632496, 1:250), rabbit
anti-Cdh1 (Genetex, GTX125890; 1:250), rabbit anti-Cdh2 (Genetex, GTX125885, 1:500), mouse anti-Vim (Millipore, MAB3400,
1:500), rabbit anti-Yap (Cell Signaling, 4912S, 1:100), rabbit anti-Taz (Cell Signaling, 8418S, 1:100), and rabbit anti-PCNA (Genetex,
GTX124496, 1:500). Secondary antibodies (Invitrogen, 1:200) used in this study were Alexa Fluor 488, Alexa Fluor 594 goat anti-rab-
bit, anti-mouse, or anti-chicken antibodies. For PCNA staining, sections were treated in citrate buffer (10 mM citric acid, 0.05%
Tween-20, pH 6.0) at 98 C for 20 minutes prior to staining.
Swim capacity assays
Zebraﬁsh were exercised in groups of 8-12 in a 5L swim tunnel respirometer device (Loligo, cat# SW100605L, 120V/60Hz). After
10 minutes of acclimation inside the enclosed tunnel, water current velocity was increased every two minutes and ﬁsh swam against
the current until they reached exhaustion. Exhausted animals were removed from the chamber without disturbing the remaining ﬁsh.
Swim time and current velocity at exhaustion were recorded. Results were expressed as means ± SEM.
Axon tracing
Anterograde axon tracing was performed on adult ﬁsh at 4 wpi. Fish were anaesthetized using MS-222 and ﬁne scissors were used to
transect the cord 4 mm rostral to the lesion site. Biocytin-soaked Gelfoam Gelatin Sponge was applied at the new injury site (Gelfoam,
Pﬁzer, cat# 09-0315-08; Biocytin, saturated solution, Sigma, cat# B4261). Fish were euthanized 6 hours post-treatment and Biocytin
was histologically detected using Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated Streptavidin (Molecular Probes, cat# S-11227).
Protein-Protein network generation
To identify functional interactions, the human orthologs of the glial bridging factor Ctgf, the transcription factor hits identiﬁed by
CRISPR/Cas9 screening, and EMT components were used as a source list. The web-based LENS tool (https://hagrid.dbmi.pitt.
edu/LENS/) was used to map out the interactions between these genes based on previously conﬁrmed and published interactions.
CRISPR/Cas9 Mutagenesis
CRISPR/Cas9 design and mutagenesis was performed as previously described (Hoshijima et al., 2019). To avoid phenotypes
that might cause lethality prior to adulthood, genes were prescreened for maternal supply using the Zebraﬁsh Gene Expression
Atlas (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/experiments/E-ERAD-475). Genes that are expressed zygotically, but not supplied maternally
were not selected for analysis. ZFIN was used to identify additional genes with morphant or mutant phenotypes that would cause
embryonic lethality. To mutant candidate genes, crRNA guide RNA sequences were selected using CHOPCHOP (https://
chopchop.cbu.uib.no/) (Table S4). Only sequences with no off-target sites with 3 or fewer mismatches elsewhere in the genome
were selected. To maximize the effect of small indels, target sites were chosen against the DNA binding sites of targeted tran-
scription factors. For most genes, an additional second target site was selected within an early exon. For genes with only one or
two exons, only one site was selected (foxg1c, spi1a, and spi1b). Lyophilized Alt-R tracrRNA and crRNA gRNAs (IDT, cat#
1072534) were reconstituted according to the manufacturer’s speciﬁcations (100 mM stocks at -20C). Prior to the day of injec-
tion, crRNA and tracrRNA were mixed at a ﬁnal concentration of 50 mM and annealed by heating to 95C and then gradual cool-
ing to 25C (-0.1C/second). The resulting dgRNA duplexes were stored at -20C until use. Alt-R S.p. Cas9 nuclease V3 (IDT,
cat# 1081059, supplied at 61.7 mM in 50% glycerol) was diluted with Cas9 dilution buffer (1 M HEPES (pH 7.5), 2 M KCl) to a
working concentration of 25 mM and stored in single use aliquots at -80C. On the day of injection, annealed dgRNA duplexes
were diluted 1:1 in duplex buffer (IDT, cat# 11-05-01-03) to a working concentration of 25 mM. Equal volumes of dgRNA and
Cas9 were incubated at 37C for 5 minutes. For samples where 2 sites were being targeted at once, Cas9 protein was added
in equal molar amounts to the total concentration of gRNA. CRISPR/Cas9 solutions were maintained at room temperature during
injections. Tubingen wild-type embryos were injected with 1 nL of CRISPR/Cas9 solution at the one-cell stage and grown to
adulthood for SC surgeries and functional analysis.
Capillary electrophoresis and NGS
Capillary electrophoresis was used to calculate the % indel for each CRISPR/Cas9 target site. For DNA extraction, whole 2 dpf larvae
or ~3 mm of excised adult tail ﬁns were added to 50 mM NaOH in 50 mL (larvae) or 100 mL (adult ﬁn). DNA samples were incubated at
95C for 20 minutes and then rapidly cooled to 4C. DNA extractions were neutralized by adding 5 mL (larvae) or 10 mL (adult ﬁns) of
1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Small 100-250 bp PCR products were generated using NEB Taq Polymerase (cat# M0273) with gene-speciﬁc
primers in a volume of 10 mL in Pryme PCR semi-skirted PCR plates (MidSci, cat# AVRT1). Samples were diluted to 24 mL with TE
dilution buffer (Agilent) and loaded into the 5200 Fragment Analyzer System (Agilent, cat# M5310AA). Capillary electrophoresis
was carried out using the Agilent Fragment Analyzer Qualitative DNA Kit (cat# DNF-905-K1000) according to the manufacturer’s
speciﬁcations. For controls, 3 wild-type uninjected siblings were ampliﬁed. Peaks within 1 bp of wild-type peaks were considered
wild types. Percent indel was calculated by dividing total mutated peak signal by total wild-type peak signal. Because of signiﬁcant
noise due to primers (<70 bp) and non-speciﬁc products (>200 bp) in the wild-type samples, only signals between 70 and 200 bp were
used. To conﬁrm mutagenesis rates, capillary electrophoresis and next generation sequencing were performed for the same cohort
of targeted animals at 2 dpf. DNA extracts from larvae or adult ﬁns were directly submitted to the Washington University Genome
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 613–626.e1–e7, March 8, 2021
e5

===== Shi2017_BMCGenomics_RatSCI+RNAseq =====
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access
Transcriptome profile of rat genes in
injured spinal cord at different stages by
RNA-sequencing
Ling-Ling Shi1,3†, Nan Zhang2†, Xiu-Mei Xie1,2†, Yue-Juan Chen1,2, Rui Wang2, Lin Shen1,2, Jian-Sheng Zhou2,
Jian-Guo Hu1,2* and He-Zuo Lü1,2,3*
Abstract
Background: Spinal cord injury (SCI) results in fatal damage and currently has no effective treatment. The pathological
mechanisms of SCI remain unclear. In this study, genome-wide transcriptional profiling of spinal cord samples from
injured rats at different time points after SCI was performed by RNA-Sequencing (RNA-Seq). The transcriptomes were
systematically characterized to identify the critical genes and pathways that are involved in SCI pathology.
Results: RNA-Seq results were obtained from total RNA harvested from the spinal cords of sham control rats and
rats in the acute, subacute, and chronic phases of SCI (1 day, 6 days and 28 days after injury, respectively; n = 3 in
every group). Compared with the sham-control group, the number of differentially expressed genes was 1797 in
the acute phase (1223 upregulated and 574 downregulated), 6590 in the subacute phase (3460 upregulated and
3130 downregulated), and 3499 in the chronic phase (1866 upregulated and 1633 downregulated), with an
adjusted P-value <0.05 by DESeq. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis showed that differentially expressed
genes were most enriched in immune response, MHC protein complex, antigen processing and presentation,
translation-related genes, structural constituent of ribosome, ion gated channel activity, small GTPase mediated
signal transduction and cytokine and/or chemokine activity. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
pathway analysis showed that the most enriched pathways included ribosome, antigen processing and presentation,
retrograde endocannabinoid signaling, axon guidance, dopaminergic synapses, glutamatergic synapses, GABAergic
synapses, TNF, HIF-1, Toll-like receptor, NF-kappa B, NOD-like receptor, cAMP, calcium, oxytocin, Rap1, B cell receptor
and chemokine signaling pathway.
Conclusions: This study has not only characterized changes in global gene expression through various stages of SCI
progression in rats, but has also systematically identified the critical genes and signaling pathways in SCI pathology.
These results will expand our understanding of the complex molecular mechanisms involved in SCI and provide a
foundation for future studies of spinal cord tissue damage and repair.
The sequence data from this study have been deposited into Sequence Read Archive (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra;
accession number PRJNA318311).
Keywords: Spinal cord injury, RNA-Seq, GO enrichment, Pathway analysis, Sprague-Dawley rats (RRID:RGD_70508)
* Correspondence: jghu9200@163.com; lhz233003@163.com
†Equal contributors
1Clinical Laboratory, the First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical College,
Anhui 233004, People’s Republic of China
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© The Author(s). 2017 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
DOI 10.1186/s12864-017-3532-x

Background
Spinal cord injury (SCI) results in a devastating loss of
motor and sensory functions. In the United States, it has
been reported that some 300,000 people are living with
SCI and nearly 12,000 new patients are diagnosed annu-
ally [1]. In China, the incidence of traumatic SCI is ap-
proximately 60,000 per year [2]. Despite advances in
surgical techniques for the spinal cord, there are still no
effective treatments for this devastating neurological dis-
order. Therefore, it is very important to further under-
stand the molecular changes in SCI in order to develop
a better therapeutic program.
The pathological changes following traumatic SCI can
be divided into two processes: primary injury and sec-
ondary injury. Primary injury is the immediate effect of
mechanical damage on the spinal cord, which directly
damages various tissue components. Secondary injury is
a cascade of effects triggered by the primary injury affect-
ing multiple biological processes and producing extensive
temporal changes in gene expression [3]. Considering the
complexity of gene expression and signaling pathways, a
global analysis is necessary to understand the molecular
mechanisms and develop therapeutic strategies for SCI.
During the last decade, cDNA microarray and genechip
technologies have provided valuable insights into gene
changes after SCI [4–6]. However, these technologies have
suffered from limitations in resolution, dynamic range
and accuracy [7]. With the advances in genome-wide
transcriptome analysis, especially high-throughput RNA
sequencing (RNA-Seq) technology, we now have a
more useful approach to observe whole transcriptome
changes [7, 8].
In this study, temporal genome-wide gene expression
profiles in injured spinal cords of adult rats were examined
using RNA-Seq, and the results were confirmed by real-
time quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR). Based on these data, the functions
and pathways involved in the pathologic process of SCI in
the acute, subacute, and chronic phases were characterized.
The bioinformatics analysis confirmed that some of the
expressed genes in our study have been shown to play im-
portant roles in SCI, thus supporting the reliability of our
data. We also identified many additional expressed genes
whose functions in SCI have not been well studied. These
additional genes may be involved in the pathological
process of SCI and deserve further study and discussion.
Methods
Animals
We used 12 female Sprague-Dawley rats (eight-week-old,
220–250 g, RRID: RGD_70508) in this study. Animal care
in surgical procedures and after operation were in accord-
ance with Regulations for the Administration of Affairs
Concerning Experimental Animals (Ministry of Science
and Technology, China; revised in June 2004) and Guide-
lines and Policies for Rodent Survival Surgery provided by
the Animal Care and Use Committees of Bengbu Medical
College.
Contusive SCI
To perform the contusive SCI, a New York University
Impactor was used as described [9]. Rats were anesthe-
tized by using pentobarbital (50 mg/kg, intraperitoneal)
and received a T9 vertebral laminectomy. Sham-operated
(sham) rats only received a laminectomy without contu-
sive injury. For making contusive injury, the spine was sta-
bilized by clamping T7 and T11 spinous processes. A
weight drop injury of the cord was made by using a 10 g
rod (2.5 mm diameter) dropped at a height of 25 mm on
the exposed dorsal surface. After injury, animals were
placed in a humidity- and temperature-controlled cham-
ber. In 3 consecutive days, buprenorphine (0.05 mg/kg,
SQ; Reckitt Benckise, Hull, England) was used every 12 h
to relieve pain. Bladder emptying was manually performed
three times daily until autonomous urination was estab-
lished. Chloramphenicol (50 ~ 75 mg/kg) was daily pro-
vided via drinking water to prevent infections.
Basso, Beattie, and Bresnahan (BBB) locomotor rating scale
BBB locomotor rating scale was used to assess the hind-
limb movements based on observation of the rat’s freely
moving in an open field [10, 11]. The evaluations were
performed by 2 scorers while rats were walking freely on
the open-field surface for 4 min. The scores were evalu-
ated before operation, at 1 day, 3, 6, 10, 14, 21, and
28 days after injury.
RNA isolation, quantification, and qualification
Spinal cords (5 mm spinal cord segment containing the
injury epicenter) of sham, acute, subacute, and chronic
phases were harvested at 6 days, 1 day, 6 days, and 28 days
after injury, respectively (n = 3 in every group). Rats were
perfused with phosphate buffer saline (PBS) before remov-
ing the spinal cords. The total RNA from spinal cords was
extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, New Jersey,
NJ, USA). Genomic DNA was removed by using DNase I.
The 1% agarose gels were used to monitor RNA degrad-
ation and contamination. NanoPhotometer® spectropho-
tometer (IMPLEN, CA, USA) was used to check RNA
purity. Qubit® RNA Assay Kit in Qubit® 2.0 Flurometer
(Life Technologies, CA, USA) was used to measure RNA
concentration. RNA Nano 6000 Assay Kit of the Bioanaly-
zer 2100 system (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA) was
used to assess RNA integrity.
Library preparation for transcriptome sequencing
For the sample preparations, 3 μg RNA was used as in-
put material for every sample. NEBNext® Ultra™RNA
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
Page 2 of 14

Library Prep Kit for Illumina® (NEB, USA) was used to
generate sequencing libraries. For each sample, the index
codes were added to attribute sequences. The poly-T
oligo-attached magnetic beads were used to purify mRNA
from total RNA. In NEBNext First Strand Synthesis Re-
action Buffer (5×), the mRNA was fragmented by divalent
cations under elevated temperature. M-MuLV Reverse
Transcriptase (RNase H) and random hexamer primers
were used to synthesize the first strand cDNA. RNase H
and DNA polymerase I were subsequently used to
synthesize the second strand cDNA. The exonuclease/
polymerase activities converted remaining overhangs
into blunt ends. To prepare for hybridization, the 3′
ends of DNA fragments were adenylated and ligated to
NEBNext Adaptor with hairpin loop structure. AMPure
XP system (Beckman Coulter, Beverly, USA) was used to
purify the library fragments to select cDNA fragments of
preferentially 150–200 bp. Before PCR, size-selected,
adaptor-ligated cDNAs were treated with 3 μl USER
Enzyme (NEB, USA) at 37 °C for 15 min followed by
95 °C for 5 min. Index (X) Primer, Universal PCR primers
and Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase were used to
perform PCR. Finally, AMPure XP system was used to
purify PCR products, and the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100
system was used to assess library quality.
Clustering and sequencing
TruSeq PE Cluster Kit v3-cBot-HS (Illumina) was used
to cluster the index-coded samples on a cBot Cluster
Generation System by Novogene (Beijing, China) accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, the 125 bp/
150 bp paired-end reads were generated and sequenced
on an Illumina Hiseq platform.
Data analysis
Quality control
To obtain high-quality clean data for downstream ana-
lyses, the low quality reads and reads containing adapters
or ploy-N in raw data were removed and the Q20, Q30
and GC content of those clean data were also calculated.
Reads mapping to the reference genome
From genome website, the files of reference genome and
gene model annotation were downloaded. Bowtie v2.2.3
was used to build the reference genome index. TopHat
v2.0.12 was used to align the paired-end clean reads to
the reference genome.
Gene expression level quantification
The reads numbers mapped to each gene were counted
by HTSeq v0.6.1. Fragments Per Kilobase of transcript
sequence per millions base pairs sequenced (FPKM)
was calculated. FPKM is the most commonly used
method for evaluating the sequencing depth and gene
length of the reads and estimating the levels of gene
expression [12].
Analysis of differential expression
Differential expression of four groups (three biological rep-
licates per group) was analyzed using the DESeq R package
(1.18.0). To control the false discovery rate, Benjamini and
Hochberg’s approach was used to adjust the P-values ob-
tained from DESeq analysis. The adjusted P-value < 0.05
was adopted as the standard for judging statistically signifi-
cant differences in gene expression.
Gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes
and genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis of differentially
expressed genes (DEGs)
The GOseq R package was used to perform GO enrich-
ment analysis of DEGs. A corrected P-value < 0.05 was
adopted as the standard for judging statistically significant
enrichment of differentially expressed genes. KEGG en-
richment analysis of DEGs was implemented by KOBAS
software.
qRT-PCR
To validate RNA-Seq results, 13 selected DEGs were
verified by qRT-PCR as described [13]. A reverse tran-
scription system (Promega, Madison, WI) was used to
reverse-transcribe the total RNA used in RNA-Seq into
cDNA. SYBR Green PCR Master Mix and the ABI 7900
PCR detection system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City,
CA) were used to perform real-time PCR. To normalize
gene expression, the housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde-
3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was parallel amp-
lified. PCR primer sequences are listed in Table 1. The
ΔΔCt method [14] was used to calculate the relative ex-
pression level of target mRNAs. The relative mRNA ex-
pression value in sham group was designated as 1.
Results
BBB scores at different stages of SCI
To observe the level of impairment produced by SCI,
BBB scores were evaluated. As shown in Fig. 1, all animals
scored 21 points before injury. At 1 day post-SCI, all nine
spinal cord-injured rats received a score of 0, while the
three sham-operated animals still received scores of 21
points. On the 3rd and 6th days, the mean BBB scores of
the six surviving injured rats were 1 ± 0 and 5.33 ± 1.53,
respectively. After 6 days, with only three injured rats
remaining, BBB scores had improved substantially. The
mean scores at 10 days post-injury (dpi), 14 dpi, 21 dpi
and 28 dpi were 8.33 ± 1.53, 9.33 ± 1.53, 10.67 ± 0.58, and
11.67 ± 0.58, respectively. According to our previous ex-
perience, this was a moderate level of impairment.
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
Page 3 of 14

Identification of expressed transcripts in the rat spinal
cord transcriptome
In this study, we established 12 cDNA libraries with the
following designations. Libraries with the A designation
were from the sham-operated spinal cords and libraries
B1, B2 and B3 were from injured spinal cords at 1 dpi, 6
dpi and 28 dpi, respectively, which represented of sham
and three different pathological stages of SCI (acute, sub-
acute, and chronic phases). RNA-Seq generated 41,724,966
to 58,619,478 raw reads for each library. After filtering the
low-quality reads, the average number of clean reads was
42,505,205 (87.73%), 43,520,840 (82.37%), 43,336,187
(91.37%), and 42,483,112 (89.70%) for the A, B, C and
D groups, respectively (Table 2). The clean reads were
used for all further analyses, and from them 77.44% to
88.79% of clean tags from the RNA-Seq data mapped
uniquely to the genome, while a small proportion of
them (<3%) were mapped multiple times to the genome
(Table 3).
Identification of the source of variance in the expressed
transcripts by principal component analysis (PCA)
To demonstrate the source of variance in our data, PCA
analysis with three principal components (PC1, 2, and 3)
was performed. As shown in Fig. 2, PC score plots showed
that the contribution of PC1, 2, and 3 was 56.89%, 11.90%,
and 7.77%, respectively. The three individual samples col-
lected at the same time points after injury were clustered
closely together which validated the finding of low vari-
ance in the present analysis study and showed that the
data could be used for the following analysis.
Differential gene expression in spinal cords at different
injury stages
RPKM was used to estimate the level of gene expression,
and DEGSeq was used to examine the differential gene
expression profile. Comparing the SCI and sham animals,
we observed 1,979 DEGs at 1 dpi, with 1,223 upregulated
and 574 downregulated genes (Fig. 3a and Additional
file 1: Table S1), 6590 DEGs at 6 dpi, with 3460 upregulated
and 3130 downregulated genes (Fig. 3b and Additional
file 1: Table S1) and 3499 DEGs at 28 dpi, with 1866
upregulated and 1633 downregulated genes (Fig. 3c and
Additional file 1: Table S1). There were 2950 DEGs be-
tween the 6 dpi and 1 dpi groups, with 1914 upregu-
lated and 1036 downregulated genes (Fig. 3d and
Additional file 1: Table S1). There were 861 DEGs be-
tween the 28 dpi and 1 dpi groups, with 591 upregulated
and 270 downregulated genes (Fig. 3e and Additional
file 1: Table S1). There were 2215 DEGs between the 28
dpi and 6 dpi groups, with 986 upregulated and 1229
downregulated genes (Fig. 3f and Additional file 1:
Table S1). A list of the most relevant genes that were
over-expressed or under-expressed and how their expres-
sion changed with time is shown in Additional file 2:
Table S2.
Table 1 Real-time PCR primers used in the study
Gene
GenBank accession no.
Forward primer 5′ - 3′
Reverse primer 5′ - 3′
C1qb
NM_019262.1
TTCACCTACCACGCCAGTTC
GCTTCAAGACTACCCCACCC
Ccl2
NM_031530.1
TGATCCCAATGAGTCGGCTG
GGTGCTGAAGTCCTTAGGGT
Cxcl2
NM_053647.1
CAGGGTACAGGGGTTGTTGT
AGGTCAGTTAGCCTTGCCTT
Enpp3
NM_019370.2
TGACTCCGGATTTGCCGAAA
CTTCGCAGTTGGAACTCCCT
Il6
NM_012589.2
ACCCCAACTTCCAATGCTCT
AGCACACTAGGTTTGCCGAG
Pf4
NM_001007729.1
TCCAGGATCCATCTCAAACGC
TTTGCTCCCATTCTTCAGCG
Tspo
NM_012515.2
GGTGGACCTCATGCTTGTCA
CCTCGCCGACCAGAGTTATC
Plau
NM_013085.3
GCGGAACTCCTATAACCCCG
GTGGCACTCTCTTGTCCGAA
Ncf1
NM_053734.2
CATTGAGGCCGGTGAGATCC
AGTTCAAGAGGTGTGGGCAG
Lcn2
NM_130741.1
CAAGTGGCCGACACTGACTA
CATTGGTCGGTGGGAACAGA
Fig. 1 BBB scores at different stages of the SCI. The BBB scores were
shown at different stages of the SCI: before injury (n = 12); sham (n = 3);
1 dpi (n = 9); 3 dpi and 6 dpi (n = 6); 10 dpi, 14 dpi, 21 dpi, and 28
dpi (n = 3)
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
Page 4 of 14

Confirmation of differential gene expression by qRT-PCR
To verify the expression profiles obtained by RNA-Seq,
ten genes were randomly selected to analyze their tran-
script expression levels by qRT-PCR. The selected genes
included C1qb, Ccl2, Cxcl2, enpp3, IL6, Lcn2, Ncf1, Pf4,
Plau, and Tspo. The results showed that these genes dis-
played similar expression patterns between RNA-seq
and qRT-PCR (Fig. 4).
Hierarchical cluster analysis of gene expression in spinal
cords at different injury stages
Based on the similarity of gene expression patterns,
7632 DEGs were classified into expression cluster groups
by hierarchical clustering (Fig. 5). These clusters con-
tained genes that were up- or downregulated throughout
the whole course of SCI. Based on the expression pat-
terns of these clusters, we can found that some showed
marked differences between different stages of SCI,
while others showed relatively minor differences. For ex-
ample, most of the genes upregulated at 1 dpi (B), 6 dpi
(C) and 28 dpi (D) compared to the sham group (A)
were in the upper cluster, while downregulated genes
were observed in the lower cluster.
K-means clustering of DEGs
To further investigate the biological characteristics of
the 7632 DEGs, K-means clustering was performed. In
the analysis, DEGs were statistically grouped into eight
subclusters based on their expression patterns in spinal
cords at different injury stages. Figure 6 shows the trends
of distinct significantly expressed subclusters of all DEGs.
There were 3082 and 400 genes in subclusters 1 and 6, re-
spectively. The gene expression levels showed a similar
trend in both clusters, which were highest in sham (A),
and lowest in SCI animals at 6 dpi (C). Subclusters 3, 4, 5,
7 and 8 included 482, 1612, 1477, 274 and 62 genes, re-
spectively. The gene expression levels showed a similar
trend in these five subclusters, with lowest expression in
sham (A) and highest expression in SCI animals at 6 dpi
(C). There were 243 genes in subcluster 2, which
expressed at the lowest level in sham (A) and at the high-
est at 1 dpi (C) with a progressive decrease at 6 dpi (C)
and 28 dpi (D). The list of gene IDs in eight subclusters
are shown in Additional file 3: Table S3.
GO enrichment of DEGs
GO enrichment analysis was conducted to characterize
the DEG profiles presented above. GO enrichment results
for all DEGs are provided in Additional file 4: Table S4.
In acute SCI (1 dpi), 35 significant GO terms were
detected in the upregulated genes (Additional file 5:
Figure S1 and Additional file 6: Table S5). No signifi-
cant terms were found in the downregulated genes at 1
dpi (Additional file 7: Figure S2 and Additional file 8:
Table S6).
In subacute SCI (6 dpi), 33 significant GO terms were
detected in the up-regulated genes (Additional file 9:
Figure S3 and Additional file 6: Table S5). Among the
down-regulated genes at 6 dpi, 40 significant GO terms
were detected (Additional file 10: Figure S4 and Additional
file 8: Table S6).
In chronic SCI (28 dpi), 31 significant GO terms were
detected in the up-regulated genes (Additional file 11:
Figure S5 and Additional file 6: Table S5). Among the
down-regulated genes at 28 dpi, 28 significant GO
terms were detected (Additional file 12: Figure S6 and
Additional file 8: Table S6).
Table 2 Summary of sequence assembly after Illumina sequencing
Sample name
Raw reads
Clean reads
clean bases
Error rate (%)
Q20 (%)
Q30 (%)
GC content (%)
A1
44881934
40093612
6.01G
0.02
95.33
88.31
50.28
A2
54272034
45508458
6.83G
0.02
97.31
92.22
50.48
A3
46199060
41913544
6.29G
0.02
96.3
90.38
49.91
B1
52270362
44613686
6.69G
0.02
97.09
91.43
50.31
B2
47612764
43741790
6.56G
0.02
96.03
89.63
50.16
B3
58619478
42207044
6.33G
0.02
98.35
93.93
50.37
C1
47746200
44041564
6.61G
0.02
96.17
89.9
50.37
C2
52818270
45368646
6.81G
0.02
97.14
91.56
50.88
C3
41724966
40598352
6.09G
0.03
94.79
87.81
50.96
D1
54673906
45455460
6.82G
0.02
96.48
89.84
50.48
D2
41816080
40410590
6.06G
0.03
94.79
87.89
50.6
D3
45601476
41583286
6.24G
0.02
95.94
89.46
50.51
A1- A3: sham; B1- B3: 1 dpi; C1- C3: 6 dpi; D1- D3: 28 dpi;
Q20: The percentage of bases with a Phred value > 20;
Q30: The percentage of bases with a Phred value > 30
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
Page 5 of 14

Table 3 Summary of clean reads mapped to the reference genome
Sample
name
A1
A2
A3
B1
B2
B3
C1
C2
C3
D1
D2
D3
Total reads
40093612
45508458
41913544
44613686
43741790
42207044
44041564
45368646
40598352
45455460
40410590
41583286
Total
mapped
33174052
(82.74%)
39784929
(87.42%)
35390098
(84.44%)
39156701
(87.77%)
36809049
(84.15%)
38574060
(91.39%)
37395128
(84.91%)
40004868
(88.18%)
32801663
(80.8%)
39311658
(86.48%)
32232784
(79.76%)
34737783
(83.54%)
Multiple
mapped
917254
(2.29%)
1067019
(2.34%)
946894
(2.26%)
1176321
(2.64%)
997260
(2.28%)
1098570
(2.6%)
1185829
(2.69%)
1369524
(3.02%)
1022149
(2.52%)
1119321
(2.46%)
937961
(2.32%)
1015029
(2.44%)
Uniquely
mapped
32256798
(80.45%)
38717910
(85.08%)
34443204
(82.18%)
37980380
(85.13%)
35811789
(81.87%)
37475490
(88.79%)
36209299
(82.22%)
38635344
(85.16%)
31779514
(78.28%)
38192337
(84.02%)
31294823
(77.44%)
33722754
(81.1%)
Non-splice
reads
20272875
(50.56%)
24409418
(53.64%)
22061282
(52.64%)
23293716
(52.21%)
22443212
(51.31%)
22884473
(54.22%)
21414897
(48.62%)
21880241
(48.23%)
18591284
(45.79%)
22881690
(50.34%)
18665456
(46.19%)
20269939
(48.75%)
Splice reads
11983923
(29.89%)
14308492
(31.44%)
12381922
(29.54%)
14686664
(32.92%)
13368577
(30.56%)
14591017
(34.57%)
14794402
(33.59%)
16755103
(36.93%)
13188230
(32.48%)
15310647
(33.68%)
12629367
(31.25%)
13452815
(32.35%)
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
Page 6 of 14

KEGG enrichment analysis
KEGG enrichment analysis was conducted to identify
pathways that play important roles in the pathologic
process of SCI. KEGG enrichment results of DEGs are
shown in Additional file 13: Tables S7, Additional file 14:
Table S8, and Additional file 15: Table S9.
In acute SCI (1 dpi), ribosome, TNF signaling pathway,
proteoglycans in cancer, malaria, and staphylococcus aur-
eus infection were enriched pathways in all DEGs; Of the
13 enriched pathways in upregulated DEGs, the top ten
were ribosome, TNF signaling pathway, malaria, salmon-
ella infection, leishmaniasis, HIF-1 signaling pathway, pro-
teoglycans in cancer, leukocyte transendothelial migration,
Chagas disease (American trypanosomiasis), and staphylo-
coccus aureus infection; the 2 enriched pathways in down-
regulated DEGs were circadian entrainment and axon
guidance (Additional file 16: Figure S7 and Additional
file 13: Table S7).
In acute SCI (6 dpi), glutamatergic synapse, circadian
entrainment, GABAergic synapse and retrograde endo-
cannabinoid signaling were pathways enriched in all
Fig. 2 PCA analysis of the expressed transcripts. PCA analysis with
three principal components (PC1, 2, and 3) was performed to
demonstrate the source of variance in our data (n = 3)
Fig. 3 Volcano map of differentially expressed genes. Significantly upregulated and downregulated genes are shown as a red and green dot,
respectively. The blue dot represents no significant difference between the expressions of genes. a 1 dpi vs sham, b 6 dpi vs sham, c 28 dpi vs
sham, d 6 dpi vs 1 dpi, e 28 dpi vs 1 dpi, f 28 dpi vs 6 dpi
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
Page 7 of 14

DEGs. The top ten pathways of the 27 enriched pathways
in upregulated DEGs were ribosome, osteoclast differ-
entiation, lysosome, NF-kappa B signaling pathway, TNF
signaling pathway, Toll-like receptor signaling pathway,
NOD-like receptor signaling pathway, Chagas disease
(American trypanosomiasis), pertussis and salmonella
infection. The top ten pathways of the 37 pathways
enriched in downregulated DEGs were glutamatergic
synapse, circadian entrainment, GABAergic synapse,
retrograde endocannabinoid signaling, calcium signaling
pathway, dopaminergic synapse, neuroactive ligand-receptor
interaction, adrenergic signaling in cardiomyocytes, insulin
secretion and nicotine addiction (Additional file 17:
Figure S8 and Additional file 14: Table S8).
In chronic SCI (28 dpi), 39 pathways were enriched in
all DEGs; the top ten were ribosome, circadian entrain-
ment, glutamatergic synapse, GABAergic synapse, retro-
grade endocannabinoid signaling, salivary secretion, platelet
activation, cAMP signaling pathway, nicotine addiction and
lysosome; In the 21 pathways enriched in upregulated
DEGs, the top ten were ribosome, lysosome, hematopoietic
cell lineage, staphylococcus aureus infection, osteoclast
differentiation, tuberculosis, leishmaniasis, Fc gamma
R-mediated phagocytosis, phagosome and NF-kappa B
signaling pathway. Of the 25 pathways enriched in
downregulated DEGs, the top ten were circadian en-
trainment, cAMP signaling pathway, glutamatergic syn-
apse, nicotine addiction, calcium signaling pathway,
GABAergic synapse, retrograde endocannabinoid sig-
naling, adrenergic signaling in cardiomyocytes, axon
guidance and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction
(Additional file 18: Figure S9 and Additional file 15:
Table S9).
Discussion
In this study, we modeled SCI in rats using the New
York University Impactor. According to the BBB scores
and our previous experience [9, 15], our model produced
a moderate level of impairment. To establish a system-
atic global analysis of gene expression patterns in the in-
jured spinal cord, we used RNA-Seq to characterize the
temporal changes after contusive SCI in rats at acute (1
dpi), subacute (6 dpi), and chronic (28 dpi) phase time-
points. The transcriptomes were systematically charac-
terized with the goal of identifying pathways and genes
critical in SCI pathology. Before data analysis, the quality
of the cDNA library was examined. Our results showed
that more than 77% of clean tags from RNA-Seq data
mapped uniquely to the genome and that variance in the
expressed transcripts as analyzed by PCA was low. These
results demonstrated that our data was of sufficient
quality to be used for functional analyses.
Comparing each time point to all other time points,
hundreds to thousands of differentially expressed genes
were obtained in the acute, subacute, and chronic phases
of SCI. Hierarchical cluster analysis and K-means cluster-
ing analysis further indicated that more than 3000 genes
in the two clusters decreased post-SCI and reached the
lowest level at 6 dpi. There were more 4000 genes in five
other clusters showing an increasing trend. Most of these
genes increased post-SCI and reached the highest level at
6 dpi. There were only 243 genes in cluster 2 which
expressed at the highest level at 1 dpi, followed by a
decrease at 6 dpi and 28 dpi. These results suggest that
our analysis may provide new information related to
gene expression profiles for the study of SCI patho-
logical mechanisms.
Fig. 4 Quantitative RT-PCR validations of DEGs characterized by RNA-Seq. The relative expression level of target mRNAs was calculated using
the ΔΔCt method and expressed relative to the value in the sham group (designated as 1). Data represent the mean ± SD (n = 3). Log2 fold
change was the ratio of average Log2 folds between samples
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
Page 8 of 14

To further characterize the above DEG profiles, GO
enrichment analysis was performed. The analysis results
showed that for statistically significant differentially
expressed genes, most enrichment occurred in immune
response, MHC protein complex, antigen processing and
presentation, translation-related genes, structural constitu-
ent of ribosome, ion gated channel activity, small GTPase
mediated signal transduction, cytokine and/or chemokine
activity, among others. KEGG pathway analysis showed
that the top enriched pathways included ribosome, antigen
processing and presentation, retrograde endocannabi-
noid signaling, axon guidance, dopaminergic synapses,
glutamatergic synapses and GABAergic synapses, as
well as TNF, HIF-1, NF-kappa B, Toll-like receptor,
NOD-like receptor, cAMP, calcium, oxytocin, Rap1, B
cell receptor and chemokine signaling pathway. In an early
study using a mouse SCI model [16], gene profiling data
at acute (2 days) and subacute phases (7 days after injury)
showed that “inflammation response”, “cell death and
survival”, “nervous system development” and “neurological
disease” were the top enriched functional categories.
“Acute Phase Response Signaling”, “LXR/RXR Activation”,
“Role of Pattern Recognition Receptors in Recognition of
Bacteria and Viruses” and “Atherosclerosis Signaling” were
the most enriched pathways [16]. Comparing our findings
to the mouse gene profiling data, we find that although
animal species and data analysis methods were different,
there were still many similar findings between the rat and
mouse models. For example, “inflammation response” in
the mouse model is similar to “immune response” in the
rat model. “Role of Pattern Recognition Receptors in
Recognition of Bacteria and Viruses” in mice is related
to “Toll-like receptor” and “NOD-like receptor” in rats
[17, 18]. These results demonstrate that there are in-
deed some similarities between the mechanisms of SCI
in rats and mice. However, we also found many more
differences in gene expression and signaling pathways
between these two species. The use of high throughput
RNA-Seq, coupled with different species and different
laboratory results, makes it is difficult to ascertain the
causes of these differences. In fact, the pathology of SCI
in rats and mice is distinct, particularly with regard to
cavity formation and scar/inflammatory responses, and
the rat model is more similar to human SCI [19, 20].
Thus, more thorough mechanistic research using the
rat model may be a better approach for understanding
human SCI.
In addition to differing species, the choice detection
methods may also produce important differences. There
are at least four other groups that have studied gene ex-
pression during acute, subacute, and chronic SCI using
methods different from RNA-Seq [21–24]. In the follow-
ing sections, we will discuss the important similarities
and differences in gene expression patterns in the injured
spinal cord between our RNA-Seq results and data avail-
able from the other labs, as well as the advantages of
RNA-Seq and the novel pathways have been discovered.
The first point we would like to make is that our re-
sults implicate many important genes previously known
to be involved in SCI, such as Socs3 [25], Il17 [26], Tnf
[27], Il6 [26], Il1b [28], CD44 [29], Fgf2 [30], Annexin
[31], Mmp9 [32] and Bax [33]. In addition to these
well-studied genes, many other genes not previously
identified were found to be involved in the response to
SCI. For example, in the acute phase, among the top ten
significantly upregulated genes, we found that colony
Fig. 5 Hierarchical cluster analysis of gene expression in the spinal
cords at different injured stages. Based on similarity of gene expression
patterns, 7632 DEGs were classified into many expression cluster groups.
The blue to red gradation represented gene expressions from down to
up. a: sham control; b: 1 dpi; c: 6 dpi; d: 28 dpi
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
Page 9 of 14

stimulating factor 2 receptor beta common subunit
(Csf2rb), perilipin 2 (Plin2), growth arrest and DNA-
damage-inducible protein GADD45 gamma (Gadd45g),
strawberry notch homolog 2 (Sbno2), filamin-C (Flnc),
B cell lymphoma 3 (Bcl3), glioma pathogenesis-related
protein 2 (Glipr2) and tribbles pseudokinase 1 (Trib1)
had not been reported in SCI.
Csf2rb is a common subunit of the GM-CSF receptor,
IL-3 receptor, and IL-5 receptor [34]. GM-CSF has been
shown to inhibit glial scar formation, enhance the integ-
rity of axonal structure and produce a long-term pro-
tective effect after SCI [35]. The roles of IL-3 and IL-5
in SCI are not very clear. However, both of them and
GM-CSF often co-express in TH2 cells, a subset of
Fig. 6 K-means clustering of DEGs. The 7632 DEGs were statistically grouped into 8 subclusters. The trends of distinct significant expression subclusters
were analyzed. A: sham control; B: 1 dpi; C: 6 dpi; D: 28 dpi. (n = 3 in every group)
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
Page 10 of 14

CD4+ T cells that are characterized by the production
of IL-4, IL-5, IL-10 and IL-13 [36]. Therefore, in the acute
phase of SCI, upregulation of their co-receptor subunit ex-
pression may be beneficial by exerting anti-inflammatory
effects.
Trib1 has been shown to interact with a number of
proteins, such as MEK-1, MKK4, COP1 and C/EBPalpha
[37, 38]. Satoh et al. demonstrated that Trib1 plays a
critical role in the differentiation of tissue-resident
M2-like macrophages [39]. In our previous study, we
demonstrated that macrophages can be polarized into
M2 subtypes in the early stage of SCI [40]. This is con-
sistent with the high expression of Trib1, which may
play important roles in the differentiation of macro-
phages after SCI.
Gadd45g is involved in DNA repair, cell cycle control,
cellular stress response and apoptosis, among other func-
tions [41]. Sbno2, a novel inflammatory response factor, is
predominantly expressed in astrocytes, as well as in the
choroid plexus and in some microglia, endothelial cells,
and neurons in the CNS [42]. Plin2, also known as adipose
differentiation-related protein, is associated with adipocyte
differentiation [43]. Flnc, also known as filamin-2 or actin-
binding-like protein, is mainly expressed in cardiac and
skeletal muscles and functions by crosslinking actin fila-
ments and anchoring membrane proteins to the actin
cytoskeleton [44]. Bcl3 is a transcriptional co-activator
that is activated through interaction with p50 NF-kappaB
homodimers [45]. Knockout of Bcl3 inhibited fiber at-
rophy and abolished NF-kappa B reporter activity [46].
Glipr2, also known as Golgi-associated plant pathogenesis-
related protein 1, is a member of plant pathogenesis related
proteins group 1 superfamily. It strongly associates with
lipid rafts in the cytosolic leaflet of Golgi membranes [47].
However, little is known about the roles of any of these
genes in SCI.
In the subacute stage, from the ten most significantly
upregulated genes, we found that urokinase-type plas-
minogen activator (Plau), hexokinase-3 (Hk3) and trig-
gering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (Trem2)
had not previously been reported in SCI. Plau is a serine
protease involved in migration and proliferation of some
tumor cells and degradation of the extracellular matrix
[48]. Hk3, an isoform of hexokinases which catalyzes the
first step of glucose metabolism, can increase ATP levels,
reduce oxidant-induced reactive oxygen species, preserve
mitochondrial membrane potential, increase mitochon-
drial biogenesis, and exert protective effects against
oxidative stress [49]. Trem2, a receptor belonging to
the immunoglobulin superfamily, is mainly expressed
on myeloid cells where it stimulates neutrophil- and
monocyte/macrophage-mediated inflammatory responses
[50]. A study by Takahashi et al. reported that expression
of
trem2
on
microglia
increased
their
scavenging
capability for apoptotic neurons without inflammation
[51]. However, the functions of these genes are poorly
understood in traumatic CNS injuries.
In the chronic phase, from the ten most upregulated
genes, we found that tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced
protein 6 (Tnfaip6), neutrophil cytosol factor 1 (Ncf1), an-
kyrin repeat and suppressor of cytokine signaling box pro-
tein 15 (Asb15), cupredoxins (Cp), tartrate-resistant acid
phosphatase 5 (Acp5) and C-type lectin domain family 4,
member A3 (Clec4a3) had not previously been reported
in SCI.
Ncf1 is a cytosolic subunit of neutrophil NADPH oxi-
dase which can be activated to produce superoxide
anion. Ncf1 and NADPH oxidase 2 complex-derived re-
active oxygen species are important regulators of several
chronic inflammatory disorders, such as multiple scler-
osis, gout, psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, rheumatoid
arthritis, and lupus [52]. Although there are no reports
of increasing Ncf1 expression in SCI, it may play an im-
portant role in the chronic phase of this pathological
process.
Tnfaip6, a secretory protein induced by tumor necrosis
factor alpha, is involved in extracellular matrix stability
and cell migration, and is important in the protease net-
work associated with inflammation [53]. Asb15, a pro-
tein predominantly expressed in skeletal muscle, has a
role in the regulation of protein turnover and muscle cell
development [54]. Cps are widespread copper-binding
proteins that bind a mononuclear type 1 copper redox site
and are mainly involved in electron transfer reactions,
photosynthesis and respiration [55]. Acp5 is involved in
osteopontin/bone sialoprotein dephosphorylation, which
is essential for bone resorption and osteoclast differenti-
ation [56]. Clec4a3, a member of the C-type lectin-like
domain-containing family which was originally thought to
be important for initiating and shaping immune re-
sponses, has been found to be upregulated in rat spinal
cord following traumatic nerve root injury [57]. However,
whether these genes contribute to the pathological process
of SCI remains unknown.
A second important point regarding our study is that
the genes identified in SCI are involved in many signal-
ing pathways. For example, the TNF [27, 58, 59], Toll-
like receptor [60], NF-kappa B [61], NOD-like receptor
[62] and synapse formation signaling pathways [63] have
been reported to be involved in the pathological process
of SCI [63, 64].
However, there were also some interesting new terms
in SCI found by KEGG pathway analysis. For example,
the ribosome term was significantly enriched in the
whole pathological process. Ribosomes consist of com-
plexes of proteins and RNAs and are complex molecular
machines responsible for protein synthesis in living cells
[65]. Therefore, the upregulation of ribosomal protein
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
Page 11 of 14

genes may increase production of corresponding pro-
teins and thus boost ribosome function after SCI. The
boosting function of ribosomal proteins can promote
ribosome biogenesis, which may contribute to cell
growth and proliferation, stress responses and the poten-
tial for repair [66]. However, the mechanisms related to ri-
bosomes in regulating neuronal growth, stress responses
and rehabilitation after SCI remain to be identified. In
addition, some pathways such as retrograde endocannabi-
noid signaling, oxytocin signaling, Rap1 signaling and the
synaptic vesicle cycle were also enriched in the subacute
and chronic phases of SCI. The roles of these pathways in
SCI have never been reported to our knowledge. These
new findings will thus supportfuture research and thera-
peutic development for SCI.
Conclusions
In summary, our study has not only characterized global
changes in gene expression in injured rat spinal cords,
but has also systematically identified the critical genes and
signaling pathways in SCI pathology. Although the genes
associated with damage and repair of spinal cord injury
are still largely unknown, the RNA-Seq analysis presented
in this study will expand our understanding of the com-
plex molecular mechanisms involved and provide a
foundation for future studies of tissue damage and re-
pair after SCI.
Additional files
Additional file 1: Table S1. Differentially expressed genes in the spinal
cords at different injured stages. The downregulated genes are shown in
green, the upregulated are shown in Red. (XLSX 634 kb)
Additional file 2: Table S2. The list of most relevant genes that are over-
expressed or under-expressed in the different injured stages. (XLSX 44 kb)
Additional file 3: Table S3. The list of gene IDs in 8 subclusters for
K-means clustering of DEGs. (XLSX 360 kb)
Additional file 4: Table S4. The significant GO terms of differentially
expressed genes. (XLSX 109 kb)
Additional file 5: Figure S1. GO enrichment analysis of up-regulated
genes in acute SCI (1 dpi). The 30 most enriched GO terms are shown.
The asterisks (*) represent the significantly enriched (P ≤0.05) biological
process, cellular component, and molecular function categories. (TIF 1475 kb)
Additional file 6: Table S5. GO enrichment result of the up-regulated
genes. (XLSX 64 kb)
Additional file 7: Figure S2. GO enrichment analysis of down-regulated
genes in acute SCI (1 dpi). The 30 most enriched GO terms are shown. No
significantly enriched biological process, cellular component, and molecular
function categories are detected. (TIF 1595 kb)
Additional file 8: Table S6. GO enrichment result of the down-regulated
genes. (XLSX 58 kb)
Additional file 9: Figure S3. GO enrichment analysis of up-regulated
genes in subacute SCI (6 dpi). The 30 most enriched GO terms are shown.
The asterisks (*) represent the significantly enriched (P ≤0.05) biological
process, cellular component, and molecular function categories. (TIF 626 kb)
Additional file 10: Figure S4. GO enrichment analysis of down-regulated
genes in subacute SCI (6 dpi). The 30 most enriched GO terms are shown.
The asterisks (*) represent the significantly enriched (P ≤0.05) biological
process and molecular function categories. No significantly enriched cellular
component is detected. (TIF 646 kb)
Additional file 11: Figure S5. GO enrichment analysis of up-regulated
genes in chronic SCI (28 dpi). The 30 most enriched GO terms are shown.
The asterisks (*) represent the significantly enriched (P ≤0.05) biological
process, cellular component, and molecular function categories. (TIF 1644 kb)
Additional file 12: Figure S6. GO enrichment analysis of down-regulated
genes in chronic SCI (28 dpi). The 30 most enriched GO terms are shown.
The asterisks (*) represent the significantly enriched (P ≤0.05) biological
process, cellular component, and molecular function categories. (TIF 1699 kb)
Additional file 13: Table S7. KEGG enrichment analysis of up DEGs in
acute SCI (1 dpi). (XLSX 192 kb)
Additional file 14: Table S8. KEGG enrichment analysis of up DEGs in
subacute SCI (6 dpi). (XLSX 384 kb)
Additional file 15: Table S9. KEGG enrichment analysis of up DEGs
chronic SCI (28 dpi). (XLSX 267 kb)
Additional file 16: Figure S7. KEGG enrichment analysis of DEGs in
acute SCI (1 dpi). The 20 most enriched KEGG pathways in 1 dpi vs sham.
“Rich factor” means that the ratio of the DEGs number and the number
of genes has been annotated in this pathway. The greater of the Rich
factor, the greater of the degree of enrichment. (TIF 1729 kb)
Additional file 17: Figure S8. KEGG enrichment analysis of DEGs in
subacute SCI (6 dpi). The 20 most enriched KEGG pathways in 6 dpi vs
sham. “Rich factor” means that the ratio of the DEGs number and the
number of genes has been annotated in this pathway. The greater of the
Rich factor, the greater of the degree of enrichment. (TIF 1827 kb)
Additional file 18: Figure S9. KEGG enrichment analysis of DEGs in
chronic SCI (28 dpi). The 20 most enriched KEGG pathways in 28 dpi vs
sham. “Rich factor” means that the ratio of the DEGs number and the
number of genes has been annotated in this pathway. The greater of the
Rich factor, the greater of the degree of enrichment. (TIF 1748 kb)
Abbreviations
dpi: Day postinjury; GAPDH: Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase;
GO: Gene ontology; KEGG: Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes;
qRT-PCR: Real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction; RNA-Seq: RNA-sequencing; SCI: Spinal cord injury
Acknowledgements
We thank SX Wang and XY Lv for helping us to train rats and perform BBB
locomotor rating scale.
Funding
This study was supported by grants from the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Nos. 81271363, 81571194) and Key Program of Anhui
Province for Outstanding Talents in University (gxbjZD2016071).
Availability of data and materials
The sequence data of this study have been deposited into Sequence Read
Archive (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra; accession number PRJNA318311).
Authors’ contributions
HZL and JGH participated in the design and coordination of the study, and
drafted the manuscript. NZ, XMX and YJC, performed animal experimental
procedures and RNA sample collection. LLS, RW, LS and JSZ conducted data
analysis and interpretation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Ethics approval
All surgical procedures and post-operative animal care were in accordance
with the Regulations for the Administration of Affairs Concerning Experimental
Animals (Ministry of Science and Technology, China; revised in June 2004) and
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
Page 12 of 14

the Guidelines and Policies for Rodent Survival Surgery provided by the Animal
Care and Use Committees of Bengbu Medical College.
Author details
1Clinical Laboratory, the First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical College,
Anhui 233004, People’s Republic of China. 2Anhui Key Laboratory of Tissue
Transplantation, the First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical College, 287
Chang Huai Road, Anhui 233004, People’s Republic of China. 3Department of
Immunology, Bengbu Medical College, Anhui 233030, People’s Republic of
China.
Received: 23 April 2016 Accepted: 1 February 2017
References
1.
Devivo MJ. Epidemiology of traumatic spinal cord injury: trends and future
implications. Spinal Cord. 2012;50(5):365–72.
2.
Qiu J. China Spinal Cord Injury Network: changes from within. Lancet Neurol.
2009;8(7):606–7.
3.
Liu NK, Wang XF, Lu QB, Xu XM. Altered microRNA expression following
traumatic spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol. 2009;219(2):424–9.
4.
Aimone JB, Leasure JL, Perreau VM, Thallmair M, Christopher Reeve Paralysis
Foundation Research C. Spatial and temporal gene expression profiling of
the contused rat spinal cord. Exp Neurol. 2004;189(2):204–21.
5.
Nesic O, Svrakic NM, Xu GY, McAdoo D, Westlund KN, Hulsebosch CE, Ye Z,
Galante A, Soteropoulos P, Tolias P, et al. DNA microarray analysis of the
contused spinal cord: effect of NMDA receptor inhibition. J Neurosci Res.
2002;68(4):406–23.
6.
Tachibana T, Noguchi K, Ruda MA. Analysis of gene expression following
spinal cord injury in rat using complementary DNA microarray. Neurosci
Lett. 2002;327(2):133–7.
7.
Marioni JC, Mason CE, Mane SM, Stephens M, Gilad Y. RNA-seq: an
assessment of technical reproducibility and comparison with gene
expression arrays. Genome Res. 2008;18(9):1509–17.
8.
Gamsiz ED, Ouyang Q, Schmidt M, Nagpal S, Morrow EM. Genome-wide
transcriptome analysis in murine neural retina using high-throughput RNA
sequencing. Genomics. 2012;99(1):44–51.
9.
Lu HZ, Xu L, Zou J, Wang YX, Ma ZW, Xu XM, Lu PH. Effects of autoimmunity
on recovery of function in adult rats following spinal cord injury. Brain Behav
Immun. 2008;22(8):1217–30.
10.
Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC. A sensitive and reliable locomotor
rating scale for open field testing in rats. J Neurotrauma. 1995;12(1):1–21.
11.
Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC, Anderson DK, Faden AI, Gruner JA,
Holford TR, Hsu CY, Noble LJ, Nockels R, et al. MASCIS evaluation of open
field locomotor scores: effects of experience and teamwork on reliability.
Multicenter Animal Spinal Cord Injury Study. J Neurotrauma. 1996;13(7):343–59.
12.
Trapnell C, Williams BA, Pertea G, Mortazavi A, Kwan G, van Baren MJ,
Salzberg SL, Wold BJ, Pachter L. Transcript assembly and quantification by
RNA-Seq reveals unannotated transcripts and isoform switching during cell
differentiation. Nat Biotechnol. 2010;28(5):511–5.
13.
Hu JG, Shen L, Wang R, Wang QY, Zhang C, Xi J, Ma SF, Zhou JS, Lu HZ.
Effects of Olig2-overexpressing neural stem cells and myelin basic protein-
activated T cells on recovery from spinal cord injury. Neurotherapeutics.
2012;9(2):422–45.
14.
Pfaffl MW. A new mathematical model for relative quantification in real-time
RT-PCR. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001;29(9), e45.
15.
Ma SF, Chen YJ, Zhang JX, Shen L, Wang R, Zhou JS, Hu JG, Lu HZ.
Adoptive transfer of M2 macrophages promotes locomotor recovery in
adult rats after spinal cord injury. Brain Behav Immun. 2015;45:157–70.
16.
Chen K, Deng S, Lu H, Zheng Y, Yang G, Kim D, Cao Q, Wu JQ. RNA-seq
characterization of spinal cord injury transcriptome in acute/subacute
phases: a resource for understanding the pathology at the systems level.
PLoS One. 2013;8(8), e72567.
17.
Areschoug T, Gordon S. Pattern recognition receptors and their role in
innate immunity: focus on microbial protein ligands. Contrib Microbiol.
2008;15:45–60.
18.
Kawai T, Akira S. The role of pattern-recognition receptors in innate
immunity: update on Toll-like receptors. Nat Immunol. 2010;11(5):373–84.
19.
Byrnes KR, Fricke ST, Faden AI. Neuropathological differences between rats
and mice after spinal cord injury. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2010;32(4):836–46.
20.
Sroga JM, Jones TB, Kigerl KA, McGaughy VM, Popovich PG. Rats and mice
exhibit distinct inflammatory reactions after spinal cord injury. J Comp
Neurol. 2003;462(2):223–40.
21.
Jin L, Wu Z, Xu W, Hu X, Zhang J, Xue Z, Cheng L. Identifying gene expression
profile of spinal cord injury in rat by bioinformatics strategy. Mol Biol Rep.
2014;41(5):3169–77.
22.
Wen T, Hou J, Wang F, Zhang Y, Zhang T, Sun T. Comparative analysis of
molecular mechanism of spinal cord injury with time based on bioinformatics
data. Spinal Cord. 2016;54(6):431–8.
23.
Chamankhah M, Eftekharpour E, Karimi-Abdolrezaee S, Boutros PC,
San-Marina S, Fehlings MG. Genome-wide gene expression profiling of
stress response in a spinal cord clip compression injury model. BMC
Genomics. 2013;14:583.
24.
Fortune RD, Grill RJ, Jr., Beeton C, Tanner M, Huq R, Loose DS. Changes in
gene expression and metabolism in the testes of the rat following spinal
cord injury. J Neurotrauma 2016. [Epub ahead of print].
25.
Park KW, Lin CY, Lee YS. Expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling-3
(SOCS3) and its role in neuronal death after complete spinal cord injury.
Exp Neurol. 2014;261:65–75.
26.
Zong S, Zeng G, Fang Y, Peng J, Tao Y, Li K, Zhao J. The role of IL-17 promotes
spinal cord neuroinflammation via activation of the transcription factor STAT3
after spinal cord injury in the rat. Mediat Inflamm. 2014;2014:786947.
27.
Wang CX, Nuttin B, Heremans H, Dom R, Gybels J. Production of tumor
necrosis factor in spinal cord following traumatic injury in rats. J Neuroimmunol.
1996;69(1–2):151–6.
28.
Hayashi M, Ueyama T, Tamaki T, Senba E. Expression of neurotrophin and IL-1
beta mRNAs following spinal cord injury and the effects of methylprednisolone
treatment. Kaibogaku zasshi J Anatomy. 1997;72(3):209–13.
29.
Moon C, Heo S, Sim KB, Shin T. Upregulation of CD44 expression in the spinal
cords of rats with clip compression injury. Neurosci Lett. 2004;367(1):133–6.
30.
Mocchetti I, Rabin SJ, Colangelo AM, Whittemore SR, Wrathall JR. Increased
basic fibroblast growth factor expression following contusive spinal cord
injury. Exp Neurol. 1996;141(1):154–64.
31.
Liu N, Han S, Lu PH, Xu XM. Upregulation of annexins I, II, and V after
traumatic spinal cord injury in adult rats. J Neurosci Res. 2004;77(3):391–401.
32.
Hansen CN, Fisher LC, Deibert RJ, Jakeman LB, Zhang H, Noble-Haeusslein L,
White S, Basso DM. Elevated MMP-9 in the lumbar cord early after
thoracic spinal cord injury impedes motor relearning in mice. J Neurosci.
2013;33(32):13101–11.
33.
Antonsson B, Conti F, Ciavatta A, Montessuit S, Lewis S, Martinou I,
Bernasconi L, Bernard A, Mermod JJ, Mazzei G, et al. Inhibition of Bax
channel-forming activity by Bcl-2. Science. 1997;277(5324):370–2.
34.
Woodcock JM, Zacharakis B, Plaetinck G, Bagley CJ, Qiyu S, Hercus TR,
Tavernier J, Lopez AF. Three residues in the common beta chain of the
human GM-CSF, IL-3 and IL-5 receptors are essential for GM-CSF and IL-5
but not IL-3 high affinity binding and interact with Glu21 of GM-CSF. EMBO J.
1994;13(21):5176–85.
35.
Huang X, Kim JM, Kong TH, Park SR, Ha Y, Kim MH, Park H, Yoon SH, Park
HC, Park JO, et al. GM-CSF inhibits glial scar formation and shows long-term
protective effect after spinal cord injury. J Neurol Sci. 2009;277(1-2):87–97.
36.
van Leeuwen BH, Martinson ME, Webb GC, Young IG. Molecular organization
of the cytokine gene cluster, involving the human IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, and GM-CSF
genes, on human chromosome 5. Blood. 1989;73(5):1142–8.
37.
Kiss-Toth E, Bagstaff SM, Sung HY, Jozsa V, Dempsey C, Caunt JC, Oxley KM,
Wyllie DH, Polgar T, Harte M, et al. Human tribbles, a protein family
controlling mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades. J Biol Chem.
2004;279(41):42703–8.
38.
Sung HY, Guan H, Czibula A, King AR, Eder K, Heath E, Suvarna SK, Dower SK,
Wilson AG, Francis SE, et al. Human tribbles-1 controls proliferation and
chemotaxis of smooth muscle cells via MAPK signaling pathways. J Biol Chem.
2007;282(25):18379–87.
39.
Satoh T, Kidoya H, Naito H, Yamamoto M, Takemura N, Nakagawa K, Yoshioka Y,
Morii E, Takakura N, Takeuchi O, et al. Critical role of Trib1 in differentiation of
tissue-resident M2-like macrophages. Nature. 2013;495(7442):524–8.
40.
Chen YJ, Zhu H, Zhang N, Shen L, Wang R, Zhou JS, Hu JG, Lu HZ. Temporal
kinetics of macrophage polarization in the injured rat spinal cord. J Neurosci
Res. 2015;93(10):1526–33.
41.
Liebermann DA, Hoffman B. Gadd45 in the response of hematopoietic cells
to genotoxic stress. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2007;39(3):329–35.
42.
Grill M, Syme TE, Nocon AL, Lu AZ, Hancock D, Rose-John S, Campbell IL.
Strawberry notch homolog 2 is a novel inflammatory response factor
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
Page 13 of 14

predominantly but not exclusively expressed by astrocytes in the central
nervous system. Glia. 2015;63(10):1738–52.
43.
Bosma M, Hesselink MK, Sparks LM, Timmers S, Ferraz MJ, Mattijssen F,
van Beurden D, Schaart G, de Baets MH, Verheyen FK, et al. Perilipin 2
improves insulin sensitivity in skeletal muscle despite elevated
intramuscular lipid levels. Diabetes. 2012;61(11):2679–90.
44.
van der Flier A, Sonnenberg A. Structural and functional aspects of filamins.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001;1538(2–3):99–117.
45.
Richard M, Louahed J, Demoulin JB, Renauld JC. Interleukin-9 regulates
NF-kappaB activity through BCL3 gene induction. Blood. 1999;93(12):4318–27.
46.
Hunter RB, Kandarian SC. Disruption of either the Nfkb1 or the Bcl3 gene
inhibits skeletal muscle atrophy. J Clin Invest. 2004;114(10):1504–11.
47.
van Galen J, Olrichs NK, Schouten A, Serrano RL, Nolte-‘t Hoen EN, Eerland R,
Kaloyanova D, Gros P, Helms JB. Interaction of GAPR-1 with lipid bilayers
is regulated by alternative homodimerization. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2012;1818(9):2175–83.
48.
Liotta LA, Goldfarb RH, Brundage R, Siegal GP, Terranova V, Garbisa S. Effect
of plasminogen activator (urokinase), plasmin, and thrombin on
glycoprotein and collagenous components of basement membrane. Cancer
Res. 1981;41(11 Pt 1):4629–36.
49.
Wyatt E, Wu R, Rabeh W, Park HW, Ghanefar M, Ardehali H. Regulation and
cytoprotective role of hexokinase III. PLoS One. 2010;5(11), e13823.
50.
Sessa G, Podini P, Mariani M, Meroni A, Spreafico R, Sinigaglia F, Colonna M,
Panina P, Meldolesi J. Distribution and signaling of TREM2/DAP12, the receptor
system mutated in human polycystic lipomembraneous osteodysplasia with
sclerosing leukoencephalopathy dementia. Eur J Neurosci. 2004;20(10):2617–28.
51.
Takahashi K, Rochford CD, Neumann H. Clearance of apoptotic neurons
without inflammation by microglial triggering receptor expressed on
myeloid cells-2. J Exp Med. 2005;201(4):647–57.
52.
Holmdahl R, Sareila O, Olsson LM, Backdahl L, Wing K. Ncf1 polymorphism
reveals oxidative regulation of autoimmune chronic inflammation. Immunol
Rev. 2016;269(1):228–47.
53.
Bardos T, Kamath RV, Mikecz K, Glant TT. Anti-inflammatory and
chondroprotective effect of TSG-6 (tumor necrosis factor-alpha-stimulated
gene-6) in murine models of experimental arthritis. Am J Pathol.
2001;159(5):1711–21.
54.
McDaneld TG, Spurlock DM. Ankyrin repeat and suppressor of cytokine
signaling (SOCS) box-containing protein (ASB) 15 alters differentiation of
mouse C2C12 myoblasts and phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein
kinase and Akt. J Anim Sci. 2008;86(11):2897–902.
55.
Roger M, Biaso F, Castelle CJ, Bauzan M, Chaspoul F, Lojou E, Sciara G,
Caffarri S, Giudici-Orticoni MT, Ilbert M. Spectroscopic characterization of a
green copper site in a single-domain cupredoxin. PLoS One. 2014;9(6), e98941.
56.
Xia L, Huang W, Tian D, Chen Z, Zhang L, Li Y, Hu H, Liu J, Chen Z, Tang G,
et al. ACP5, a direct transcriptional target of FoxM1, promotes tumor
metastasis and indicates poor prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma.
Oncogene. 2014;33(11):1395–406.
57.
Lindblom RP, Aeinehband S, Parsa R, Strom M, Al Nimer F, Zhang XM,
Dominguez CA, Flytzani S, Diez M, Piehl F. Genetic variability in the rat
Aplec C-type lectin gene cluster regulates lymphocyte trafficking and motor
neuron survival after traumatic nerve root injury. J Neuroinflammation.
2013;10:60.
58.
Lee YB, Yune TY, Baik SY, Shin YH, Du S, Rhim H, Lee EB, Kim YC, Shin ML,
Markelonis GJ, et al. Role of tumor necrosis factor-alpha in neuronal and
glial apoptosis after spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol. 2000;166(1):190–5.
59.
Esposito E, Cuzzocrea S. Anti-TNF therapy in the injured spinal cord. Trends
Pharmacol Sci. 2011;32(2):107–15.
60.
Impellizzeri D, Ahmad A, Di Paola R, Campolo M, Navarra M, Esposito E,
Cuzzocrea S. Role of Toll like receptor 4 signaling pathway in the secondary
damage induced by experimental spinal cord injury. Immunobiology.
2015;220(9):1039–49.
61.
Brambilla R, Bracchi-Ricard V, Hu WH, Frydel B, Bramwell A, Karmally S,
Green EJ, Bethea JR. Inhibition of astroglial nuclear factor kappaB reduces
inflammation and improves functional recovery after spinal cord injury. J
Exp Med. 2005;202(1):145–56.
62.
Kigerl KA, de Rivero Vaccari JP, Dietrich WD, Popovich PG, Keane RW.
Pattern recognition receptors and central nervous system repair. Exp Neurol.
2014;258:5–16.
63.
Jacobi A, Loy K, Schmalz AM, Hellsten M, Umemori H, Kerschensteiner M,
Bareyre FM. FGF22 signaling regulates synapse formation during post-injury
remodeling of the spinal cord. EMBO J. 2015;34(9):1231–43.
64.
Pallier PN, Poddighe L, Zbarsky V, Kostusiak M, Choudhury R, Hart T,
Burguillos MA, Musbahi O, Groenendijk M, Sijben JW, et al. A nutrient
combination designed to enhance synapse formation and function
improves outcome in experimental spinal cord injury. Neurobiol Dis.
2015;82:504–15.
65.
Korostelev A, Trakhanov S, Laurberg M, Noller HF. Crystal structure of a 70S
ribosome-tRNA complex reveals functional interactions and rearrangements.
Cell. 2006;126(6):1065–77.
66.
Hetman M, Pietrzak M. Emerging roles of the neuronal nucleolus. Trends
Neurosci. 2012;35(5):305–14.
•  We accept pre-submission inquiries 
•  Our selector tool helps you to ﬁnd the most relevant journal
•  We provide round the clock customer support 
•  Convenient online submission
•  Thorough peer review
•  Inclusion in PubMed and all major indexing services 
•  Maximum visibility for your research
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central 
and we will help you at every step:
Shi et al. BMC Genomics  (2017) 18:173 
Page 14 of 14

===== Shivdasani2021_Science_regeneration =====
sciencemag.org  SCIENCE
PHOTO: FLORIJN DEKKERS AND ANNE RIOS
which is responsible for converting organic 
fuel molecules (e.g., glucose) and oxygen into 
carbon dioxide, water, and energy—a muta-
tion in one of these enzymes, the 2-oxoglu-
tarate dehydrogenase enzyme (sucA), is suf-
ficient to not only abolish this up-regulation 
but also confer carbenicillin resistance. These 
findings reinforce that antibiotic efficacy is 
intimately linked to the cell’s metabolic state.
These analyses suggest that rewiring of 
central metabolism may be a general strat-
egy to acquire antibiotic resistance, but the 
scope of metabolic changes resulting from 
these mutations remains to be systemati-
cally unraveled. One hypothesis emerging 
from this study is that different metabolic 
mutations can converge to similar adaptive 
changes and provide resistance to antibiot-
ics with largely different modes of action. 
Hence, although individually at lower fre-
quency than classical resistance mutations, 
it is possible that different metabolic muta-
tions can play the same role in mediating 
antibiotic resistance (see the figure). 
Advances in technologies that enable the 
monitoring of dynamic metabolic changes 
in response to genetic and environmental 
perturbations combined with computational 
models of cellular metabolism will help re-
searchers to investigate the common scope 
of diverse metabolic mutations in antibiotic 
resistance (3, 5, 9, 10). Predicting how mu-
tations affect the metabolic state of cells, 
alter drug action, and ultimately shape the 
fitness landscape of resistance mutations 
will be of paramount importance to lever-
age this understanding in the optimization 
of treatment regimens and the discovery of 
new drugs and combination therapies. Small 
molecules that interfere with respiratory and 
fermentative metabolism might improve the 
killing efficacy of classical antibiotics (4, 11) 
and hamper the evolution of resistance by 
changing the fitness landscape of antibiotic 
resistance (3, 5, 6). From the data and analy-
sis presented by Lopatkin et al., mechanisms 
by which pathogenic bacteria can become 
resistant in vivo can be unraveled. j
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
 1.  P. Belenky et al., Cell Rep. 13, 968 (2015).  
 2.  O. Fridman, A. Goldberg, I. Ronin, N. Shoresh, N. Q. 
Balaban, Nature 513, 418 (2014).  
 3.  M. Zampieri et al., Mol. Syst. Biol. 13, 917 (2017).  
 4.  S. Meylan et al., Cell Chem. Biol. 24, 195 (2017).  
 5.  A. I. Campos, M. Zampieri, Mol. Cell 74, 1291 (2019).  
 6.  M. Vestergaard et al., mBio 8, e01114 (2017).  
 7.  A. J. Lopatkin et al., Science 371, eaba0862 (2021).
 8.  I. Yelin, R. Kishony, Cell 172, 1136 (2018).  
 9.  E. S. Kavvas, L. Yang, J. M. Monk, D. Heckmann, B. O. 
Palsson, Nat. Commun. 11, 2580 (2020).  
 10.  Y. Hart et al., Nat. Methods 12, 233 (2015).  
 11.  Y. Shan et al., mBio 8, e02267 (2017).  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank V. Chubukov and K. Ortmayr for helpful feedback. 
10.1126/science.abf7922
STEM CELLS
Tissue regeneration: 
Reserve or reverse?
Stem cells recover from injury by tissue dedifferentiation, 
not from dedicated reserves
By Ramesh A. Shivdasani1,2,3, Hans Clevers4,5,6, 
Frederic J. de Sauvage7 
T
issues with high intrinsic turnover, 
such as the skin and intestinal lin-
ing, rely on resident stem cells, which 
generate all native cell types. Intesti-
nal stem cells (ISCs) are highly sensi-
tive to damage, although they recover 
quickly. It is unclear whether this recovery 
(i.e., regeneration) occurs from less sensitive 
pools of “reserve” stem cells (1) or whether 
ISC progeny undergo “reverse” differen-
tiation into stem cells (2). Recent studies 
in diverse organs highlight that dedifferen-
tiation of specified cell types is a pervasive 
and dominant means for tissue regenera-
tion. The findings have broad implications 
because all tissues experience some cell 
attrition over a lifetime, and knowing how 
tissues replenish those losses may help in 
preventing or treating organ failure. More-
over, it remains unclear whether incom-
plete differentiation, a common feature of 
cancer, reflects normal tissue plasticity, and 
it is unclear whether stem cells that arise by 
dedifferentiation may spawn cancers. 
ISCs expressing leucine-rich repeat–con-
taining G protein–coupled receptor 5 (Lgr5) 
lie at the bottom of small bowel crypts (3). 
In the course of homeostatic tissue turnover, 
their immediate progeny adopt alternative 
enterocyte or secretory fates, then fill the 
crypts with replicating progenitors that mi-
grate away from ISCs. Cell division ceases at 
the crypt tops, where postmitotic cells begin 
a 3- to 5-day journey along intestinal villi. 
When ISCs sustain irreparable damage, some 
source in the crypt must regenerate new 
ISCs. Other adult epithelia—such as airways, 
prostate, and liver—are organized differently 
from the intestine and from each other (see 
the figure). These epithelia also restore cells 
lost by damage or attrition, even though at 
rest they turn over at least a hundred times 
more slowly than the intestinal lining. 
1Department of Medical Oncology and Center for 
Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, MA, USA. 2Department of Medicine, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA. 3Harvard Stem Cell Institute, 
Cambridge, MA, USA. 4Hubrecht Institute, Utrecht, 
Netherlands. 5Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and 
Sciences (KNAW), Utrecht, Netherlands. 6University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. 7Department 
of Molecular Oncology, Genentech, South San Francisco, 
CA, USA. Email: ramesh_shivdasani@dfci.harvard.edu
INSIGHTS  |  PERSPECTIVES
A cross section of mouse small intestine, showing intestinal crypts and villi, is visualized with 
immunofluorescence microscopy (nuclei in red, and F-actin, which marks the cytoskeleton, in blue). 
Intestinal stem cells reside at the base of crypts, where they maintain cell turnover.
784    19 FEBRUARY 2021 • VOL 371 ISSUE 6531
Published by AAAS
on March 10, 2021
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 

SCIENCE  sciencemag.org
GRAPHIC: KELLIE HOLSKI/SCIENCE
Airway epithelial structure varies from 
trachea to small bronchioles, and distinct 
progenitors in different segments produce 
assorted secretory and ciliated cell types. In 
the lining of human and mouse upper air-
ways, flat basal cells lie beneath a layer of 
columnar differentiated cells and adjacent 
to submucosal myoepithelial glands. Stem 
cell activity in normal tissue turnover maps 
to a subpopulation of keratin 5 (Krt5)–ex-
pressing basal cells (4). The trachea and 
bronchi are vulnerable to diverse injuries, 
including targeted destruction of Krt5+ 
stem cells and pervasive mucosal damage 
from noxious inhalants or viruses.
Adult human and mouse prostate glands 
also contain columnar luminal and flat 
KRT5+ basal cells. Distinct unipotent pro-
genitors maintain both populations, and 
castration induces massive luminal cell 
loss. Androgen reexposure restores prostate 
mass within weeks, which implies the pres-
ence of castration-resistant progenitors. 
However, an unequivocal stem cell pool has 
not been identified. The liver also has nota-
ble regenerative abilities after chemical or 
surgical injury. The emerging consensus is 
that this organ lacks a dedicated stem cell 
compartment and recovers from damage 
through dedifferentiation of mature hepat-
ocytes and biliary cells (5, 6). 
Stem cell activity in vivo is demonstrated 
most persuasively by introducing into a 
tissue a permanent color or fluorescent 
label whose expression depends on Cre 
recombinase–mediated excision of a STOP 
cassette. When Cre activity is restricted to 
stem cells, all the progeny of those cells ex-
clusively carry the label. ISCs and tracheal 
stem cells were thus identified because tar-
geted Cre activity in LGR5+ or KRT5+ mouse 
cells labeled the respective full lineages (3, 
4). Investigation of tissue regeneration re-
quires ablation of a stem cell compartment, 
followed by tracking of the restored ability 
to produce sufficient numbers of all native 
stem cell progeny. The canon of tissue re-
pair rests heavily on such lineage-tracing 
experiments, but one limitation is that Cre 
recombinase is not often confined to a sin-
gle defined cell type. This challenge lies at 
the heart of competing models for tissue 
recovery after lethal cell injuries.
Dividing cells take up labels such as 
[3H]thymidine or fluorescent histone 2B 
and shed these labels as they replicate 
further or their daughters die. In the in-
testine, however, rare cells located near 
the fourth tier from the crypt base retain 
[3H]thymidine for weeks. Given once-popular 
ideas that stem cells must be few in num-
ber and retain one “immortal” DNA strand 
when they replicate, +4 label-retaining cells 
(LRCs) were described as ISCs. In support of 
that idea, lineage tracing from Bmi1, a locus 
thought to be restricted to nonreplicating +4 
LRCs, elicited an ISC-like response in vivo (7). 
To reconcile the evidence for ISC proper-
ties in both LGR5+ crypt base columnar cells 
(CBCs) and +4 LRCs, researchers postulated 
that abundant CBCs serve as frontline ISCs, 
whereas the smaller +4 LRC population 
contains dedicated reserves. Indeed, intes-
tinal turnover is unperturbed when LGR5+ 
CBCs are ablated because other crypt cells’ 
progeny continue to repopulate villi and an 
LGR5+ ISC compartment is soon restored 
(1 ). Multiple candidate markers of +4 LRCs 
that regenerate ISCs after injury have been 
proposed (8). Although these cells are too 
few to explain the typical scale and speed 
of ISC restoration, the prospect of two stem 
cell pools carried the additional allure of a 
sound adaptive strategy in a tissue that re-
quires continuous self-renewal.
ISC differentiation is, however, not 
strictly unidirectional. Cre expression in 
absorptive or secretory cell types tags those 
cells selectively, but upon ablation of LGR5+ 
CBCs, the label appears throughout (9). 
These observations imply that differenti-
ated daughter cells have reverted into ISCs. 
Moreover, Bmi1 expression was found to 
mark differentiated crypt endocrine cells 
(10), and putative +4 markers are expressed 
in many crypt cells including LGR5+ CBCs. 
Accordingly, when Cre is expressed from 
these loci, the traced lineage might simply 
reflect CBC activity in resting animals and 
reverse differentiation of crypt cells after 
ISC ablation. But is dedifferentiation a rare 
and physiologically inconsequential event 
or the predominant mode of stem cell re-
covery? Dedifferentiation may obviate the 
need to invoke a dedicated reserve popula-
tion, or it is possible that ISC recovery may 
reflect both dedifferentiation and contribu-
tions from a reserve stem cell population.
To investigate these issues, research-
ers activated a fluorescent label in LGR5+ 
CBCs and waited for this label to pass into 
progeny cells before ablating CBCs (11). 
Thus, only the CBCs that recover by de-
differentiation should be labeled, and any 
cells arising from reserve ISCs should not. 
Nearly every restored crypt and CBC was 
fluorescent, with substantial contributions 
from both enterocytes and secretory cells 
(11). Cells captured early in the restorative 
process coexpressed mature-cell and ISC 
genes, which is compatible with recov-
ery by dedifferentiation. Another study 
found that damaged ISCs are reconstituted 
wholly by the progeny of LGR5+ CBCs (8). 
Thus, dedifferentiation would seem to be 
the principal mode of ISC regeneration, 
and prior conclusions about +4 ISCs likely 
reflect unselective Cre expression.
+4
ISC, intestinal stem cell; KRT5, keratin 5; LGR5, leucine-rich 
repeat–containing G protein–coupled receptor 5.
LGR5+ ISC
LGR5
+ cell-
specifc 
damage
Intestine
Prostate
Castration
Luminal 
cell
KRT5
+ basal
stem cell
Turnover
Airway
KRT5+ cell-
specifc 
damage
Club cell
KRT5+ basal
stem cell
Myoepithelial 
cell
Diferentiated 
cells
Homeostasis
Recovery
Dediferentiation
Stem cells in homeostasis 
and recovery
Physiologic cell turnover and recovery from injury 
occur from different cellular sources in diverse 
epithelia (intestine, upper airway, and prostate 
gland). Homeostatic turnover is driven by the stem 
cell pool, and tissue restoration from injury occurs 
through transient expansion and dedifferentiation of   
specified mature cells.
19 FEBRUARY 2021 • VOL 371 ISSUE 6531    785
Published by AAAS
on March 10, 2021
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 

sciencemag.org  SCIENCE
Different tissues might deploy distinct 
regenerative strategies, and recent studies 
in mouse airway, prostate, intestinal, and 
liver epithelia provide insightful lessons. 
After ablation of KRT5+ airway stem cells, 
specified secretory and club cell precursors 
were found to undergo clonal multilineage 
expansion and accounted for up to 10% of 
restored KRT5+ cells in vivo (12). Chemical 
or viral damage was subsequently reported 
to induce migration and dedifferentiation of 
submucosal gland myoepithelial cells into 
the basal layer to reconstitute the surface 
lining, including KRT5+ stem cells (13). Thus, 
dedifferentiation into native stem cells oc-
curs upon injury to both airway and intesti-
nal linings in mice. 
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) 
analysis of mouse prostate glands recently 
revealed distinct gene expression profiles in 
~3% of luminal cells, which are more clono-
genic than others, express putative stem cell 
markers, and hence qualify as a pool enriched 
for native stem-like cells (14). After androgen 
reexposure following castration, however, 
the scale and distribution of cell replication 
and the location of restored clones were in-
compatible with an origin wholly within that 
small pool. Rather, the principal source of 
gland reconstitution in vivo, including new 
KRT5+ basal cells, was the dominant pop-
ulation of differentiated luminal cells (14). 
These observations parallel those in the 
liver, where recovery of organ mass after tis-
sue injury occurs by renewed proliferation 
of mature resting hepatocytes (5), abetted 
by expansion of bile duct cells that transdif-
ferentiate into hepatocytes (6). Cell plasticity 
is thus widespread, whether tissues have or 
lack native stem cell compartments.
Reverse differentiation in the intestine, 
airways, and prostate gland was generally 
observed after near-total elimination of res-
ident stem or luminal cells, an extreme and 
artificial condition. However, several obser-
vations suggest that this dedifferentiation 
reflects a physiologic process designed to 
maintain a proper cell census. Contact with 
a single KRT5+ airway stem cell prevents 
secretory and club cell dedifferentiation in 
vitro (12), and tracheal submucosal glands 
exhibit limited stem cell activity even in the 
absence of injury (13). Live imaging of intes-
tinal crypts reveals continuous and stochas-
tic exit from and reentry into the ISC com-
partment (15), implying that barriers for 
differentiation or dedifferentiation are in-
herently low. However, the primary purpose 
of dedifferentiating airway, intestinal, liver, 
and prostate cells is not to enable tissue re-
covery. Therefore, they should be regarded 
as facultative stem cells; that is, they have 
other physiologic functions and realize a 
latent stem cell capacity only under duress.
This distinction from “reserve” stem cells 
is not merely semantic. Emphasis in regen-
erative therapy research belongs on any 
cell population with restorative potential; 
in vivo findings now direct attention away 
from putative reserve cells and toward ded-
ifferentiation as a common means for tissue 
recovery. The absence of dedicated reserves 
and the inherent cellular ability to toggle 
between stem and differentiated states also 
inform cancer biology. Because mutations 
realize oncogenic potential only in long-
lived cells, both frontline and reserve stem 
cells represent candidate sources of cancer, 
in contrast to differentiated cells, which are 
generally short-lived. However, oncogenic 
mutations that arise in differentiated cells 
could become fixed upon dedifferentiation, 
thus enabling tumor development.
Notably, stem cell properties and in-
terconversion with their progeny are not 
stereotypic. ISCs divide daily into two 
identical daughters, whereas hematopoie-
tic stem cell replication is infrequent and 
asymmetric. Severe loss of blood stem cells 
does not elicit substantial dedifferentiation 
and is rescued only by adoptive stem cell 
transfer. Immature secretory precursors 
dedifferentiate more readily than termi-
nally mature airway cells (12), whereas fully 
differentiated cells fuel liver and prostate 
regeneration. Cell plasticity in each case 
is determined by local signals. Unknown 
factors from KRT5+ tracheal stem cells, for 
example, suppress secretory cell dediffer-
entiation (12), and specific factors secreted 
from the prostate mesenchyme stimulate 
luminal cell dedifferentiation (14). The in-
testinal mesenchyme probably senses ISC 
attrition to trigger tissue recovery, but the 
spatial and molecular determinants remain 
unknown. Outstanding challenges are to 
identify the signaling pathways that ensure 
a stable cell census and to harness diverse 
regenerative responses to ameliorate acute 
tissue injuries or prevent organ failure. 
Knowing the cellular basis for stem cell re-
covery in different contexts brings us closer 
to those goals. j
 REFERENCES AND NOTES 
 1.  H. Tian et al., Nature 478, 255 (2011).  
 2.  J. H. van Es et al., Nat. Cell Biol. 14, 1099 (2012).  
 3.  N. Barker et al., Nature 449, 1003 (2007).  
 4.  J. R. Rock et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 12771 
(2009).  
 5.  B. D. Tarlow et al., Cell Stem Cell 15, 605 (2014).  
 6.  A. Raven et al., Nature 547, 350 (2017).  
 7.  E. Sangiorgi, M. R. Capecchi, Nat. Genet. 40, 915 (2008). 
 8.  A. Ayyaz et al., Nature 569, 121 (2019).  
 9.  S. J. Buczacki et al., Nature 495, 65 (2013).  
 10.  K. S. Yan et al., Cell Stem Cell 21, 78 (2017).  
 11.  K. Murata et al., Cell Stem Cell 26, 377 (2020).  
 12.  P. R. Tata et al., Nature 503, 218 (2013).  
 13.  T. J. Lynch et al., Cell Stem Cell 22, 653 (2018).  
 14.  W. R. Karthaus et al., Science 368, 497 (2020).  
 15.  L. Ritsma et al., Nature 507, 362 (2014).  
10.1126/science.abb6848
CELL THERAPY
Emerging cell 
therapy for 
biliary diseases
Gallbladder organoids 
repair bile ducts in mouse 
and human liver
By Simone N. T. Kurial1 and 
Holger Willenbring1,2,3 
C
ell therapy has potential as an alterna-
tive to liver transplantation. The liver 
cell therapy field has been focused on 
diseases affecting hepatocytes, which 
provide most of the liver’s metabolic 
and synthetic functions (1). Less atten-
tion has been paid to biliary diseases affecting 
cholangiocytes, the cells that form the biliary 
tree. This system consists of intrahepatic and 
extrahepatic bile ducts and the gallbladder, 
and drains bile into the intestine. Because 
bile is toxic when it accumulates in the liver, 
biliary diseases can lead to liver fibrosis and 
failure, necessitating liver transplantation (2). 
Despite progress in bioengineering bile ducts 
for treating extrahepatic biliary diseases (3), 
few studies have explored cell therapy for 
diseases affecting intrahepatic bile ducts. 
Still, evidence is accumulating that supports 
the feasibility of cell therapy for intrahepatic 
biliary diseases, and on page 839 of this issue, 
Sampaziotis et al. (4) provide the most defini-
tive example to date. 
Cell therapy for intrahepatic biliary dis-
eases requires repopulating large stretches of 
injured bile ducts or forming new ones. As 
in any emerging field, distinct approaches 
have been taken to meet these requirements, 
varying in the source of transplanted cells, 
recipient characteristics, and route of cell de-
livery (see the table). Most studies have used 
primary cells, including expandable cells iso-
lated from the extrahepatic part of the human 
biliary tree by two-dimensional or organoid 
culture (4, 5). In culture, these cells lose re-
gional specification but maintain core chol-
angiocyte identity; after engraftment in the 
liver, they acquire intrahepatic cholangiocyte 
1Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine 
and Stem Cell Research, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 2Department of Surgery, 
Division of Transplant Surgery, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 3Liver Center, University 
of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 
Email: holger.willenbring@ucsf.edu
INSIGHTS  |  PERSPECTIVES
786    19 FEBRUARY 2021 • VOL 371 ISSUE 6531
Published by AAAS
on March 10, 2021
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 

Tissue regeneration: Reserve or reverse?
Ramesh A. Shivdasani, Hans Clevers and Frederic J. de Sauvage
DOI: 10.1126/science.abb6848
 (6531), 784-786.
371
Science 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/371/6531/784
REFERENCES
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/371/6531/784#BIBL
This article cites 15 articles, 2 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title 
(print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science 
Copyright © 2021, American Association for the Advancement of Science
on March 10, 2021
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from

