# Extracted PDF text — 2026-07-16 — part 2/9
# papers Bideau2021_CellMolLifeSci_AnimalRegenerationReview .. Dumoulin2021_JCompNeurol_AxonGuidance+SpinalCordMidline
# anchor per paper: ===== <note-stem> =====

===== Bideau2021_CellMolLifeSci_AnimalRegenerationReview =====
Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-021-03760-7
REVIEW
Animal regeneration in the era of transcriptomics
Loïc Bideau1 · Pierre Kerner1   · Jerome Hui2   · Michel Vervoort1   · Eve Gazave1 
Received: 5 November 2020 / Revised: 4 January 2021 / Accepted: 9 January 2021 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
Animal regeneration, the ability to restore a lost body part, is a process that has fascinated scientists for centuries. In this 
review, we first present what regeneration is and how it relates to development, as well as the widespread and diverse nature 
of regeneration in animals. Despite this diversity, animal regeneration includes three common mechanistic steps: initia-
tion, induction and activation of progenitors, and morphogenesis. In this review article, we summarize and discuss, from 
an evolutionary perspective, the recent data obtained for a variety of regeneration models which have allowed to identify 
key shared mechanisms that control these main steps of animal regeneration. This review also synthesizes the wealth of 
high-throughput mRNA sequencing data (bulk mRNA-seq) concerning regeneration which have been obtained in recent 
years, highlighting the major advances in the regeneration field that these studies have revealed. We stress out that, through 
a comparative approach, these data provide opportunities to further shed light on the evolution of regeneration in animals. 
Finally, we point out how the use of single-cell mRNA-seq technology and integration with epigenomic approaches may 
further help researchers to decipher mechanisms controlling regeneration and their evolution in animals.
Keywords  Regeneration · Evolution · Transcriptomics · Bulk mRNA-seq · scRNA-seq · Signaling pathways
What is regeneration?
Concept and definition
From the fantastical features of mythic beasts to the routine 
tasks of less remarkable organisms, the description of spe-
cies’ restorative properties has only increased our collective 
fascination for regeneration. Seemingly every civilization 
has built folklore as well as some basic knowledge on the 
topic, like the regenerating eye of the ancient Egyptians’ 
god Horus, or the newt-like regenerative feats of the Aztec 
deity Xolotl, without forgetting the regenerating liver of 
the ancient Greeks’ Prometheus [1]. Regeneration has also 
drawn the attention of great minds and scientific communi-
ties throughout history. Starting from antiquity with Aristo-
tle and Pliny the Elder [1], regeneration studies were espe-
cially successful with the works of Abraham Trembley on 
hydras [2] and Lazzaro Spallanzani’s work on salamanders 
[3], with many important concepts and biological principles 
discovered in their wake [4, 5]. However, it seems that no 
one attempted to sketch a clear definition of regeneration 
until the seminal work of Thomas Hunt Morgan in 1901 
[6]. Morgan juxtaposed three different phenomena that could 
be covered by the notion of regeneration: egg and embryo 
regeneration, physiological regeneration, and restorative 
regeneration. These are better known today as “embryonic 
regulation” (the compensation of cell or tissue loss during 
embryogenesis), “homeostatic regeneration” (periodic loss 
and replacement of cells and tissues, such as the gut lin-
ing, epidermis, hair and feathers turn over) and “restorative 
regeneration” (replacement of lost body parts or the entire 
body), respectively [7, 8]. It is noteworthy that the term 
“regeneration” is also used for both unicellular organisms 
and microbial communities, or even ecosystems [9]. We will, 
however, restrict our discussion to restorative regeneration 
Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences
Supplementary Information  The online version contains 
supplementary material available at https​://doi.org/10.1007/s0001​
8-021-03760​-7.
 *	 Michel Vervoort 
	
michel.vervoort@ijm.fr
 *	 Eve Gazave 
	
eve.gazave@ijm.fr
1	
Université de Paris, CNRS, Institut Jacques Monod, 
75006 Paris, France
2	
School of Life Sciences, Simon F.S. Li Marine Science 
Laboratory, State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China

	
L. Bideau et al.
1 3
processes of individual metazoans in this review. Some 
authors [10] define this phenomenon as “the restoration, 
the replacement of a lost body part through traumatic injury 
(either amputation or autotomy)”. It is, however, not a suf-
ficiently precise definition and may raise potential confusion 
between healing or scarring and regeneration. It also does 
not properly clarify the overlap of regeneration and asexual 
reproduction in some species. Furthermore, one of the main 
disagreements in the domain of regeneration is whether it 
should be considered as a part of development [8].
Regeneration versus development
For many authors, the striking similarities between embry-
onic development and regeneration make the case for con-
sidering the restorative capabilities found in adults as a part 
of development, which therefore would need to be extended 
throughout the life of animals. Yet, there are major dif-
ferences between these processes that would, by contrast, 
suggest that embryonic development and regeneration are 
distinct phenomena with an overlapping use of common 
cellular and genetic mechanisms. There are, for instance, at 
least eight restorative regeneration-specific processes found 
in some or all metazoans [8, 11].
1.	 Wound healing: the formation of an epithelial barrier 
against environmental insults necessary for regeneration 
to take place [12].
2.	 Immune response: the deployment of the animal immune 
system at the site of injury seems crucial for normal 
regeneration in some metazoans [13].
3.	 Induced reprogramming: resident or distant adult cells—
either stem cells or differentiated cells—are activated by 
the injury and may require unique pathways to recover 
embryonic-like cell behaviors [11].
4.	 Transdifferentiation: regeneration depends in some cases 
on the redifferentiation of dedifferentiated adult cells 
into different cell types than their original ones [12].
5.	 System integration: regenerated cells and tissues are 
integrated and organized in existing differentiated struc-
tures, with an emphasis with the continuation of existing 
systems, such as the vascular and nervous systems [11].
6.	 Nerve dependency: many regeneration events seem to 
depend on the activity of the established nervous system 
[14].
7.	 Size recognition and termination: positional identity and 
positional memory in regenerating structures allow for 
a harmonious growth until an adequate morphology is 
reconstructed [15].
8.	 Proliferation of differentiated cells: only during the 
regeneration of some organs or structures will fully dif-
ferentiated cells start dividing again [16].
Despite these specificities, it remains unclear whether 
these regeneration-specific responses could justify their 
exclusion from bona fide developmental mechanisms. One 
way to advance the “regeneration versus development” dis-
cussion is to rigorously classify the different types of regen-
eration living organisms can perform.
Different types of regeneration
T.H. Morgan proposed a dualistic grouping of varieties of 
regeneration based on the requirement of active cell prolif-
eration [6] that to date is still used. At the time regarded as a 
regeneration expert [17], Morgan compiled a thorough syn-
thesis on earlier regenerative studies, leading him to propose 
a basic subdivision of regeneration into two general types 
called epimorphosis and morphallaxis. In epimorphosis, an 
organism, such as a salamander restoring its limb, regen-
erates by recruiting dividing cells, whereas morphallaxis 
refers to the remodeling of existing tissue, exemplified by a 
regenerating Hydra.
Further precisions and discussion points followed and 
researchers also frequently try to discriminate blastemal 
regeneration (where the process requires the apparition of a 
mass of undifferentiated cells or blastema) from other types 
of regeneration. Yet some authors warn that blastemas, while 
they look alike in many species, may have wildly different 
origins, ontogenically or evolutionarily [8]. It is also pos-
sible to differentiate regeneration processes involving pre-
existing stem cells (such as in the regenerative prowess of 
planarians relying on migrating stem cells called neoblasts), 
dedifferentiating or transdifferentiating cells, and compen-
satory regeneration involving dividing differentiated cells 
(displayed during human liver regeneration for instance).
Finally, regeneration processes can also be classified 
depending on the extent of their restorative power. A hier-
archical regeneration ladder can therefore be established 
depending on the structures that can be restored, starting 
with cell regeneration, such as axonal regeneration (which 
we will exclude from the present review), organ (O) or tissue 
regeneration, such as the restoration of a newt lens, complex 
structure (CS) regeneration, such as that of limbs, and finally 
whole-body (WB) regeneration, such as restoration of a full 
flatworm from a small body fragment.
All these previous types of regeneration are displayed by 
at least one member of the multicellular organisms in the 
tree of life [18], especially in the metazoan lineage [10], 
which will be our sole point of focus during the remainder 
of this review.
Regeneration at the metazoan scale
Mapping up-to-date data on the regeneration abilities 
of different metazoan lineages can be a crucial tool to 

Animal regeneration in the era of transcriptomics﻿	
1 3
understanding the evolution of regeneration, and discuss-
ing whether a single or independent origins of regenera-
tion scenario is more likely [19, 20]. We therefore gener-
ated such a tree (Fig. 1) encompassing the main metazoan 
lineages. Some broad observations can be made, such as the 
lack of WB regeneration capacity in ecdysozoans and ver-
tebrates, or the almost ubiquitous organ/tissue regeneration 
ability shared by metazoans (with the notable exception of 
nematodes, and uncertainties regarding tardigrades, onych-
ophorans, and priapulids due to the scarcity of experimental 
tests). It is noteworthy that this kind of mapping (Fig. 1) 
highlights the relatively frequent occurrence of regenerative 
abilities among metazoans. An experimental bias towards 
ecdysozoan and vertebrate models may have hindered regen-
erative research so far, but a recent slew of new and uncon-
ventional model systems offers an opportunity to reduce the 
paucity of our basic knowledge on regeneration [21].
Mechanisms of regeneration
Despite the high variability of regenerative types and pro-
cesses displayed by metazoan species, a careful mecha-
nistic analysis revealed what appears to be a conserved, 
tri-modular organization of the restorative regeneration 
of complex structures, such as appendages and the whole 
body [20, 22] (Fig. 2). These modules are, by chronologi-
cal order:
1.	 Wound closure through the formation of an epithelium 
and general body response to injury
2.	 Regeneration induction, usually by the recruitment of 
progenitors and the formation of a blastema
3.	 Morphogenesis involving patterning, differentiation, and 
growth
Bound to overlap in some instances, these three suc-
cessive modules are nevertheless distinct in their nature. 
A thorough exploration of the processes and genetic path-
ways involved in these modules in diverse animal mod-
els might therefore highlight specificities or conserved 
similarities at the metazoan level. We will review here the 
common signals and pathways that have been described 
as crucial for the transition between wound healing and 
blastema formation, which constitutes the initiation of 
regeneration per se. Following that, we will discuss the 
diversity of both the origins and potency of the progeni-
tors populating the blastema. Lastly, we will highlight 
the mechanisms that allow the regeneration of functional 
structures across metazoans.
Fig. 1   Mapping regeneration types on the metazoan phylogenetic 
tree. Most metazoan phyla include representative species with docu-
mented abilities to regenerate organs (O, yellow circles) and complex 
structures (CS, green circles). While absent (struck-through circles) 
in all vertebrates, ecdysozoans, and some other scattered lineages, 
whole-body regeneration (WB, blue circles) is a widespread phe-
nomenon among Metazoa. Lack of substantiated data (gray circles) 
is mostly observed in Brachiopoda and Ecdysozoa. Phylogenetic tree 
topology is derived from recent metazoans’ phylogenies [175, 176], 
with still-controversial lineage positioning depicted with dotted lines. 
Porifera, Hydra, flatworm, octopus, Platynereis, Drosophila, sea-star, 
enteropneust, Ciona, zebrafish, and axolotl silhouettes are adapted 
from PhyloPic.org (not to scale) [Illustrators: Hillewaert Keesey, 
Duygu Özpolat, Michelle Site, Jake Warner, Yan Wong]

	
L. Bideau et al.
1 3
Initiation of regeneration in metazoans
Three major pathways are emerging as key factors for the 
initiation of regeneration in various animal species: ROS 
(reactive oxygen species) signaling, apoptosis, and innate 
immunity (Fig. 2a).
ROS
ROS is an umbrella term used for a wide variety of oxidiz-
ers containing oxygen, such as hydrogen peroxide ­(H2O2) 
and superoxide anion radical ­(O2
.−), both of which are pro-
duced as metabolic by-products [23]. They are the cause of 
Fig. 2   Key common steps in 
eumetazoan regeneration. a Ini-
tiation of regeneration. Within 
minutes after amputation, 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
are produced at the wound site. 
Their accumulation promotes 
apoptosis, and activates innate 
immunity. Innate immunity is 
also activated by apoptotic cells 
and produces pro-inflammatory 
cytokines (green squares) that 
sustain apoptosis. Surround-
ing cells enter mitosis through 
apoptosis-induced prolifera-
tion (AiP) and the diffusion of 
mitogenic pro-inflammatory 
cytokines. b Blastema forma-
tion. A blastema, whatever is 
its origin (migration of resident 
stem cells or local dedifferen-
tiation) is always composed of 
undifferentiated mesenchymal 
cells covered by a wound 
epidermis. Cell proliferation 
within the blastema as well as 
its innervation are crucial for 
a successful regeneration. c 
Morphogenesis. Four important 
aspects of this complex step 
are depicted: role of innerva-
tion, positional memory of the 
remaining tissue, patterning of 
the regenerated region in par-
ticular in term of axes, and cell 
differentiation. More details can 
be found in the main text
H 0
-
0
Migration of resident stem cells
Positional memory
Innervation
Patterning
x
y
z
Initiation
Blastema formation
Morphogenesis
a
tissue
tissue
amputation 
plane
wound 
epidermis
nerve
mitotic 
cell
Amputation
ROS
Innate immunity
Apoptosis
Cell proliferation
b
c

Animal regeneration in the era of transcriptomics﻿	
1 3
oxidative stress and damage, and can lead to cell death; how-
ever, they are also involved in cell signaling during various 
processes, especially regeneration. In vertebrates, notably 
during zebrafish fin or Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration, 
ROS are produced very early at the wound site and their 
production is sustained after wound closure [24, 25]. In both 
species, lowering the level of ROS by inhibiting NADPH 
oxidase (NOX) activity—which is responsible for their 
production—strongly reduces the size of the regenerated 
structure, notably by reducing the number of proliferative 
cells in the blastema. A similar role has been demonstrated 
during planarian regeneration, as inhibiting ROS produc-
tion affects stem cell early differentiation, resulting in an 
improper regeneration and shortening of the blastema [26]. 
The importance of ROS has been also acknowledged during 
Drosophila imaginal disc regeneration, where they activate 
JNK and p38 signaling pathways which in turn trigger the 
JAK/STAT pathway required for regeneration [27]. Finally, 
in the cnidarian Hydra, ROS are produced at the wound site 
briefly after amputation and might therefore be required for 
proper regeneration in this species as well [28].
Cell death
ROS are known to trigger cell death [29], especially by 
apoptosis, and there is now clear evidence that apoptosis 
promotes regeneration through the so-called apoptosis-
induced compensatory proliferation (AiP) [30]. During 
Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration, apoptosis does not fol-
low amputation immediately, but triggers cell prolifera-
tion later on [31]. Two rounds of apoptosis happen quite 
early during zebrafish fin regeneration; the second round 
co-occurs with the peak of ROS production and triggers 
subsequent cell proliferation which is crucial for blas-
tema formation [24]. In both species, blocking apoptosis 
at early time points after amputation impairs regeneration. 
In planarians, two rounds of apoptosis happen as well, 
co-occurring with increased cell divisions: the first hap-
pens early after amputation and is restricted to the wound 
region, while the second spreads throughout the organism 
and happens later during regeneration [32]. While apop-
tosis is required for tissue remodeling during planarian 
regeneration [33], a causal link between apoptosis and cell 
division has not been demonstrated. Lastly, Hydra head 
regeneration and the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis 
oral regeneration provide another example of AiP, within 
cnidarians. In Nematostella, a burst of apoptotic activity 
appears at the cut site shortly after amputation. Pan-cas-
pase inhibitors hamper both apoptosis and proliferation 
which subsequently block regeneration [34]. In Hydra, 
there is an early round of apoptosis followed by cell pro-
liferation induced by the diffusion of Wnt molecules from 
apoptotic bodies [35]. Wnt-containing apoptotic bodies are 
also found in regenerating zebrafish epidermis and shown 
to promote proliferation of adjacent stem cells through 
Wnt signaling [36]. Thus, the chain of events, starting with 
ROS production which triggers apoptosis and in turn leads 
to cell proliferation, is emerging as a widely distributed, 
and possibly conserved, key pathway involved in regen-
eration initiation in Eumetazoa (Cnidaria plus Bilateria).
Innate immunity
Innate immunity appears to have an important role dur-
ing the first step of regeneration, especially in verte-
brates. In regenerating zebrafish fins and salamander 
limbs, both neutrophils and macrophages populate the 
wound region quickly after amputation, and the depletion 
of macrophages shortly after amputation tilts the balance 
in favor of inflammation, which results in a significant 
reduction of blastema size and impaired regeneration 
[37]. Yet, pro-inflammatory cytokines are secreted after 
amputation as well [13] and were shown to be important 
for early regeneration: knockdown (KD) of interleukin-8 
(IL-8; also known as CXCL8) prevents the recruitment of 
neutrophils at the wound site and the normal expression of 
inflammatory genes during the first phases of zebrafish fin 
regeneration [38]. IL-8 KD delays regeneration and leads 
to defective recruitment of monocytes and granulocytes 
during salamander limb regeneration [39]. The implication 
of innate immunity during regeneration in other phyla is 
less obvious as the available data are scarcer, but growing 
evidence hints at a similar importance. In both planarians 
and Hydra, mRNA-seq data for regenerative tissues show 
an up-regulation of numerous genes annotated as innate 
immunity-related, notably lectins, metalloproteinases, and 
putative members of Toll-like Receptor (TLR) signaling 
[40, 41].
It is now well-established that ROS signaling, apoptosis, 
and immune response to injury play major roles in the first 
steps of regeneration in many animals. ROS production is 
the earliest signal, being detectable in some species within 
minutes after the injury, and could serve as a wound sensor. 
Apoptosis and immune response to injury are shown to start 
acting slightly later to control activation of progenitors and 
correct patterning of the reformed tissues. It must be noted 
that those three pathways are extremely intricate and can 
trigger each other easily, in any direction [29, 42, 43].
Recruitment and activation of progenitors
We will describe two main aspects of this process, the source 
or origin of the pool of undifferentiated cells that constitute 

	
L. Bideau et al.
1 3
the blastema, and the fate and potency of these blastemal 
cells (Fig. 2b).
Origin of blastemal cells
In many animals, the blastema is formed by migratory cells 
that are recruited upon injury. The best and prime instance 
of such is WB regeneration in planarians. The source of their 
blastemal cells has triggered a long scientific controversy 
[44], and it is now fully confirmed that those cells arise from 
undifferentiated resident stem cells called neoblasts. Indeed, 
it has been shown in the planarian Schmidtea mediterranea 
that upon amputation of the anterior-most part of the worm, 
neoblasts rapidly migrate to the wound and form the blas-
tema [45]. The identification of the distant origin of planar-
ian blastemal cells in turn triggered the search for migratory 
cells involved in regeneration in other animals. In annelids, 
such migratory cells were observed in a regeneration con-
text in three species, either through an indirect cell lineage 
approach by S-phase labelling in Enchytraeus japonensis 
[46] and Capitella teleta [47], or using long-term live imag-
ing in Pristina leidyi [48].
Among deuterostomes, regeneration in the colonial ascid-
ians Botrylloides leachi requires the activation of non-cir-
culatory “inner cells” lining the epithelium of blood vessels 
[49]. Upon injury, those cells detach from the epithelium and 
migrate towards the wound where they form aggregates [49]. 
Similarly, in the solitary ascidian Ciona intestinalis, precur-
sors of the regenerating distal oral siphon originate from 
a proximal organ, the branchial sac, whose cells migrate 
upon injury towards the wound [50]. There are examples of 
cell migration in vertebrate’s regeneration as well [51]. Dur-
ing zebrafish fin regeneration, the tracking of Di-I-labelled 
cells proved that migration can occur from distant epithelial 
and connective tissues towards the blastema in a short time 
window (up to 2 days after amputation) [52]. In particular, 
it was shown that, upon amputation, osteoblast progenitor 
cells migrate from their niche in the joints and contribute 
significantly to the regenerated bones [53]. Migration of 
regenerative cells also happens in non-bilaterian species. 
In Hydra, in vivo tracing of Green Fluorescent Protein-
producing (GFP +) interstitial stem cells grafted onto wild-
type (WT) animals showed that those cells migrate upon 
amputation towards the wound and replace the lost tissues 
and stem cells [54]. In Hydractinia echinata, both direct and 
indirect cell tracking techniques showed that cells forming 
the head blastema originate from more posterior tissues in 
the body column [55]. Migration is thus the primary source 
of regenerative cells in several organisms scattered across 
eumetazoans, which advocates for the potent ancestrality 
and conservation of this mechanism in various lineages of 
regenerative animals. Yet, convergence cannot be excluded.
As such, regeneration does not always rely on migratory 
cells. During urodele limb regeneration, blastema forma-
tion does not depend on distant cells but rather on dedif-
ferentiation of local mature tissues abutting the amputation 
plane [56]. For instance, it was shown in transgenic lines of 
adult newts in which myofibers were labelled with fluores-
cent markers that myocytes do dedifferentiate during regen-
eration and proliferate within the blastema [57]. Likewise, 
grafting experiments showed that nerve cell dedifferentiation 
contributes to blastema formation in axolotls [58]. During 
zebrafish fin regeneration, labelling of mature fibroblasts and 
osteoblasts showed that both cell types dedifferentiate and 
actively populate the blastema, as well as the newly regener-
ated tissues [59]. Similarly in mice, which have very limited 
regenerative abilities but are still able to regenerate their 
digit tip after amputation, axons close to the wound degen-
erate, which triggers the dedifferentiation of their associ-
ated Schwann cells [60]. Those cells participate in the blas-
tema formation, and are crucial for its proper growth [60]. 
In the annelid Platynereis dumerilii, indirect evidence by 
S-phase labelling also suggests that posterior body regen-
eration mainly occurs through local dedifferentiation [61]. 
Histological analyses also support the presence of dediffer-
entiation during regeneration in various species, such as the 
amphioxus Branchiostoma lanceolatum [62], some echino-
derms [63, 64] and the jellyfish Polyorchis penicillatus [65]. 
Lastly, the blastema can also originate from the activation of 
local resident stem cells. In Xenopus tadpoles and zebrafish 
larvae, muscle satellite cells close to the wound are acti-
vated and populate the blastema [66]. Similarly, satellite 
cells participate in regeneration in axolotls [57] and larval 
newts [67]. In zebrafish, both dedifferentiated osteoblasts 
and undifferentiated cells, the osteoblast progenitors contrib-
ute to bone regeneration [51, 53]. In mice digit tips, most of 
the blastema is formed thanks to activation of several types 
of resident stem/progenitor cells [68]. Finally, outside ver-
tebrates, during leg regeneration of the crustacean Parhyale 
hawaiensis, the blastema is partly formed by normally qui-
escent cells located in the muscles, resembling vertebrate 
satellite cells [69].
Fate and potency of blastemal cells
A second important aspect is to define the identities of 
blastemal cells, in particular whether a blastema contains 
pluripotent and/or tissue-specific (multipotent or unipo-
tent) stem/progenitor cells. As advanced techniques of cell 
tracking and fate mapping are required for these identities 
to be properly investigated, data are still scarce. However, 
two opposite models are emerging. It was hypothesized for 
a long time that morphologically indistinct blastemal cells 
constitute a pool of multi/pluripotent progenitors [70]. This 
assertion was properly proven in the planarian Schmidtea 

Animal regeneration in the era of transcriptomics﻿	
1 3
mediterranea in which a subset of neoblasts called ‘cNeo-
blasts’ can restore regenerative abilities when injected in 
small numbers into lethally irradiated hosts [71]. A single 
cNeoblast can even replenish an entire irradiated animal. 
Acoels worms (Acoelomorpha) harbor neoblasts as well, 
even though it is still not clear whether they correspond to 
a homologous cell type and have the exact same properties 
[72, 73]. This led to the hypothesis that the involvement of 
multi/pluripotent stem cells during regeneration could be 
conserved across bilaterians [74]. As such, in the ascidian 
Ciona intestinalis, regeneration occurs from a unique stem 
cell niche, the branchial sac, whose progenitors can give rise 
to both muscle and nervous tissues [75]. Outside bilaterians, 
the existence in Hydra of multipotent stem cells, the inter-
stitial cells or i-cells, was well-known for a long time [76] 
and it has been shown that those stem cells could migrate 
upon injury and participate in regeneration [54]. Similarly, 
in Hydractinia, regeneration of the head of a polyp involves 
the migration of multipotent i-cells [55].
In contrast, in vertebrates, amphibians, zebrafish, or mam-
mals, blastemal cells are lineage-restricted stem/progenitor 
cells. In Xenopus, grafts of GFP + tissues onto WT animals 
proved that during tadpole tail regeneration, the spinal cord 
and notochord are regenerated by their own remnants which 
dedifferentiate and proliferate at the amputation stump, while 
muscles are reformed only through the activation of satellite 
cells [77]. Similar grafting experiments, recently supported 
by data obtained with CRIPSR/Cas9 technology, led to the 
same conclusions in axolotls in which cartilage, muscle, or 
nervous cells are unable to switch to another lineage during 
regeneration [58, 78]. The conservation of cell lineages dur-
ing regeneration is also documented for zebrafish fin regen-
eration, with a strict separation of fate between osteoblasts, 
fibroblasts and epidermal cells [79]. Likewise, cell tracing 
in mice showed a strict restriction of fate during digit tip 
regeneration between germ layers, and that bone and car-
tilage on the one hand, and tendons and vasculature on the 
other hand do not transdifferentiate into one another [68]. 
Thus, strict lineage restriction during regeneration appears 
to be a conserved feature among vertebrates. It must however 
still be noted that there are examples in which mesodermal 
progenitors, during regeneration, can expand their progeny 
compared to the one produced in homeostatic conditions 
[80, 81].
Redifferentiation of the progenitors 
and morphogenesis
Another major question is how differentiation of blastemal 
cells is controlled, especially in terms of size and pattern-
ing of regenerated structures, to produce a fully functional 
structure which usually displays shape, size and function 
in accordance with its position in the body (e.g., along 
anterior–posterior and dorsal–ventral axes), and similar to 
the one that was amputated. Two main points will be dis-
cussed here: how the amputated tissues keep in memory 
what the structure to be regenerated is, as well as the impor-
tance of nervous tissues and reinnervation for proper regen-
eration (Fig. 2c).
Positional memory during regeneration in bilaterians: role 
of mesodermal tissues
Planarians, given their outstanding regenerative abilities, 
are particularly relevant models to study how positional 
information is encoded, said information being required for 
the blastema to regenerate the proper structure depending 
on its position along the body of the animal. Witchley and 
colleagues [82] searched for genes exhibiting a regional-
ized expression pattern that they refer to as Position Control 
Genes (PCG). Strikingly, it appears that expression of these 
genes is almost entirely restricted to the muscles of the body 
wall. Upon any kind of amputation, their overall pattern is 
rapidly re-established in the amputated fragments, which 
allows for the correct specialization of the activated neo-
blasts forming the blastema [82]. A similar expression of 
PCG and similar role of muscles have been shown during 
Hofstenia regeneration [83]. In vertebrates, positional infor-
mation seems to be encoded in mesodermal tissues as well. 
In axolotl, grafts of GFP + tissues into WT animals showed 
that cartilage-derived cells possess proximo-distal identity 
[58]. Intercalation assays where distal blastemas are grafted 
upon proximal stumps confirmed that connective tissue 
cells contain proximo-distal information that allows proper 
regeneration of the limb [84]. Zebrafish posterior fins are 
also able to maintain their shape through regeneration with 
longer peripheral fin rays and shorter central fin rays. Fin 
ray grafts that are displaced along the proximo-distal axis 
retain memory of their origin and will not regenerate accord-
ing to their new position [85]. Given that epidermal tissues 
of the graft are quickly replaced by the host epidermis, this 
memory is most likely also carried by the mesoderm [85].
Importance of innervation
Although proper functional and mechanistic evidence is 
still scarce in most animals, nerve-dependent regeneration 
appears to be shared among metazoans (reviewed in [14]). 
The role of innervation during regeneration was particu-
larly highlighted in the salamander limb in which dener-
vation impedes a blastema to grow and differentiate [86] 
and rerouting a peripheral nerve underneath an epidermal 
wound triggers the formation of an ectopic limb [87]. Re-
innervation induces a gradient of the growth factor nAG, a 
ligand for the receptor Prod1 which is crucial for the estab-
lishment of the proximo-distal axis during regeneration [88]. 

	
L. Bideau et al.
1 3
Furthermore, it was shown that nerves induce the up-regu-
lation of a histone deacetylase (HDAC) in the blastema just 
before the differentiation stages. HDAC expression could 
modify the epigenetic landscape of the blastema and allows 
its differentiation as the inhibition of HDAC activity results 
in a severely delayed regeneration [89]. In planarians, nerves 
were shown to be crucial for the patterning of regenerative 
parts along with cell–cell communication through the gap 
junctions. Severing the ventral nerve cord and blocking gap 
junctions lead to the formation of ectopic heads in place of 
tails [90]. More recently, modeling of planarian regenera-
tion suggested that the diffusion of small molecules alone 
cannot explain the quick and stereotypical reestablishment 
of the PCG pattern in body fragments of various sizes [91]. 
The authors of this study proposed that nerves may provide 
a scaffold for the directional transport of morphogens, and 
therefore that initial nerve polarity would determine the 
antero-posterior axis of regenerating fragments.
As for development, many entangled developmental 
genes and signaling pathways exert crucial functions in the 
later stages of regeneration, i.e. the patterning and morpho-
genesis of the regenerated structures. In the next section, we 
review how genome-wide transcriptomic analyses allowed 
to identify such genes and pathways involved in regeneration 
in diverse animals and how these approaches may help to 
better understand the evolution of regeneration in animals.
Insights from regeneration bulk 
transcriptomic data
While having been intensively studied morphologically dur-
ing the first part of the twentieth century, animal regenera-
tion withdrew from developmental biology’s center stage 
with the rise of genetic and molecular developmental studies 
in the 70s [10, 92]. Indeed, the main developmental biol-
ogy models that emerged at that time (i.e. Drosophila, C. 
elegans, Mus musculus), while having been instrumental in 
providing insights into many biological questions, were of 
limited interest to study restorative regeneration due to their 
restricted regenerative abilities (Fig. 1) [10]. Conversely, the 
majority of key regeneration model species were not easily 
amenable for functional analysis [93]. We are, however, cur-
rently witnessing a strong revival of interest from the scien-
tific community for regeneration [92, 93]. New mechanis-
tic studies of regeneration are mainly fostered by technical 
advances, notably high-throughput sequencing technologies 
that are currently widely and successfully applied to less 
conventional regeneration models.
Bulk mRNA‑seq data uncover the transcriptional 
profiles of various types of regeneration in many 
non‑model species throughout metazoans
High-throughput mRNA sequencing, commonly called bulk 
mRNA-seq, is a popular technology used nowadays to moni-
tor changes in gene expression that accompany complex and 
dynamic biological processes [94]. This unbiased approach 
provides a timed in-depth overall view of the transcriptomic 
landscape of cells participating in regeneration. By estimat-
ing and comparing relative gene expression levels with a high 
degree of accuracy, identifying thousands of differentially 
expressed genes that may play crucial roles during regenera-
tion steps is now a fairly straightforward process. In the last 
ten years, a huge amount of mRNA-seq data was gathered, 
with more than 100 studies on species (around 50) belong-
ing to almost all metazoan lineages with regenerative abili-
ties (Figs. 1 and 3, Supplementary Table 1). Unsurprisingly, 
the main bilaterian model systems for regeneration, namely 
flatworms (Platyhelminthes [95]), salamanders and Xenopus 
(Lissamphibia [96]), and the zebrafish (Actinopterygii [97]), 
encompass the majority of bulk mRNA-seq studies (Fig. 3, 
Supp. Table 1). In addition, many studies investigated regen-
eration in Mammalia, although their regenerative potential is 
Fig. 3   Diversity and number of 
bulk mRNA-seq regeneration 
studies. Major groups of meta-
zoans and number of regen-
eration studies dealing with 
whole-body regeneration (WB), 
complex structure regeneration 
(CS) and organ regeneration (O) 
in each group are mentioned

Animal regeneration in the era of transcriptomics﻿	
1 3
more limited, driven by possible applications for regenera-
tive medicine [98]. In contrast, while non-bilaterian lineages, 
namely Porifera [99], Placozoa, Ctenophora, and Cnidaria, 
harbor extensive regeneration capabilities [10], very few 
studies have investigated their transcriptomic changes dur-
ing regeneration, with the noticeable exceptions of Cnidaria 
[100, 101]. In terms of phylogenetic distribution, information 
from important regenerative groups, i.e., Ctenophora [102], 
Nemertea [103], Cephalochordata [62], and Mollusca [104] 
(as well as more under-looked ones: Brachiopoda, Phoronida, 
Ectoprocta, Gastotricha, Entoprocta, Chaetognatha, Rotifera, 
Priapulida, Xenoturbellida [10]) is still missing in current 
existing datasets.
For the other main clades (Acoelomorpha, Annelida, 
Arthropoda, Hemichordata, Tunicata, Mammalia), data 
come mostly from one or two species, which prevents any 
generalization to the entire group. A single species cannot be 
considered as representative of its whole lineage, especially 
concerning a character as labile as regeneration. Regenera-
tion has a rather rich evolutionary history, as species-specific 
innovations are frequent among closely related species often 
exhibiting very different regenerative abilities [12, 103, 
105]. In contrast, in Platyhelminthes, up to seven species 
displaying various regeneration features have been molecu-
larly studied, uncovering the regulatory network at the ori-
gin of head regeneration (see below) [106–111]. So far, our 
knowledge of changes in transcription during regeneration 
concerns more than 50 species and various types of regen-
eration, including whole-body regeneration of Cnidaria, 
Acoelomorpha, Tunicata, and Planaria, regeneration of com-
plex structures, such as body axis (Annelida, Hemichordata), 
appendages (Actinopterygii, Lissamphibia and Arthropoda), 
and organ regeneration (Vertebrata) (Fig. 1, Supp. Table1).
The overwhelming majority of these studies has been 
performed on adult animals, with only a couple of stud-
ies investigating larval stages (in sea stars [112]), juvenile 
(Xenopus tadpoles [113]) and newborn (rats [114] and mice 
[115]), which leaves a gap in our greater comprehension of 
regeneration processes. The majority of available data are 
series of mRNA-seq data at different time points after an 
amputation or a wound, which cover the three main afore-
mentioned steps of regeneration and therefore allow us to 
finely highlight the dynamics of the process. In a couple of 
earlier studies [116, 117], the data provided were restricted 
to one specific regenerative stage (usually a blastema stage) 
or time point, and are consequently much less informative. 
Altogether, these bulk mRNA-seq studies made significant 
strides toward our understanding of regeneration and have 
given us the opportunity to further shed light on its evolution 
using a comparative approach [98, 112, 118].
Major advances in the regeneration field revealed 
by bulk mRNA‑seq
New questions on regeneration can be addressed thanks to 
bulk mRNA-seq data and their comparative analyses. Four 
of those major topics will be discussed below.
Regeneration versus development
Whether adult injury-induced regeneration is a post-embry-
onic developmental process or a phenomenon distinct from 
development is a long-standing, unresolved scientific ques-
tion. On the one hand, regeneration has its proper evolu-
tionary history and contains specific features not found dur-
ing development [8]. On the other hand, restoring complex 
tissue structures upon injury involves the reactivation of 
developmental processes that are specific to the regenerated 
structure and that have to remain available in adult stages 
[119]. Transcriptomic data allowed to address this question 
by defining, in a couple of species, to which extent regenera-
tion and developmental programs share molecular common-
alities and present specificities. A recent study on the cnidar-
ian Nematostella vectensis (sea anemone) sought to answer 
this question for the first time on a greater scale, thanks to 
the comparison of a large time series of mRNA-seq data for 
development and regeneration [34, 101]. This study revealed 
that regeneration uses a partial and rewired embryonic gene 
regulatory network (GRN), with regeneration‐specific mod-
ules driving cellular events unique to regeneration, such as 
apoptosis [34]. Along the same line, another recent study 
investigated the process of skeletogenesis in the echinoderm 
Amphiura filiformis (brittle star) during both embryogenesis 
and arm regeneration [120]. This analysis focused mainly on 
the role of the FGF signaling pathway during skeletogenesis 
and supports the hypothesis that regeneration recapitulates 
development in this species. While these seminal analyses 
pointed out similarities between development and regen-
eration in both the investigated species, more studies are 
required to fully address the question of the relationships 
between development and regeneration in Metazoa.
Patterning
Like an embryo, a regenerating body region must be meticu-
lously patterned to ensure that only the appropriate struc-
tures are formed, at the proper location, and with the cor-
rect size and shape [7]. Patterning during regeneration is 
regulated by positional memory, a cellular property that 
involves adult cells spared from injury and maintains nec-
essary information for structures’ replacement [121]. Posi-
tional memory has been studied mainly in the context of 
appendages and main body axis regeneration. Comparison 
of tissue transcriptomes at different anatomical locations was 

	
L. Bideau et al.
1 3
performed during appendage regeneration in both zebrafish 
[121] and axolotls [122]. This enabled the identification of 
several candidate transcripts involved in positional memory 
along the proximo-distal axis of the limb (such as the RNA-
binding protein cirbp, which plays a cytoprotective role, 
and kazald1, whose knockout in blastema impairs regenera-
tion) and caudal fin (such as transcription factors of the dlx 
and msx families, known to be involved in the patterning of 
developing appendages), paving the way for future mecha-
nistic studies [121, 122]. Which programs drive anterior/
posterior (AP) regeneration in bilaterians, but also apical/
basal (or oral/aboral) regeneration in cnidarians, is a promi-
nent question in the field. In Hydra, while a similar initial 
transcriptional response is observed early after amputation 
on either side of the oral/aboral axis, dramatically different 
programs are set up later on, involving BMP signaling on 
the basal part and Wnt-β-catenin pathway on the apical side 
[123]. The important role of the latter during apical regen-
eration has been described in both Hydra and Hydractinia in 
which knockdown (KD) of Wnt3 impedes regeneration upon 
decapitation [35, 124]. Furthermore, incubation of Wnt3 
protein induces the formation of ectopic “heads” on body 
columns [125]. Similarly, in Nematostella, Wnt-β-catenin 
members are highly expressed in the oral pole compared to 
the aboral one [126]. Strikingly, the Wnt-β-catenin pathway 
is also a central regulator of axial polarity during regenera-
tion of a variety of bilaterian species. In the larva of the sea 
star Patiria miniata, Wnt ligands and Frizzled receptors are 
up-regulated posteriorly during regeneration, suggesting that 
Wnt-β-catenin may have a role in AP patterning [112]. In 
the annelid Aeolosoma viride, inhibition or overactivation 
of the Wnt-β-catenin pathway impairs head regeneration 
[127]. In the planarian Schmidtea, Wnt-β-catenin activation 
specifies posterior regeneration while its inhibition (through 
NOTUM) specifies anterior regeneration [107, 128]. KD of 
β-catenin results in the regeneration of a head in place of a 
tail [128], and KD of notum in the opposite outcome [129]. 
Similarly, in the Acoelomorpha Hofstenia, Wnt-β-catenin 
is activated during posterior regeneration [130, 131]: KD 
of Wnt-β-catenin positive mediators results in anterior-like 
structures in place of the tail, and KD of Wnt inhibitors in 
tail structures in place of the head [73]. A gene regulatory 
network for posterior regeneration initiation has recently 
been described, with a Wnt ligand (Wnt-3) being transcrip-
tionally regulated by an early wound response factor (Egr) 
[131]. The Wnt-β-catenin pathway is also responsible for 
other crucial functions in later stages of regeneration. In axo-
lotls, its inhibition prevents normal regeneration and results 
in the formation of a spiky outgrowth [132], while its global 
activation results in malformations of regenerated skeletal 
tissues [133]. Similarly, in zebrafish fin regeneration, inhi-
bition of Wnt-β-catenin signaling early after amputation 
prevents blastema formation [132], while later on during 
blastema differentiation, its inhibition hinders proper bone 
calcification [134]. During mouse digit tip regeneration, 
Wnt-β-catenin pathway activation in the epidermal progeni-
tors is crucial for the differentiation of the regenerated nail, 
but also for blastema growth and overall regeneration [135]. 
Besides highlighting the role of the Wnt-β-catenin in regen-
eration success, the comparison of head and tail regenera-
tion transcriptomes in Schmidtea led to another important 
and unanticipated observation. While their transcriptome 
profiles were initially very different, they later converged to 
a shared core regenerative program [107]. In stunning con-
trast, in the Syllidae Sphaerosyllis hystrix and Syllis gracilis 
(annelid worms), anterior and posterior regenerations do not 
rely on a common transcriptomic landscape: the posterior 
regeneration program is indeed more related to the one used 
during posterior growth (growth by addition of segments in 
the posterior body part of uninjured juvenile animals) than 
to the head regeneration program [136].
Variations in regenerative capabilities
Regenerative capacity varies greatly across animals but 
also across the life cycle of a given species [10]. Why do 
certain animals possess substantial regenerative capacities 
(at least during a specific period of their life cycle), while 
others lack such amazing abilities? Answering this crucial 
question is fundamental to implementing medical strategies 
aiming to unlock the regenerative potential of humans. To 
start answering this question, researchers have exploited 
the vast richness of regeneration patterns in animals. Xeno-
pus is an amphibian species that does not display life-long 
regenerative capacity, as this ability is restricted to the 
pre-metamorphic larval stages (with the exception of the 
retina) [137]. Lee-Liu and colleagues investigated Xenopus 
spinal cord regeneration during its regenerative and non-
regenerative stages, revealing differences in the timing of 
the transcriptional response and in the inventory of regulated 
transcripts involved in broad biological processes including 
neurogenesis, metabolism, immune response and inflamma-
tion, cell cycle, development, and response to stress [113]. 
The axolotl Ambystoma mexicanum is another amphibian 
which can regenerate its appendages in a nerve-dependent 
manner: regeneration does not occur in denervated limbs 
[96]. Interestingly, repeated limb amputations lead to regen-
eration defects and failure [138]. Two studies explored the 
transcriptomic landscape of those impaired regenerations 
in comparison to normal regenerating limbs, laying down a 
detailed blueprint of mis-regulated genes hindering regener-
ation, such as amphiregulin, an EGF-like ligand [138, 139]. 
Similarly, comparison between regenerating tails versus non-
regenerating limbs were performed in the lizard Podarcis 
muralis, revealing the importance of small nucleolar RNAs 
and Wnt signaling pathways for tail regeneration [140]. In 

Animal regeneration in the era of transcriptomics﻿	
1 3
planarians, while some species, such as Schmidtea, are able 
to reform a full animal from a single pluripotent stem cell 
[71], many others lack (or have limited) regenerative abili-
ties and notably are unable to regenerate their anterior part 
upon amputation [106, 110]. Procotyla fluviatilis and Den-
drocoelum lacteum, for example, fail to regenerate their head 
if amputated too posteriorly along their body axis. Compara-
tive transcriptomic analysis between regeneration-competent 
and non-competent tissues revealed that the Wnt signaling 
pathway is aberrantly activated in non-competent tissues and 
that downregulation of this pathway is sufficient to restore 
head regeneration from regeneration-non-competent tissues 
[106, 110]. These two seminal papers revealed that manipu-
lating a single signaling pathway can be sufficient to reverse 
the evolutionary loss of regenerative potential in planarians.
Evolutionary history of regeneration
The origin and evolution of regeneration in animals is a 
long-standing debate, and while several ecological reasons 
and evolutionary hypotheses have been proposed, why and 
how regeneration abilities evolved remain a mystery [10]. 
Nevertheless, as regeneration is found in species that belong 
to all of the main branches of the metazoan tree, the pos-
sibility that this ability is an ancestral feature of animals 
and might therefore rely on homologous mechanisms and 
genetic networks is a tempting hypothesis that requires care-
ful examination [21]. A broad comparative approach, using 
the tremendously increasing quantity of mRNA-seq data 
obtained in the recent years for a large spectrum of metazoan 
species, will be a compelling strategy to address this ques-
tion. A couple of attempts have already been made, leading 
to a patchy inventory of similar, homologous, or co-opted 
components of regeneration networks in distantly related 
species [112, 118, 126]. Hence, comparisons between 
Hydra, Schmidtea, and Patiria whole-body regeneration 
revealed the common involvement, during the immediate-
early phase of regeneration, of cell death/apoptosis-related 
genes, MAPK signaling-associated genes (such as Jnk), and 
the transcription factor-encoding gene Egr. At later stages 
of regeneration, the Wnt signaling pathway is mandatory to 
specify the axis in those three species before the occurrence 
of a massive cell proliferation event which is associated with 
the expression of different genes. Another computational and 
broad comparison between Hydra, Schmidtea and the echi-
noderm Apostichopus japonicus (sea cucumber) identified 
18 common differentially expressed genes with functions 
related to metabolic processes and signaling pathways, such 
as Wnt and cadherin [118]. Our own analysis of the exten-
sive bibliography related to bulk mRNA-seq data during 
regeneration (Supp. Table 1) also points out several major 
signaling pathway components in addition to the Wnt-β-
catenin pathway already mentioned, notably Jak/STAT [113, 
141, 142], Notch [126, 143–145], MAPK [108, 142, 143, 
146], and FGF/FGFR signaling [120, 123, 147, 148], which 
are dynamically expressed in various regeneration contexts 
and steps (Fig. 4). This analysis also unveils the importance 
of less-studied regulators, such as those linked to epigenetic 
Fig. 4   Majors signaling pathways’ components are dynamically 
expressed in various metazoan regeneration contexts. Transcrip-
tomic data highlight the potential importance of 13 major signaling 
pathways during regeneration of 15 main metazoan lineages. Circles 
indicate that at least one transcriptomic study reports differential 
expression of those pathway components. Cnidaria—A Anthozoa; 
Cnidaria—M Medusozoa; Echinodermata—H Holothuroidea; Echi-
nodermata—O Ophiuroidea; Echinodermata—A Asteroidea

	
L. Bideau et al.
1 3
modifications [112, 143, 149], non-coding RNAs [146, 147], 
and importantly many unknown novel or species-specific 
regeneration genes [107, 113, 122, 141, 147, 150].
In summary, we outlined in this section that a compara-
tive evolutionary study of regeneration is a powerful strategy 
to tackle key regeneration-linked questions. There is clearly 
much more to learn from the wealth of information gathered 
so far from mRNA-seq analyses, and this will undoubtedly 
be pursued in the next coming years.
Perspectives
While bulk transcriptomics has duly demonstrated its use-
fulness to identify genes and pathways involved in complex 
phenomena, such as development or regeneration, it is not 
applicable for the identification and characterization of cel-
lular states nor for the comprehension of how those states 
change over the course of such processes [151]. Bulk analy-
sis eliminates crucial information by averaging signals from 
individual cells and does not allow to discriminate between 
changes due to gene regulation and those due to modifica-
tions in cell type composition. In recent years, NGS-based 
technologies for transcriptomics have been exploring a new 
direction for characterizing individual cells, i.e., single-cell 
RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) (e.g., [151, 152]). Methods 
have been developed to use scRNA-seq to characterize cell 
populations and track distinct cell lineages during embryonic 
development (e.g., [153, 154]). These approaches have also 
been used to understand regeneration processes in differ-
ent species across the animal kingdom, including WB in 
the planarian Schmidtea [155–160], anterior body regen-
eration in the earthworm Eisenia [161], tail regeneration in 
Xenopus [162, 163], limb regeneration in the axolotl Amby-
stoma [164–166], fin and heart regeneration in zebrafish 
[167–169], and digit regeneration in mice [170–173].
These studies revealed the diversity of cell populations 
during regeneration and unveiled previously unrecognized 
cell types in the blastema, such as multipotent mesenchymal-
like progenitors producing various connective tissue lineages 
during axolotl limb regeneration [164, 165], regeneration-
organizing cells which belong to the wound epidermis and 
act as a signaling center during Xenopus tail regeneration 
[162], or rare and transient cell types required for WB in 
Schmidtea [160]. Another very promising path to further 
unravel regeneration mechanisms is to combine mRNA-seq 
(both bulk and scRNA-seq) with epigenomic approaches. 
In a recently published seminal study, bulk mRNA-seq, 
scRNA-seq, and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequenc-
ing (ChIP-seq) were used to compare regeneration in two 
distantly related teleosts, zebrafish and African killifish 
Nothobranchius. This study revealed an evolutionarily con-
served regeneration response program involving specific 
regeneration-responsive enhancers, some of which may 
have been repurposed for other functions in vertebrates with 
poor regeneration abilities, such as mammals [168]. Appli-
cation of these transcriptomic and epigenomic approaches, 
and more generally of multi-omics approaches [174] to an 
increasing number of regeneration models will undoubtedly 
help decipher fundamental regeneration mechanisms and 
their evolution in animals.
Acknowledgements  We are grateful to Haley Flom for her diligent 
proofreading of this manuscript.
Funding  This work was supported by the PROCORE—France/Hong 
Kong Joint Research Scheme. Work in the Vervoort team is supported 
by funding from the Labex “Who Am I” laboratory of excellence (No. 
ANR- 11-LABX-0071) funded by the French Government through 
its “Investments for the Future” program operated by the Agence 
Nationale de la Recherche under grant No. ANR-11-IDEX-0005-01, 
the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), the INSB 
department (grant “Diversity of Biological Mechanisms”), the Agence 
Nationale de la Recherche (ANR grants TELOBLAST no. ANR-
16-CE91-0007 and STEM no. ANR-19-CE27-0027-02), the “Asso-
ciation pour la Recherche sur le Cancer” (grant PJA 20191209482), 
and the “Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer” (grant RS20/75-20). JH is 
funded by the TUYF Charitable Trust.
Compliance with ethical standards 
Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.
References
	 1.	 Elliott SA, Alvarado AS (2018) Planarians and the history of 
animal regeneration: paradigm shifts and key concepts in biol-
ogy. Methods Mol Biol 1774:207–239
	 2.	 Trembley A et al (1744) Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire d’un 
genre de polypes d’eau douce, à bras en forme de cornes. Chez 
Jean & Herman Verbeek, Leyde
	 3.	 Spallanzani L (1768) Prodromo di un’opera da imprimersi 
sopra le riproduzioni animali dato in luce da Spallanzani. 
Montanari, Modena
	 4.	 Dinsmore CE (1991) A history of regeneration research: mile-
stones in the evolution of a science. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge
	 5.	 Keller J (1894) Die ungeschlechtliche Fortpflanzung der Süss-
wasserturbellarien. Jen Zeit Naturw 94:3823–3827
	 6.	 Morgan TH (1901) Regeneration. Macmillan, New York
	 7.	 Poss KD (2010) Advances in understanding tissue regen-
erative capacity and mechanisms in animals. Nat Rev Genet 
11(10):710–722
	 8.	 Vervoort M (2011) Regeneration and development in animals. 
Biol Theory 6(1):25–35
	 9.	 MacCord K, Maienschein J (2019) Understanding regenera-
tion at different scales. Elife 8:e46569. https​://doi.org/10.7554/
eLife​.46569​
	 10.	 Bely AE, Nyberg KG (2010) Evolution of animal regeneration: 
re-emergence of a field. Trends Ecol Evol 25(3):161–170

Animal regeneration in the era of transcriptomics﻿	
1 3
	 11.	 Barresi MJF, Gilbert SF (2020) Developmental biology. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford
	 12.	 Brockes JP, Kumar A (2008) Comparative aspects of animal 
regeneration. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 24:525–549
	 13.	 Godwin JW, Pinto AR, Rosenthal NA (2013) Macrophages 
are required for adult salamander limb regeneration. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 110(23):9415–9420
	 14.	 Sinigaglia C, Averof M (2019) The multifaceted role of nerves 
in animal regeneration. Curr Opin Genet Dev 57:98–105
	 15.	 Uemoto T, Abe G, Tamura K (2020) Regrowth of zebrafish 
caudal fin regeneration is determined by the amputated length. 
Sci Rep 10(1):649
	 16.	 Sanchez Alvarado A, Tsonis PA (2006) Bridging the regenera-
tion gap: genetic insights from diverse animal models. Nat Rev 
Genet 7(11):873–884
	 17.	 Sunderland ME (2010) Regeneration: Thomas Hunt Morgan’s 
window into development. J Hist Biol 43(2):325–361
	 18.	 Coffman JA (2019) Regenerative potential across species: an 
eco-evo-devo perspective. In: Palacios D (ed) Epigenetics and 
regeneration. Academic Press, Elsevier, pp 197–214
	 19.	 Slack JM (2017) Animal regeneration: ancestral character or 
evolutionary novelty? EMBO Rep 18(9):1497–1508
	 20.	 Tiozzo S, Copley RR (2015) Reconsidering regeneration in 
metazoans: an evo-devo approach. Front Ecol Evol 3:67. https​
://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2015.00067​
	 21.	 Lai AG, Aboobaker AA (2018) EvoRegen in animals: time to 
uncover deep conservation or convergence of adult stem cell 
evolution and regenerative processes. Dev Biol 433(2):118–131
	 22.	 Galliot B, Chera S (2010) The Hydra model: disclosing an 
apoptosis-driven generator of Wnt-based regeneration. Trends 
Cell Biol 20(9):514–523
	 23.	 Sies H, Jones DP (2020) Reactive oxygen species (ROS) as 
pleiotropic physiological signalling agents. Nat Rev Mol Cell 
Biol 21(7):363–383
	 24.	 Gauron C et al (2013) Sustained production of ROS triggers 
compensatory proliferation and is required for regeneration to 
proceed. Sci Rep 3:2084
	 25.	 Love NR et al (2013) Amputation-induced reactive oxygen 
species are required for successful Xenopus tadpole tail regen-
eration. Nat Cell Biol 15(2):222–228
	 26.	 Pirotte N et al (2015) Reactive oxygen species in planar-
ian regeneration: an upstream necessity for correct pattern-
ing and brain formation. Oxid Med Cell Longev. https​://doi.
org/10.1155/2015/39247​6
	 27.	 Santabarbara-Ruiz P et al (2015) ROS-induced JNK and p38 
signaling is required for unpaired cytokine activation during 
drosophila regeneration. PLoS Genet 11(10):e1005595
	 28.	 Vriz S, Reiter S, Galliot B (2014) Cell death: a program to 
regenerate. Curr Top Dev Biol 108:121–151
	 29.	 Mittal M et al (2014) Reactive oxygen species in inflammation 
and tissue injury. Antioxid Redox Signal 20(7):1126–1167
	 30.	 Fan Y, Bergmann A (2008) Apoptosis-induced compensatory 
proliferation. The Cell is dead. Long live the Cell! Trends Cell 
Biol 18(10):467–473
	 31.	 Tseng AS et al (2007) Apoptosis is required during early stages 
of tail regeneration in Xenopus laevis. Dev Biol 301(1):62–69
	 32.	 Pellettieri J et al (2010) Cell death and tissue remodeling in 
planarian regeneration. Dev Biol 338(1):76–85
	 33.	 Beane WS et al (2013) Bioelectric signaling regulates head 
and organ size during planarian regeneration. Development 
140(2):313–322
	 34.	 Warner JF et al (2019) Regeneration is a partial redeploy-
ment of the embryonic gene network. BioRxiv. https​://doi.
org/10.1101/65893​0
	 35.	 Chera S et al (2009) Apoptotic cells provide an unexpected 
source of Wnt3 signaling to drive hydra head regeneration. 
Dev Cell 17(2):279–289
	 36.	 Brock CK et al (2019) Stem cell proliferation is induced by 
apoptotic bodies from dying cells during epithelial tissue main-
tenance. Nat Commun 10(1):1044
	 37.	 Petrie TA et al (2014) Macrophages modulate adult zebrafish 
tail fin regeneration. Development 141(13):2581–2591
	 38.	 de Oliveira S et al (2013) Cxcl8 (IL-8) mediates neutro-
phil recruitment and behavior in the zebrafish inflammatory 
response. J Immunol 190(8):4349–4359
	 39.	 Tsai SL, Baselga-Garriga C, Melton DA (2019) Blastemal 
progenitors modulate immune signaling during early limb 
regeneration. Development 146(1):dev169128. https​://doi.
org/10.1242/dev.16912​8
	 40.	 Peiris TH, Hoyer KK, Oviedo NJ (2014) Innate immune system 
and tissue regeneration in planarians: an area ripe for explora-
tion. Semin Immunol 26(4):295–302
	 41.	 Wenger Y et al (2014) Injury-induced immune responses in 
Hydra. Semin Immunol 26(4):277–294
	 42.	 Yang Y et al (2015) Programmed cell death and its role in 
inflammation. Mil Med Res 2:12
	 43.	 Fogarty CE, Bergmann A (2017) Killers creating new life: cas-
pases drive apoptosis-induced proliferation in tissue repair and 
disease. Cell Death Differ 24(8):1390–1400
	 44.	 Baguna J (2012) The planarian neoblast: the rambling history 
of its origin and some current black boxes. Int J Dev Biol 
56(1–3):19–37
	 45.	 Wenemoser D, Reddien PW (2010) Planarian regeneration 
involves distinct stem cell responses to wounds and tissue 
absence. Dev Biol 344(2):979–991
	 46.	 Sugio M et al (2012) Stem cells in asexual reproduction of 
Enchytraeus japonensis (Oligochaeta, Annelid): proliferation 
and migration of neoblasts. Dev Growth Differ 54(4):439–450
	 47.	 de Jong DM, Seaver EC (2018) Investigation into the cellular 
origins of posterior regeneration in the annelid Capitella teleta. 
Regeneration (Oxf) 5(1):61–77
	 48.	 Zattara EE, Turlington KW, Bely AE (2016) Long-term time-
lapse live imaging reveals extensive cell migration during 
annelid regeneration. BMC Dev Biol 16:6
	 49.	 Rinkevich Y et al (2010) Piwi positive cells that line the vascu-
lature epithelium, underlie whole body regeneration in a basal 
chordate. Dev Biol 345(1):94–104
	 50.	 Jeffery WR (2015) Distal regeneration involves the age depend-
ent activity of branchial sac stem cells in the Ascidian Ciona 
intestinalis. Regeneration (Oxf) 2(1):1–18
	 51.	 Sehring IM, Weidinger G (2020) Recent advancements in 
understanding fin regeneration in zebrafish. Wiley Interdiscip 
Rev Dev Biol 9(1):e367
	 52.	 Poleo G et al (2001) Cell proliferation and movement during 
early fin regeneration in zebrafish. Dev Dyn 221(4):380–390
	 53.	 Ando K et al (2017) Osteoblast production by reserved pro-
genitor cells in zebrafish bone regeneration and maintenance. 
Dev Cell 43(5):643-650.e3
	 54.	 Boehm AM, Bosch TC (2012) Migration of multipotent inter-
stitial stem cells in Hydra. Zoology (Jena) 115(5):275–282
	 55.	 Bradshaw B, Thompson K, Frank U (2015) Distinct mecha-
nisms underlie oral vs aboral regeneration in the cnidarian 
Hydractinia echinata. Elife 4:e05506
	 56.	 Stocum DL, Cameron JA (2011) Looking proximally and dis-
tally: 100 years of limb regeneration and beyond. Dev Dyn 
240(5):943–968
	 57.	 Sandoval-Guzman T et al (2014) Fundamental differences in 
dedifferentiation and stem cell recruitment during skeletal 
muscle regeneration in two salamander species. Cell Stem Cell 
14(2):174–187

	
L. Bideau et al.
1 3
	 58.	 Kragl M et al (2009) Cells keep a memory of their tissue origin 
during axolotl limb regeneration. Nature 460(7251):60–65
	 59.	 Stewart S, Stankunas K (2012) Limited dedifferentiation pro-
vides replacement tissue during zebrafish fin regeneration. Dev 
Biol 365(2):339–349
	 60.	 Johnston AP et al (2016) Dedifferentiated schwann cell precur-
sors secreting paracrine factors are required for regeneration of 
the mammalian digit tip. Cell Stem Cell 19(4):433–448
	 61.	 Planques A et al (2019) Morphological, cellular and molecular 
characterization of posterior regeneration in the marine annelid 
Platynereis dumerilii. Dev Biol 445(2):189–210
	 62.	 Somorjai IM et al (2012) Vertebrate-like regeneration in the 
invertebrate chordate amphioxus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
109(2):517–522
	 63.	 Fan T et al (2011) Patterns and cellular mechanisms of arm 
regeneration in adult starfish Asterias rollestoni bell. J Ocean 
Univ China 10(3):255–262
	 64.	 Di Benedetto C et al (2014) Echinoderm regeneration: an in vitro 
approach using the crinoid Antedon mediterranea. Cell Tissue 
Res 358(1):189–201
	 65.	 Lin YC, Grigoriev NG, Spencer AN (2000) Wound healing in 
jellyfish striated muscle involves rapid switching between two 
modes of cell motility and a change in the source of regulatory 
calcium. Dev Biol 225(1):87–100
	 66.	 Rodrigues AM et al (2012) Skeletal muscle regeneration in Xeno-
pus tadpoles and zebrafish larvae. BMC Dev Biol 12(1):9
	 67.	 Tanaka EM (2016) The molecular and cellular choreography of 
appendage regeneration. Cell 165(7):1598–1608
	 68.	 Rinkevich Y et al (2011) Germ-layer and lineage-restricted 
stem/progenitors regenerate the mouse digit tip. Nature 
476(7361):409–413
	 69.	 Konstantinides N, Averof M (2014) A common cellular basis 
for muscle regeneration in arthropods and vertebrates. Science 
343(6172):788–791
	 70.	 Stocum DL (1984) The urodele limb regeneration blastema. 
Determination and organization of the morphogenetic field. Dif-
ferentiation 27(1):13–28
	 71.	 Wagner DE, Wang IE, Reddien PW (2011) Clonogenic neoblasts 
are pluripotent adult stem cells that underlie planarian regenera-
tion. Science 332(6031):811–816
	 72.	 De Mulder K et al (2009) Characterization of the stem cell sys-
tem of the acoel Isodiametra pulchra. BMC Dev Biol 9(1):69
	 73.	 Srivastava M et  al (2014) Whole-body acoel regeneration 
is controlled by Wnt and Bmp-Admp signaling. Curr Biol 
24(10):1107–1113
	 74.	 Gehrke AR, Srivastava M (2016) Neoblasts and the evolution of 
whole-body regeneration. Curr Opin Genet Dev 40:131–137
	 75.	 Jeffery WR (2019) Progenitor targeting by adult stem cells 
in Ciona homeostasis, injury, and regeneration. Dev Biol 
448(2):279–290
	 76.	 David CN (2012) Interstitial stem cells in Hydra: multipotency 
and decision-making. Int J Dev Biol 56(6–8):489–497
	 77.	 Gargioli C, Slack JM (2004) Cell lineage tracing during Xenopus 
tail regeneration. Development 131(11):2669–2679
	 78.	 Flowers GP, Sanor LD, Crews CM (2017) Lineage tracing of 
genome-edited alleles reveals high fidelity axolotl limb regenera-
tion. Elife 6:e25726
	 79.	 Tu S, Johnson SL (2011) Fate restriction in the growing and 
regenerating zebrafish fin. Dev Cell 20(5):725–732
	 80.	 Morrison JI, Borg P, Simon A (2010) Plasticity and recovery of 
skeletal muscle satellite cells during limb regeneration. FASEB 
J 24(3):750–756
	 81.	 Tornini VA et al (2017) Live fate-mapping of joint-associated 
fibroblasts visualizes expansion of cell contributions during 
zebrafish fin regeneration. Development 144(16):2889–2895
	 82.	 Witchley JN et al (2013) Muscle cells provide instructions for 
planarian regeneration. Cell Rep 4(4):633–641
	 83.	 Raz AA et al (2017) Acoel regeneration mechanisms indicate an 
ancient role for muscle in regenerative patterning. Nat Commun 
8(1):1260
	 84.	 Nacu E et al (2013) Connective tissue cells, but not muscle cells, 
are involved in establishing the proximo-distal outcome of limb 
regeneration in the axolotl. Development 140(3):513–518
	 85.	 Shibata E et al (2018) Robust and local positional information 
within a fin ray directs fin length during zebrafish regeneration. 
Dev Growth Differ 60(6):354–364
	 86.	 Brockes JP (1984) Mitogenic growth factors and nerve depend-
ence of limb regeneration. Science 225(4668):1280–1287
	 87.	 Endo T et al (2015) The accessory limb model: an alternative 
experimental system of limb regeneration. Methods Mol Biol 
1290:101–113
	 88.	 Kumar A et al (2007) Molecular basis for the nerve depend-
ence of limb regeneration in an adult vertebrate. Science 
318(5851):772–777
	 89.	 Wang MH et al (2019) Nerve-mediated expression of histone 
deacetylases regulates limb regeneration in axolotls. Dev Biol 
449(2):122–131
	 90.	 Oviedo NJ et al (2010) Long-range neural and gap junction pro-
tein-mediated cues control polarity during planarian regenera-
tion. Dev Biol 339(1):188–199
	 91.	 Pietak A et al (2019) Neural control of body-plan axis in regen-
erating planaria. PLoS Comput Biol 15(4):e1006904
	 92.	 Gazave E, Rottinger E (2019) 7th Euro Evo Devo meeting: 
Report on the "Evolution of regeneration in Metazoa" sym-
posium. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. https​://doi.org/10.1002/
jez.b.22897​
	 93.	 Grillo M, Konstantinides N, Averof M (2016) Old questions, 
new models: unraveling complex organ regeneration with new 
experimental approaches. Curr Opin Genet Dev 40:23–31
	 94.	 Lowe R et al (2017) Transcriptomics technologies. PLoS Comput 
Biol 13(5):e1005457
	 95.	 Ivankovic M et al (2019) Model systems for regeneration: planar-
ians. Development 146(17). https​://doi.org/10.1242/dev.16768​4
	 96.	 Joven A, Elewa A, Simon A (2019) Model systems for regen-
eration: salamanders. Development 146(14). https​://doi.
org/10.1242/dev.16770​0
	 97.	 Marques IJ, Lupi E, Mercader N (2019) Model systems for regen-
eration: zebrafish. Development 146(18). https​://doi.org/10.1242/
dev.16769​2
	 98.	 Iismaa SE et al (2018) Comparative regenerative mechanisms 
across different mammalian tissues. NPJ Regen Med 3:6
	 99.	 Kenny NJ et al (2018) Towards the identification of ancestrally 
shared regenerative mechanisms across the Metazoa: a transcrip-
tomic case study in the Demosponge Halisarca caerulea. Mar 
Genomics 37:135–147
	100.	 Vogg MC, Galliot B, Tsiairis CD (2019) Model systems 
for regeneration: Hydra. Development 146(21). https​://doi.
org/10.1242/dev.17721​2
	101.	 Warner JF et al (2018) NvERTx: a gene expression database 
to compare embryogenesis and regeneration in the sea anem-
one Nematostella vectensis. Development 145(10). https​://doi.
org/10.1242/dev.16286​7
	102.	 Ramon-Mateu J et al (2019) Regeneration in the ctenophore 
Mnemiopsis leidyi occurs in the absence of a blastema, requires 
cell division, and is temporally separable from wound healing. 
BMC Biol 17(1):80
	103.	 Zattara EE et al (1898) A phylum-wide survey reveals multiple 
independent gains of head regeneration in Nemertea. Proc Biol 
Sci 2019(286):20182524

Animal regeneration in the era of transcriptomics﻿	
1 3
	104.	 Imperadore P et al (2017) Nerve degeneration and regeneration in 
the cephalopod mollusc Octopus vulgaris: the case of the pallial 
nerve. Sci Rep 7:46564
	105.	 Bely AE (2010) Evolutionary loss of animal regeneration: pattern 
and process. Integr Comp Biol 50(4):515–527
	106.	 Sikes JM, Newmark PA (2013) Restoration of anterior regen-
eration in a planarian with limited regenerative ability. Nature 
500(7460):77–80
	107.	 Kao D, Felix D, Aboobaker A (2013) The planarian regenera-
tion transcriptome reveals a shared but temporally shifted regula-
tory program between opposing head and tail scenarios. BMC 
Genomics 14:797
	108.	 Qin YF et al (2011) Transcriptome profiling and digital gene 
expression by deep-sequencing in normal/regenerative tissues 
of planarian Dugesia japonica. Genomics 97(6):364–371
	109.	 Almazan EMP et al (2018) Girardia dorotocephala transcrip-
tome sequence, assembly, and validation through characteriza-
tion of piwi homologs and stem cell progeny markers. Dev Biol 
433(2):433–447
	110.	 Liu SY et al (2013) Reactivating head regrowth in a regeneration-
deficient planarian species. Nature 500(7460):81–84
	111.	 Wasik K et al (2015) Genome and transcriptome of the regenera-
tion-competent flatworm, Macrostomum lignano. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 112(40):12462–12467
	112.	 Cary GA et al (2019) Analysis of sea star larval regeneration 
reveals conserved processes of whole-body regeneration across 
the metazoa. BMC Biol 17(1):16
	113.	 Lee-Liu D et al (2014) Genome-wide expression profile of the 
response to spinal cord injury in Xenopus laevis reveals extensive 
differences between regenerative and non-regenerative stages. 
Neural Dev 9:12
	114.	 Pibiri M et al (2015) Global gene expression profile of nor-
mal and regenerating liver in young and old mice. Age (Dordr) 
37(3):9796
	115.	 Wang Z et al (2019) Mechanistic basis of neonatal heart regen-
eration revealed by transcriptome and histone modification profil-
ing. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116(37):18455–18465
	116.	 Blythe MJ et al (2010) A dual platform approach to transcript 
discovery for the planarian Schmidtea mediterranea to estab-
lish RNAseq for stem cell and regeneration biology. PLoS ONE 
5(12):e15617
	117.	 Sun L et al (2011) Large scale gene expression profiling dur-
ing intestine and body wall regeneration in the sea cucumber 
Apostichopus japonicus. Comp Biochem Physiol D Genomics 
Proteomics 6(2):195–205
	118.	 Fumagalli MR, Zapperi S, La Porta CAM (2018) Regeneration in 
distantly related species: common strategies and pathways. NPJ 
Syst Biol Appl 4:5
	119.	 Benenati, G., J.I. Montoya-Burgos, and B. Galliot, Towards a 
parsimonious analysis of regeneration and self-repair in animal 
evolution, in Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop 
on Information Processing in Cells and Tissues (IPCAT 2007), 
N.C.T.o. Scheper, Editor. 2007, Jesus College Oxford: Oxford, 
United Kingdom. p. 90–100.
	120.	 Czarkwiani A et al (2019) FGF signalling plays similar roles in 
development and regeneration of the skeleton in the brittle star 
Amphiura filiformis. BioRxiv. https​://doi.org/10.1101/63296​8
	121.	 Rabinowitz JS et al (2017) Transcriptomic, proteomic, and 
metabolomic landscape of positional memory in the caudal fin 
of zebrafish. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114(5):E717–E726
	122.	 Bryant DM et al (2017) A tissue-mapped axolotl de novo tran-
scriptome enables identification of limb regeneration factors. 
Cell Rep 18(3):762–776
	123.	 Wenger Y et al (2019) Generic and context-dependent gene 
modulations during Hydra whole body regeneration. BioRxiv. 
https​://doi.org/10.1101/58714​7
	124.	 Duffy DJ et al (2010) Wnt signaling promotes oral but suppresses 
aboral structures in Hydractinia metamorphosis and regeneration. 
Development 137(18):3057–3066
	125.	 Lengfeld T et al (2009) Multiple Wnts are involved in Hydra 
organizer formation and regeneration. Dev Biol 330(1):186–199
	126.	 Schaffer AA et al (2016) A transcriptional time-course analysis 
of oral vs. aboral whole-body regeneration in the Sea anemone 
Nematostella vectensis. BMC Genomics 17:718
	127.	 Chen C-Y, Yueh W-T, Chen J-H (2020) Canonical wnt signaling 
is involved in anterior regeneration of the annelid Aeolosoma 
viride. bioRxiv. https​://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.01.97244​8
	128.	 Petersen CP, Reddien PW (2009) A wound-induced Wnt expres-
sion program controls planarian regeneration polarity. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 106(40):17061–17066
	129.	 Petersen CP, Reddien PW (2011) Polarized notum activation at 
wounds inhibits Wnt function to promote planarian head regen-
eration. Science 332(6031):852–855
	130.	 Gehrke AR et  al (2019) Acoel genome reveals the regu-
latory landscape of whole-body regeneration. Science 
363(6432):eaau6173. https​://doi.org/10.1126/scien​ce.aau61​73
	131.	 Ramirez AN, Loubet-Senear K, Srivastava M (2020) A regula-
tory program for initiation of Wnt signaling during posterior 
regeneration. Cell Rep 32(9):108098
	132.	 Kawakami Y et al (2006) Wnt/beta-catenin signaling regulates 
vertebrate limb regeneration. Genes Dev 20(23):3232–3237
	133.	 Wischin S et al (2017) Chemical activation of Wnt/beta-catenin 
signalling inhibits innervation and causes skeletal tissue mal-
formations during axolotl limb regeneration. Mech Dev 144(Pt 
B):182–190
	134.	 Wehner D et al (2014) Wnt/beta-catenin signaling defines organ-
izing centers that orchestrate growth and differentiation of the 
regenerating zebrafish caudal fin. Cell Rep 6(3):467–481
	135.	 Takeo M et al (2013) Wnt activation in nail epithelium couples 
nail growth to digit regeneration. Nature 499(7457):228–232
	136.	 Ribeiro RP et al (2019) Comparative transcriptomics in Sylli-
dae (Annelida) indicates that posterior regeneration and regular 
growth are comparable, while anterior regeneration is a distinct 
process. BMC Genom 20(1):855. https​://doi.org/10.1186/s1286​
4-019-6223-y
	137.	 Phipps LS et al (2020) Model systems for regeneration: Xenopus. 
Development 147(6). https​://doi.org/10.1242/dev.18084​4
	138.	 Bryant DM et al (2017) Identification of regenerative roadblocks 
via repeat deployment of limb regeneration in axolotls. NPJ 
Regen Med 2:30
	139.	 Wu CH et al (2013) De novo transcriptome sequencing of axolotl 
blastema for identification of differentially expressed genes dur-
ing limb regeneration. BMC Genomics 14:434
	140.	 Vitulo N et al (2017) Transcriptome analysis of the regenerating 
tail vs. the scarring limb in lizard reveals pathways leading to 
successful vs. unsuccessful organ regeneration in amniotes. Dev 
Dyn 246(2):116–134
	141.	 Petersen HO et al (2015) A comprehensive transcriptomic and 
proteomic analysis of hydra head regeneration. Mol Biol Evol 
32(8):1928–1947
	142.	 Vizcaya-Molina E et al (2018) Damage-responsive elements in 
Drosophila regeneration. Genome Res 28(12):1852–1866
	143.	 Mashanov VS, Zueva OR, Garcia-Arraras JE (2014) Transcrip-
tomic changes during regeneration of the central nervous system 
in an echinoderm. BMC Genomics 15:357
	144.	 Zondag LE et al (2016) Uncovering the pathways underlying 
whole body regeneration in a chordate model, Botrylloides leachi 
using de novo transcriptome analysis. BMC Genomics 17:114

	
L. Bideau et al.
1 3
	145.	 Luttrell SM et  al (2016) Head regeneration in hemichor-
dates is not a strict recapitulation of development. Dev Dyn 
245(12):1159–1175
	146.	 Xu C et al (2020) Transcriptional analysis of scar-free wound 
healing during early stages of tail regeneration in the green anole 
lizard, Anolis carolinensis. J Immunol Regen Med 7:100025. 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.regen​.2019.10002​5
	147.	 Bhambri A et  al (2018) Large scale changes in the tran-
scriptome of Eisenia fetida during regeneration. PLoS ONE 
13(9):e0204234
	148.	 Hutchins ED et al (2014) Transcriptomic analysis of tail regen-
eration in the lizard Anolis carolinensis reveals activation of con-
served vertebrate developmental and repair mechanisms. PLoS 
ONE 9(8):e105004
	149.	 Bando T et al (2013) Analysis of RNA-Seq data reveals involve-
ment of JAK/STAT signalling during leg regeneration in the 
cricket Gryllus bimaculatus. Development 140(5):959–964
	150.	 Arenas Gómez CM et al (2018) Using transcriptomics to enable a 
plethodontid salamander (Bolitoglossa ramosi) for limb regenera-
tion research. BMC Genomics 19(1):704
	151.	 Trapnell C (2015) Defining cell types and states with single-cell 
genomics. Genome Res 25(10):1491–1498
	152.	 Wang Y, Navin NE (2015) Advances and applications of single-
cell sequencing technologies. Mol Cell 58(4):598–609
	153.	 Cao J et al (2019) The single-cell transcriptional landscape of 
mammalian organogenesis. Nature 566(7745):496–502
	154.	 Pijuan-Sala B et al (2019) A single-cell molecular map of mouse 
gastrulation and early organogenesis. Nature 566(7745):490–495
	155.	 Scimone ML et al (2016) Two FGFRL-Wnt circuits organize 
the planarian anteroposterior axis. Elife. https​://doi.org/10.7554/
eLife​.12845​
	156.	 Molinaro AM, Pearson BJ (2016) In silico lineage tracing 
through single cell transcriptomics identifies a neural stem cell 
population in planarians. Genome Biol 17:87
	157.	 Wurtzel O, Oderberg IM, Reddien PW (2017) Planarian epider-
mal stem cells respond to positional cues to promote cell-type 
diversity. Dev Cell 40(5):491-504.e5
	158.	 Plass M et  al (2018) Cell type atlas and lineage tree of a 
whole complex animal by single-cell transcriptomics. Science 
360(6391). https​://doi.org/10.1126/scien​ce.aaq17​23
	159.	 Fincher CT et al (2018) Cell type transcriptome atlas for the 
planarian Schmidtea mediterranea. Science 360(6391). https​://
doi.org/10.1126/scien​ce.aaq17​36
	160.	 Benham-Pyle BW et al (2020) Identification of rare transient 
somatic cell states induced by injury and required for whole-body 
regeneration. BioRxiv. https​://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.13275​
3
	161.	 Shao Y et al (2020) Genome and single-cell RNA-sequencing 
of the earthworm Eisenia andrei identifies cellular mechanisms 
underlying regeneration. Nat Commun 11(1):2656
	162.	 Aztekin C et al (2019) Identification of a regeneration-organizing 
cell in the Xenopus tail. Science 364(6441):653–658
	163.	 Kakebeen AD et al (2020) Chromatin accessibility dynamics and 
single cell RNA-Seq reveal new regulators of regeneration in 
neural progenitors. Elife. https​://doi.org/10.7554/eLife​.52648​
	164.	 Gerber T et al (2018) Single-cell analysis uncovers convergence 
of cell identities during axolotl limb regeneration. Science 
362(6413). https​://doi.org/10.1126/scien​ce.aaq06​81
	165.	 Leigh ND et al (2018) Transcriptomic landscape of the blastema 
niche in regenerating adult axolotl limbs at single-cell resolution. 
Nat Commun 9(1):5153
	166.	 Rodgers AK, Smith JJ, Voss SR (2020) Identification of immune 
and non-immune cells in regenerating axolotl limbs by single-cell 
sequencing. Exp Cell Res 394(2):112149
	167.	 Cao J et al (2016) Single epicardial cell transcriptome sequenc-
ing identifies Caveolin 1 as an essential factor in zebrafish heart 
regeneration. Development 143(2):232–243
	168.	 Wang W et  al (2020) Changes in regeneration-responsive 
enhancers shape regenerative capacities in vertebrates. Science 
369(6508). https​://doi.org/10.1126/scien​ce.aaz30​90
	169.	 Hou Y et al (2020) Cellular diversity of the regenerating caudal 
fin. Sci Adv 6(33):eaba2084
	170.	 Storer MA et al (2020) Acquisition of a unique mesenchymal 
precursor-like blastema state underlies successful adult mam-
malian digit tip regeneration. Dev Cell 52(4):509-524.e9
	171.	 Vaughan AE et al (2015) Lineage-negative progenitors mobi-
lize to regenerate lung epithelium after major injury. Nature 
517(7536):621–625
	172.	 Carr MJ et al (2019) Mesenchymal precursor cells in adult nerves 
contribute to mammalian tissue repair and regeneration. Cell 
Stem Cell 24(2):240-256.e9
	173.	 Johnson GL, Masias EJ, Lehoczky JA (2020) Cellular heteroge-
neity and lineage restriction during mouse digit tip regeneration 
at single-cell resolution. Dev Cell 52(4):525-540.e5
	174.	 Hasin Y, Seldin M, Lusis A (2017) Multi-omics approaches to 
disease. Genome Biol 18(1):83
	175.	 Feuda R et al (2017) Improved modeling of compositional het-
erogeneity supports sponges as sister to all other animals. Curr 
Biol 27(24):3864
	176.	 Laumer CE et  al (1906) Revisiting metazoan phylog-
eny with genomic sampling of all phyla. Proc Biol Sci 
2019(286):20190831
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

===== Blum2021_NatNeuro_MouseSpinalCord+MotorNeurons =====
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-020-00795-0
1Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. 2Stanford Neurosciences Graduate Program, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. 3Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. 4Department of 
Neurology and Neurological Science, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. 5Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA, USA. 6Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, USA. 7These authors contributed equally: Sandy Klemm, Jennifer L. Shadrach.  
✉e-mail: agitler@stanford.edu
T
he CNS receives sensory input from its surroundings, inte-
grates that information and then communicates with muscles 
and organs throughout the body to enact an appropriate 
response. Although a vast, interconnected network of neurons is 
responsible for processing information and planning motor behav-
iors, the transmission of signals from the CNS to peripheral mus-
cles is controlled by one special and rare cell population: the spinal 
motor neuron.
Spinal motor neurons are unique because they reside in the CNS 
yet extend their axons far into the periphery to reach their innerva-
tion targets. Their activity is essential for virtually all skeletal and 
smooth muscle contractions in the body, controlling actions that 
range from the regulation of blood pressure and sweat secretion 
to the contraction of fast-twitch muscle fibers. Because of the vast 
diversity of muscular function within the body, motor neurons must 
tune their synaptic connections and electrophysiological proper-
ties to the unique features of the effector cells they control1. The 
intricate process of establishing motor neuron identity requires 
both cell-intrinsic and cell-extrinsic signaling during spinal cord 
development, culminating in the tightly controlled expression 
of transcription factors and cell signaling molecules that define 
motor circuits2–4.
Considering their physiological importance, it is not surprising 
that spinal motor neuron dysfunction underlies human neuromus-
cular diseases. Indeed, spinal motor neuron degeneration is causally 
responsible for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), spinal muscular 
atrophy and other rare neuromuscular disorders. In many of these 
diseases, certain populations of spinal motor neurons are selectively 
affected, whereas others are spared5. Defining the ground state for 
transcriptional differences between motor neuron subtypes in the 
adult will empower the analysis of molecular mechanisms that sepa-
rate susceptible and resistant populations, leading to a better under-
standing of the molecular underpinnings of cell type vulnerability.
Despite their critical functional role, spinal motor neurons make 
up less than 0.4% of the total cells in the mammalian spinal cord. 
This rarity has made them notoriously difficult to transcriptionally 
characterize6. To overcome this challenge, we developed a motor 
neuron enrichment strategy using a fluorescent reporter mouse 
(Methods). This yielded a ~100-fold increase in representation of 
motor neuron nuclei over past efforts7, enabling us to assess the 
transcriptional diversity of motor neurons in the adult spinal cord.
We performed single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) on 
43,890 nuclei from the adult mouse spinal cord, providing unprec-
edented single-cell resolution of the spinal motor system. This 
method allowed us to transcriptionally distinguish spinal motor 
neurons of the autonomic nervous system (visceral motor neu-
rons) and somatic nervous system (skeletal motor neurons) based 
on many newly discovered marker genes. Foundational work in the 
field of spinal cord development has established the molecular logic 
of spinal neuron differentiation and target specification3,8. These 
efforts set the stage for the present study, in which we performed 
an unbiased analysis and validation of motor neuron diversity in 
the adult mouse spinal cord. We demonstrate that single-nucleus 
transcriptional profiling can provide key insights into the link 
between the brain and the body by defining the neuropeptides, 
transmitters and receptors that motor neurons use to communicate. 
Furthermore, this detailed characterization will enable the develop-
ment of a broad range of molecular tools, including transgenic mice 
Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of the adult 
mouse spinal cord reveals molecular diversity of 
autonomic and skeletal motor neurons
Jacob A. Blum1,2, Sandy Klemm1,7, Jennifer L. Shadrach3,7, Kevin A. Guttenplan   1,2, Lisa Nakayama1, 
Arwa Kathiria1, Phuong T. Hoang1,4, Olivia Gautier1,2, Julia A. Kaltschmidt3, William J. Greenleaf   1,5,6 
and Aaron D. Gitler   1 ✉
The spinal cord is a fascinating structure that is responsible for coordinating movement in vertebrates. Spinal motor neurons 
control muscle activity by transmitting signals from the spinal cord to diverse peripheral targets. In this study, we profiled 
43,890 single-nucleus transcriptomes from the adult mouse spinal cord using fluorescence-activated nuclei sorting to enrich 
for motor neuron nuclei. We identified 16 sympathetic motor neuron clusters, which are distinguishable by spatial localization 
and expression of neuromodulatory signaling genes. We found surprising skeletal motor neuron heterogeneity in the adult spi-
nal cord, including transcriptional differences that correlate with electrophysiologically and spatially distinct motor pools. We 
also provide evidence for a novel transcriptional subpopulation of skeletal motor neuron (γ*). Collectively, these data provide 
a single-cell transcriptional atlas (http://spinalcordatlas.org) for investigating the organizing molecular logic of adult motor 
neuron diversity, as well as the cellular and molecular basis of motor neuron function in health and disease.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 24 | April 2021 | 572–583 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
572

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
and a roadmap for reprogramming stem cells into specific motor 
neuron subtypes, which will unlock genetic access to previously 
uncharacterized spinal motor neuron populations.
Single-nucleus transcriptional profiling of the adult mouse 
spinal cord
Because spinal motor neurons are so scarce, we enriched for motor 
neuron nuclei using a transgenic fluorescent reporter mouse9. This 
technique enabled us to selectively isolate cholinergic nuclei (Chat+), 
a population that encompasses all motor neurons and several inter-
neuron subtypes in the adult mouse spinal cord (Methods). Given 
the important role of non-cell autonomous mechanisms in neu-
rodegeneration, we also isolated non-motor neuron cells, includ-
ing interneurons, astrocytes, microglia and oligodendrocytes. In 
total, we transcriptionally profiled 43,890 nuclei from a collection 
of male, female and mixed cohorts of wild-type adult mice, with 
20–40% of nuclei coming from motor neurons and 60–80% coming 
from other cells in the spinal cord (Fig. 1a). We used graph-based 
methods to cluster nuclei and then annotate cell types across clus-
ters based on averaged expression of common marker genes, includ-
ing genes encoding neurotransmitter signaling machinery (Fig. 1b,c 
and Methods). This approach enabled us to simultaneously char-
acterize motor neurons, while also comparing their transcrip-
tomes with other cells within the spinal cord, to find marker genes 
that are exclusively expressed in cell populations of interest. We 
assigned all profiled nuclei into seven broad categories: excitatory 
interneurons, inhibitory interneurons, cholinergic neurons, astro-
cytes, microglia, oligodendrocytes and endothelial cells (Fig. 1c, 
Extended Data Fig. 1a,b and Supplementary Table 1). Based on 
these categories, we estimate that ~30% (13,589 cells) of the profiled 
single-nucleus transcriptomes correspond to cholinergic neurons. 
This is a considerable improvement in representation over previous 
efforts7 and provides unparalleled access to the transcriptional het-
erogeneity of spinal motor neurons. We provide an interactive web 
portal to access and search all of the spinal cord transcriptome data: 
http://spinalcordatlas.org.
Novel genetic markers distinguish autonomic and skeletal 
motor neurons
We next asked whether the observed transcriptional diversity of spi-
nal motor neurons corresponds to functionally defined cell types, 
as in development (Fig. 1d). We computationally isolated and used 
graph-based clustering (Methods) to segregate all cholinergic neu-
rons into 21 clusters (Fig. 1e). We annotated these subpopulations as 
skeletal motor neurons, cholinergic interneurons and visceral motor 
neurons (Fig. 1f) based on expression of known marker genes as 
well as expression patterns of uncharacterized genes in the publicly 
available Allen Mouse Spinal Cord Atlas10. Specifically, we identified 
cholinergic interneurons based on their expression of Pax2 (ref. 11) 
and visceral motor neurons (that are part of the autonomic ner-
vous system) by their expression of neuronal nitric oxide synthase 
(Nos1+)12. We performed double-label in situ hybridization with 
Chat and Nos1 to confirm that Nos1 is expressed specifically in the 
lateral autonomic columns of the thoracic and sacral spinal cord—
where visceral motor neurons are located (Extended Data Fig. 1c,d).
We hypothesized that the remaining three clusters represented 
skeletal motor neurons—a broad cell population with no known 
genetic markers that distinguish them from visceral motor neurons. 
To test this hypothesis, we examined the Allen Mouse Spinal Cord 
Atlas10 for expression of two genes that are highly expressed in those 
clusters: Bcl6 and Tns1. Indeed, in contrast to ubiquitous (Actb) and 
pan-neuronal (Syn1) transcripts, which show broad expression in 
transverse sections, it is apparent that Bcl6 and Tns1 are strongly 
expressed in small- and large-diameter neurons in the ventral 
horn of the spinal cord (Extended Data Fig. 2a–d). Future studies 
will investigate the expression patterns of these putative markers 
in greater depth, but this pattern is consistent with skeletal motor 
neurons. Our classification of skeletal and visceral motor neurons 
differs from a previous study, which postulated that two other 
genes, Fbn2 and Zeb2, were novel markers specifically expressed in 
α motor neurons13. Instead, our transcriptional data indicate that 
that Zeb2 and Fbn2 are absent from skeletal motor neuron clusters 
(Extended Data Fig. 1e,f), the latter of which we confirmed by mul-
tiplexed Chat/Fbn2 in situ hybridization (Extended Data Fig. 1g). 
Thus, these new transcriptional profiles reveal dozens of possible 
new marker genes that reliably distinguish skeletal motor neurons 
from other cells in the spinal cord. (Fig. 1g and Supplementary 
Table 2a).
Single-nucleus transcriptomics reveals diversity within the 
autonomic nervous system
Unlike skeletal motor neurons, which control voluntary movement, 
visceral motor neurons in the spinal cord control the activity of 
involuntary smooth muscles responsible for regulating homeostatic 
processes throughout the body. These cells are part of the sympa-
thetic nervous system, whereas similar cells in the brain stem are 
part of the parasympathetic nervous system12. These sympathetic 
visceral motor neurons are developmentally very closely related 
to skeletal motor neurons14,15 but do not innervate muscle fibers 
directly. Instead, they project from the lateral autonomic column of 
the spinal cord and synapse onto the peripheral ganglia in the sym-
pathetic chain that control smooth muscle contraction (Fig. 2a)12. 
Neurons of the autonomic nervous system innervate nearly every 
organ in the body and, thus, have different functional requirements 
to fit the needs of each peripheral target (Fig. 2b). Could these func-
tional differences be encoded by transcriptional heterogeneity?
The sympathetic nervous system is organized along the rostral–
caudal axis of the spinal cord, such that visceral motor neurons that 
control the same organs are coarsely grouped near one another 
within the spinal cord (Fig. 2b). Intriguingly, past electrophysi-
ological studies uncovered heterogeneity among visceral motor 
neurons with respect to their membrane properties, responsiveness 
to neurotransmitters16 and sensitivity to hormones such as dopa-
mine17 and noradrenaline18. This evidence strongly suggests that the 
Fig. 1 | Motor neuron enrichment and single-nucleus transcriptional analysis of the adult mouse spinal cord uncovers skeletal and visceral motor 
neuron markers. a, Workflow for cholinergic nucleus enrichment and snRNAseq: GFP+ and TdTomato+ cells were mixed at a ratio between 1:3 and 2:3. 
Plot shows the distribution of canonical cell types with their proportional representation. FACS was used to select appropriate proportion of singlet 
DAPI+GFP+tdTomato− nuclei. b, UMAP of clustered snRNA-seq data from 43,890 transcriptomes. c, Average expression levels per cluster for marker 
genes of each canonical cell population. Cell type labels based on expression patterns of marker genes. d, Schematic depicting expected cholinergic cell 
types in the spinal cord. Visceral motor neurons (blue) innervate sympathetic ganglia; skeletal motor neurons (green) directly innervate muscle fibers; and 
cholinergic interneurons (red) innervate motor neurons and other cells. e, UMAP with graph-based clustering of all cholinergic neurons reveals 21 clusters. 
f, Ranked expression of known marker genes Pax2 (interneurons) and Nos1 (visceral motor neurons), as well as marker gene Anxa4 (skeletal motor 
neurons), by cluster. Cell labels were assigned hierarchically by expression levels of Pax2, Nos1 and Bcl6 and are reported below each plot. Cholinergic 
interneuron clusters that also express Nos1 are denoted with asterisk (*). g, Enriched differentially expressed genes for cholinergic interneurons, skeletal 
motor neurons and visceral motor neurons. Dot size is proportional to the percent of each cluster expressing the marker gene, whereas blue color intensity 
is correlated with expression level. All expression values were log normalized in Seurat50. IN, interneuron; MN, motor neuron.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 24 | April 2021 | 572–583 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
573

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
Cholinergic
neurons 
Rapid spinal cord
dissection
Homogenization,
nuclei extraction
Sucrose cushion,
myelin depletion
FACS sorting for 
cholinergic nuclei
GFP
+
cholinergic
nuclei 
25%
75%
a
b
d
0
1
2
3
5 13 0
7
4 11 9 17 2 19 1
8 16 14 12 15 6 20 3 18 10
Identity
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
Bcl6
Nos1
Skeletal motor neurons
0
1
2
3
10 20 16 7
9 11 17 1 12 8
6 15 2 18 4 14 19 5
3 13 0
Visceral motor neurons
0
1
2
3
20 10 18 3
8 13 5
0
7
1 11 17 15 6
4 16 14 9 12 2 19
Identity
Pax2
Cholinergic interneurons
Foxp2
Cpa6
Gnb4
Qrfpr
Fbn2
Mme
Vwa5b1
Pde8a
Rxfp1
Trabd2b
Ahnak2
Plekhg1
Pdgfd
Chst9
Rreb1
6030407O03Rik
Esrrb
Grin3b
Glis3
Aox1
Pou6f2
Gm12649
Bcl11a
Nxph2
Ebf2
Pax2
Gpc4
Pax8
C1qtnf7
Pitx2
Cholinergic INs
Skeletal MNs
Visceral MNs
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Average expression
Percent expressed
20
40
60
g
Sympathetic 
ganglion
Spinal cord cross-section
Skeletal muscle
Smooth muscle 
innervation targets
Cell_type
Astrocytes
Endothelial cells
Oligodendrocytes
Cholinergic neurons
Inhibitory neurons
Excitatory neurons
e
f
25
13
28
29
11
23
17
4
8
34
21
30
36
19
18
31
1
20
37
33
38
0
5
7
14
32
27
15
24
9
2
35
3
10
16
22
Cldn5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
20
21
22
23
24
25
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
11
10
9
8
7
5
4
3
2
1
0
P2ry12
Trem2
Cx3cr1
Aqp4
Gfap
Mobp
Mbp
Slc6a5
Gad2
Gad1
Slc17a6
Slc17a8
Chat
Slc5a7
Excitatory
interneurons 
Inhibitory
interneurons 
Oligodendrocytes
Endothelial cells
Astrocytes
Microglia/macrophages
c
Chat-Cre nuclear 
reporter mouse
Cholinergic-enriched 
nuclei suspension
Cholinergic-enriched
nuclei suspension
31%
42%
11%
7%
9%
tdTomato+
non-cholinergic
S nuclei
Microglia/macrophages
* *
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 24 | April 2021 | 572–583 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
574

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
visceral motor system contains physiologically distinct subpopula-
tions, but the overarching molecular logic underlying the sympa-
thetic nervous system remains unresolved.
We hypothesized that transcriptomic clusters might reflect dis-
tinct populations of visceral motor neurons that innervate specific 
peripheral targets, are selectively responsive to hormones17 and/or use 
distinct classes of neuropeptides in transmitting signals to peripheral 
ganglia19. To test these hypotheses, we subclustered all visceral motor 
neurons. By limiting the diversity of cell types that are concurrently 
analyzed and subclustering along principal axes of variation specific 
to visceral motor neurons, we resolved 16 transcriptionally distinct 
subpopulations (Fig. 2c). We identified marker genes that are, accord-
ing to the Allen Spinal Cord Atlas10, expressed in the adult mouse 
lateral autonomic column of the spinal cord and are significantly 
enriched in at least one of the 16 visceral motor neuron populations 
(Supplementary Table 3). For each marker gene, we estimated a nor-
malized spatial density of expressing cells along the rostral–caudal spi-
nal cord using data from the Allen Spinal Cord Atlas (Methods). We 
then estimated the positional distribution of cells within each visceral 
motor neuron cluster as an average of these spatial cell distributions, 
weighted by the relative expression levels of the marker genes within 
each cluster (Methods). Although most clusters showed no strong spa-
tial bias along this axis, clusters 3, 7 and 10 showed a clear enrichment 
in the sacral spinal cord (Extended Data Fig. 3a).
To confirm these findings, we selected several genes that are 
enriched in distinct clusters (Rxfp1, Nts, Cdh8, Piezo2, Creb5 and 
Fbn2) and performed in situ hybridizations on sections every 
600 µm along the rostral–caudal axis of the adult spinal cord (Fig. 2d 
and Extended Data Fig. 3b). The results of this analysis were strik-
ing: we confirmed that Rxfp1 (clusters 3 and 7) is expressed exclu-
sively in the sacral spinal cord (Fig. 2d and Extended Data Fig. 3c,d). 
Among other roles, sacral visceral motor neurons modulate sexual 
function—an intriguing finding given that male and female sexual 
organs release relaxin family peptides20,21, which bind to Rxfp1. We 
provide Rxfp1 as an example for how these sequencing data can 
reveal functionally relevant receptor expression, and there are other 
highly specific hormone receptor genes in distinct clusters (Table 1). 
We speculate that differentially expressed hormone receptor expres-
sion among visceral motor populations might be tuned to central 
pre-synaptic inputs and/or peripheral innervation targets.
We found preganglionic clusters to be highly transcriptionally 
divergent, with many individual markers capable of distinguish-
ing specific clusters (Fig. 2e). Strikingly, the most common sub-
type of visceral motor neurons (cluster 0) expresses high levels of 
Neurotensin (Nts) and is, therefore, neurotensinergic. These neuro-
tensinergic motor neurons are distributed throughout the thoracic 
and sacral lateral autonomic columns (Fig. 2d). Nts expression was 
remarkably binary, with Ntson and Ntsoff visceral motor neurons fre-
quently observed directly adjacent to one another in transverse sec-
tions (Fig. 2f). Neurotensin is a 13-amino-acid peptide, which, when 
injected into rats, causes potent inhibition of sympathetic circuits 
that regulate blood pressure, heart rate and inspiratory drive, among 
other effects on the sympathetic nervous system22. Remarkably, 
although Nts is clearly involved in regulating sympathetic nervous 
function, its role in spinal preganglionic motor neurons has not 
been studied. We present strong evidence that Nts expression is a 
defining feature of preganglionic motor identity and provide the 
transcriptional roadmap for more detailed future characterization.
Because several studies showed that hormones, neuropeptides 
and monoaminergic signaling play a crucial role in the sympathetic 
nervous system17–23, we were interested in differentially expressed 
genes that would affect those pathways. We observed remarkable 
specificity of neuropeptides and receptors—as well as neurotrans-
mitter receptors—across visceral motor neuron clusters (Fig. 2f 
and Table 1). Adrenergic receptors, for example, show a remark-
able degree of expression specificity in our single-nucleus sequenc-
ing data. Type I adrenergic receptor Adra1a is expressed in clusters 
3 and 7, which we previously determined to correspond to sacral 
autonomic motor neurons (Fig. 2d). On the other hand, type II 
adrenergic receptor Adra2a is expressed at low levels in all vis-
ceral populations (Extended Data Fig. 3e). We also found highly 
specific expression of neuroactive peptide precursors, such as Penk 
and Sst in cluster 3 (Table 1). Together, these findings suggest that 
the repertoire of neuropeptide and hormone receptor expression 
is an organizing logic within the sympathetic preganglionic motor 
system.
Transcriptional characterization of cholinergic inhibitory 
neurons
Cholinergic interneurons are a rare cell population marked by Pax2 
expression11. They play key roles in the circuits underlying loco-
motor behaviors24 (Fig. 2g). Subclustering revealed eight distinct 
transcriptional populations of cholinergic interneurons (Fig. 2h), 
including clusters 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7 that express high levels of Nos1, 
which is traditionally considered to be a marker of the autonomic 
nervous system in the spinal cord12 (Fig. 2i). It remains to be deter-
mined whether these Nos1+ cholinergic cells are interneurons or, 
instead, a preganglionic motor neuron population that projects into 
the periphery but also expresses the interneuron marker Pax2. A 
subset of this population of cells (clusters 2, 3 and 6) also expresses 
higher levels of Piezo2, a mechanosensitive ion channel involved 
in proprioception, than any other population in the adult spinal 
cord (Supplementary Table 2a). We performed in situ hybridization 
to demonstrate that cholinergic, Piezo2-high cells have large cell 
bodies and predominantly localize just lateral of the central canal 
(Extended Data Fig. 3f). Notably, the localization and size of these 
cholinergic interneurons strongly resemble previously identified 
Pitx2− ‘C3’ cells25.
In contrast, clusters 0 and 1 do not express Nos1 but instead 
express Pitx2—an established marker of partition cells25,26 (Fig. 2j). 
Partition cells are a subset of cholinergic interneurons that make 
direct cholinergic synapses with motor neuron soma and proxi-
mal dendrites. These synapses, referred to as ‘C boutons’, modu-
late motor neuron excitability during locomotor activity25. There 
Fig. 2 | Single-nucleus transcriptomics reveals immense diversity within the autonomic nervous system and partition cells. a, Schematic illustrating the 
position of sympathetic visceral motor neurons (blue) in the lateral autonomic column of the spinal cord. b, Diagram adapted from Espinosa-Medina et al. 
showing innervation targets of the sympathetic nervous system12. c, UMAP with 16 visceral motor neuron subclusters. Inset shows all cells from Fig. 1e 
that were subclustered. d, Frequency of visceral motor neuron subpopulations (Rxfp1+ and Nts+) along the rostral–caudal axis of the spinal cord. Individual 
data points for total visceral motor neurons are shown with filled circles, whereas marker gene-positive cell numbers are shown with filled triangles. n = 3 
biologically independent animals. e, Novel marker genes for each cluster of visceral motor neurons. f, Representative in situ hybridization of Chat, Nts and 
Fbn2 demonstrating Nts expression in visceral motor neurons. Scale bar, 200 µm and 20 µm (inset). n = 3 biologically independent animals. g, Schematic 
showing cholinergic interneuron innervation of skeletal motor neurons as demonstrated previously25. h, UMAP with graph-based clustering labels for 
cholinergic interneurons. Inset shows all cells from Fig. 1e that were subclustered. i, Novel marker genes for cholinergic interneuron clusters are identified. 
j, Expression of Pitx2 in cholinergic interneuron populations, overlaid on UMAP projection from h. Clusters 0 and 1 are Pitx2 positive. All expression 
values were log normalized in Seurat50. Dot size is proportional to the percent of each cluster expressing the marker gene, whereas blue color intensity is 
correlated with expression level in e and i.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 24 | April 2021 | 572–583 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
575

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
a
c
d
Sacral Lumbar
Thoracic
Cervical
Skin
Artery
Adrenal 
medulla
Mesenteric 
ganglion
Pelvic
ganglion
Stomach
Liver
Intestine
Lungs
Heart
Salivary 
gland
15
0
13
8
4
11
12
10
9
1
5
14
6
2
3
7
Rectum
Bladder
Sexual
organs
Celiac ganglion
b
e
f
From Fig. 1e
Sacral
Lumbar
Thoracic
Cervical
Sympathetic visceral
motor neurons  
g
Cholinergic
interneurons 
h
i
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
j
From Fig. 1e
Chat/DAPI
Nts/DAPI
Fbn2/DAPI
Chat/Nts/Fbn2/DAPI
40
Total
Trhr
Nts
Gm10248
Chodl
Mdga1
Frem1
Slc26a7
Sst
Bnc2
Fras1
Gpc3
Slc16a12
Gas7
Lypd6
Tll2
Col24a1
Etv1
Lgr5
Mamdc2
Gm20754
Gm26911
Gm43948
Col12a1
Fn1
Mpped2
Dscaml1
Fstl4
Pde11a
Tox
Pitx2
6
3
2
1
0
7
4
5
4
5
7
2
3
6
Percent expressed
Average expression
2
1
0
–1
0
25
50
75
100
Cartpt
Ror1
Kitl
Fam19a2
Angpl1
Ust
Bmpr1b
Piezo2
Col6a6
Otof
Rarb
Nos1
Chst9
Lama2
Pde5a
Ptprk
Sox6
Hcrtr2
Sdk2
Zfp536
Shisa9
Nwd2
Cpne4
Fstl4
Vegfc
Cluster
Gene
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Sox5
Cdh20
Tnc
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Rxfp1
Total
Nts
Visceral motor counts/slide
Visceral motor counts/slide
30
20
10
0
40
30
20
10
0
Cluster
Percent expressed
Average expression
0
25
50
2
1
0
75
Gene
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 24 | April 2021 | 572–583 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
576

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
is a robust transcriptional signature that separates partition cells 
from other cells in the spinal cord (Supplementary Table 2a,d). 
Of particular interest is Gldn, a gene that is selectively expressed 
in the cluster of cholinergic Pitx2+ cells that have previously been 
identified as partition cells (Extended Data Fig. 3g). Mutations in 
GLDN cause lethal congenital contracture syndrome, a crippling 
neurodegenerative disease in which joints become permanently 
fixed in a bent or straight position27. Future studies should seek to 
examine if GLDN mutations affect partition cells.
Elegant viral tracing studies have delineated partition cells into 
ipsilaterally and contralaterally projecting populations that make 
exquisitely specific synaptic connections with motor neurons28. We 
found a parallel transcriptional bifurcation in partition cells, which 
segregate into two main clusters that are genetically delineated by 
many differentially expressed genes. One example is Nrxn3, which 
encodes a cell adhesion molecule responsible for establishing synap-
tic specificity (Extended Data Fig. 3h). Further in vivo experiments 
will be necessary to definitively show whether these transcription-
ally distinct populations correspond to ipsilateral and contralateral 
projecting populations and whether Nrxn3 plays a functional role 
in partition circuit assembly and maintenance. By identifying these 
populations in our data, we present a detailed molecular character-
ization of partition cells and reveal several novel marker genes of 
cholinergic interneurons cell classes.
Identification of novel α and γ motor neuron markers
Traditionally, skeletal motor neurons have been defined based on 
their muscle innervation target4,29, developmental lineage30, mor-
phology and electrophysiological properties5,31. They are classi-
fied as α, β and γ spinal motor neurons (Fig. 3a). α motor neurons 
directly innervate extrafusal muscle fiber neuromuscular junctions. 
In contrast, γ motor neurons innervate intrafusal muscle spindles32. 
We identified skeletal motor neurons by Tns1/Bcl6 expression (as 
above; Methods) and then subclustered them (Fig. 3b).
To identify putative α and γ motor neurons, we examined expres-
sion patterns of the few robust genetic markers of these populations 
that have been confirmed in adult animals32–35 (Fig. 3c). Clusters 0, 2 
and 6 express high levels of Htr1d and low levels of Rbfox3 and Spp1 
(Fig. 3c and Supplementary Table 2e), suggesting that they represent 
γ motor neurons. The remaining clusters minimally express Htr1d, 
suggesting that they represent α motor neurons (Fig. 3c). We calcu-
lated differential gene expression between putative α and γ motor 
neuron clusters, yielding a collection of novel markers of each popu-
lation (Fig. 3d). To validate a putative marker of γ motor neurons 
(Npas1), we performed multiplexed in situ hybridization with the 
canonical γ markers Htr1d and Chat in the adult spinal cord. These 
experiments demonstrate robust co-expression in cholinergic cells 
in the ventral horn (Fig. 3e). Similarly, we performed in situ hybrid-
ization comparing expression of Chat, a novel α marker (Vipr2), and 
an established marker of α motor neurons (Rbfox3) to confirm that 
Vipr2 is expressed solely in α motor neurons (Fig. 3e and Extended 
Data Fig. 4a,b). Additionally, Vipr2 and Htr1d have non-overlapping 
expression patterns in Chat+ cells (Extended Data Fig. 4c), as do 
Npas1 and Rbfox3 (Extended Data Fig. 4d). As a final confirmation, 
Table 1 | Differentially expressed signaling machinery genes 
among visceral motor neuron clusters
Gene product
Diff. expressed 
cluster
Serotonergic
 Htr2c
Serotonin receptor 2
2, 4
 Htr1f
Serotonin receptor 1
3
 Htr2a
Serotonin receptor 2
13
Adrenergic
 Adra1a
Adrenergic receptor 1
3, 7
Dopaminergic
 Drd2
Dopamine receptor 2
11
Hormone signaling
 Prlr
Prolactin receptor
0, 15
 Trhr
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone 
receptor
0, 15
 Trhde
Thyrotropin-releasing 
hormone-degrading enzyme
7, 11
 Rxfp1
Relaxin family peptide receptor 1
3, 7
 Ghr
Growth hormone receptor
11
 Gfra1
GDNF family receptor
3, 5, 14
 Qrfpr
Orexigenic neuropeptide QRFP 
receptor
0, 13, 15
 Hcrtr2
Orexin receptor type II
3, 5, 15
 Tacr1
Tachykinin (substance P) receptor 1
2, 3
Opioid signaling
 Penk
Enkephalin
3
 Oprm1
Opioid receptor mu 1
9
Neuropeptide (other)
 Sst
Somatostatin
3
 Nts
Neurotensin
0, 15
 Cartpt
Cart peptide
1, 9
Misc. signaling
 Lifr
Lif receptor
4, 5
 Tnc
Tenascin
15
 Tnr
Tenascin receptor
11, 13, 15
All genes listed show differential enrichment in one cluster compared with all others (Wilcoxon 
rank sum test, Padj < 0.01 (Bonferroni) and log2 FC > 0.5).
Fig. 3 | Transcriptional differences between α and γ motor neurons. a, Transverse schematic illustrating the position of skeletal motor neurons (blue) in 
the ventral horn of the spinal cord. γ motor neurons are small and innervate intrafusal muscle fibers. α motor neurons are large and innervate extrafusal 
fibers. b, UMAP with 11 subclustered skeletal motor neuron populations. Inset shows all cells from Fig. 1e that were subclustered. c, Average expression of 
known γ marker Htr1d and α markers Rbfox3 and Spp1 by cluster. d, Heat map with average expression by cluster of differentially expressed genes in α and γ 
populations. Differentially expressed genes between γ and α populations. e, Representative in situ hybridization against Chat/Htr1d/Npas1 and Chat/Rbfox3/
Vipr2 in transverse lumbar spinal cord sections. Arrowheads indicate γ motor neurons in both images. Scale bars, 200 µm (overview) and 50 µm (inset). 
n = 4 biologically independent animals. f, Transverse schematic illustrating γ motor neurons (blue) innervating intrafusal muscle fibers. Inset shows all cells 
from Fig. 3b that were subsequently subclustered. g, Heat map showing fundamental subdivision between γ and γ* motor neurons, hierarchically clustered 
by expression of highly variable genes among all classes of γ motor neurons (Methods). h, Differentially expressed membrane receptors between two main 
populations of γ motor neurons, as well as novel markers that delineate them. i, Representative in situ hybridization against Htr1d/Plch1/Creb5 in transverse 
lumbar spinal cord. Plch1 and Creb5 are expressed reciprocally in Htr1d+ cells and represent γ and γ* motor neurons. Arrowheads demarcate Creb5+ γ motor 
neurons, and * indicates γ* motor neurons. n = 5 biologically independent animals. All differential expression was calculated using Wilcoxon rank sum test and 
adjusted for multiple comparisons (Bonferroni method) (Padj < 0.01 and log2 FC > 0.5). All expression values were log normalized in Seurat50. Scale bars, 50 µm.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 24 | April 2021 | 572–583 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
577

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
Glis3
Sv2b
Stk32a
Stac
Pnoc
Car2
Kcnk13
Syt17
Htr1d
Npas1
Kcnt2
Aox1
Adra1a
Chst9
Dock2
Lypd6
Col5a1
Tpd52l1
Tacr1
Rspo2
Maf
Spint2
Col4a5
Popdc3
Sema3d
Cacna1g
Ecel1
Mrvi1
Col5a3
Vipr2
α and γ marker genes
From Fig. 1e
a
f
b
Identity
Rbfox3
Skeletal motor neurons
d
α motor neurons
γ motor
neurons 
Normalized counts
e
i
h
Nrp2
Sema3c
Pard3b
Klhl1
Trpc5
Pcp4l1
Kitl
Stxbp6
Crtac1
Sphkap
Plch1
Gpr149
Mgat4c
Adamts16
Cacng3
Cdh11
Nwd2
D5Ertd615e
Hs3st4
Kcnj6
Atp2b4
Trpm3
Grm5
Grik1
Grik1
Fgf13
Fign
Shisa9
Hoxd11
Hgf
Egflam
Sema5a
0
1
2
3
4
Normalized counts
0
2
4
6
γ* motor neurons
γ motor neurons
Cell type
Membrane receptors
Novel markers
γ motor
neurons
Htr1f, Htr2a, Dcc, Gria1, Grin2a, Grik1,
Grm5, Grm8, Hcrtr2, Lgr5, Neto1,
Nrp2, Nrip1, Ptpro, Ret, Ryr3
Creb5, Klhl1, Sema6d, Pard3b,
Sema3c, Nrp2, Pcdh7, Tszh2,
Kif26b, Plekhg1, Cacng3, Palld
γ* motor
neurons
Epha4, Gpr149, Rora, Antxr1, Bmpr1b,
Grin2b, Grm1, Grm7, Lrp1b, Nr3c1,
Trpc5,
Rora, Stxbp6, Sgcd, Gpr149,
Plch1, Nos1ap, Rtl4, Prkcd, Crtac1,
Sphkap, Cdh12, Cacna1c
Gamma motor neurons
Chat/DAPI
Htr1d/DAPI
Npas1/DAPI
Chat/Htr1d/Npas1/DAPI
g
Plch1/DAPI
Htr1d/DAPI
Creb5/DAPI
Htr1d/Creb5/Plch1/DAPI
*
*
*
*
Chat/DAPI
Rbfox3/DAPI
Vipr2/DAPI
Chat/Vipr2/DAPI/Rbfox3
2
1
8
4
10
6
0
3
5
9
7
0
0
2.0
2.5
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
1
2
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
8
8
9
9
10
10
Identity
Htr1d
c
Identity
Spp1
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 24 | April 2021 | 572–583 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
578

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
we show that Vipr2 and Npas1 are expressed in reciprocal popula-
tions of motor neurons in the ventral horn (Extended Data Fig. 4e). 
Notably, all existing α motor neuron markers are insufficient on their 
own to distinguish them from other cells in the spinal cord. In con-
trast, Vipr2 is expressed exclusively in α motor neurons. Together, 
these results provide a robust molecular basis for distinguishing α 
and γ motor neurons using newly described genetic markers.
Transcriptional profiles of γ spinal motor neurons reveal 
two highly divergent motor neuron types
γ motor neurons innervate intrafusal muscle fibers, which maintain 
the tension required for skeletal muscle to function properly (Fig. 3f). 
Hierarchical clustering of γ motor neuron marker genes (Htr1d+) 
revealed two main clusters (Fig. 3g), which are distinguished by the 
expression of many individual transcripts (Fig. 3h). When cluster-
ing is taken to an even more granular level, segmenting γ motor 
neurons into four distinct populations (Extended Data Fig. 5a,b); 
however, the majority of variation is captured by dividing them 
into two populations. We noticed that many of the genes enriched 
in the Stxbp6+ population are also expressed more broadly by 
α motor neurons (Extended Data Fig. 5c,d). We named this new 
population γ* (pronounced ‘gamma star’), whereas all other Htr1d+ 
cells are canonical γ motor neurons. We can reliably distinguish γ 
from γ* by reciprocal expression of either Stxbp6 or Plch1 (γ*) and 
Creb5 or Pard3b (γ), both in our single-cell dataset (Extended Data 
Fig. 5e–h), and by in situ hybridization (Fig. 3i and Extended Data 
Fig. 5i,j). Owing to the extensive number of differentially expressed 
genes that separate γ from γ*, as well as the lack of an intermedi-
ate population between them that would suggest that they are two 
functional ‘states’ of γ motor neurons, we hypothesize that these cell 
types represent a fundamental subdivision of the fusimotor system. 
However, future work will be necessary to conclusively determine if 
this subdivision corresponds to transient ‘activity states’ of γ motor 
neurons or developmentally and functionally distinct populations 
of cells.
One kind of skeletal motor neuron that has been defined 
physiologically and anatomically, but not yet transcriptionally, 
is the β motor neuron. This cell type innervates both intrafusal 
and extrafusal fibers and, therefore, has properties of both α and 
γ motor neurons36. Could γ* actually correspond to this histori-
cally elusive and long-sought skeletal motor neuron subtype? We 
present a list of novel markers that differentiate the γ and γ* popu-
lations (Fig. 3h), which will enable a more detailed exploration 
in the future.
Transcriptional analysis of α motor neurons reveals motor 
pools
During development, motor neurons require cell-intrinsic and 
cell-extrinsic cues that coordinate expression of transcription fac-
tors and cell adhesion molecules3,4. This molecular cascade enables 
α motor neurons to form into groups, known as motor pools, 
that cluster alongside one another in the spinal cord and collec-
tively innervate the extrafusal fibers of distinct muscles33 (Fig. 4a). 
Owing to a vast heterogeneity in muscle location throughout the 
body and the types of muscle contractions required for coordinated 
movement, mature α motor neurons display substantial functional 
differences37–39. However, a priori, it was unknown whether electro-
physiological subtypes of α motor neurons with specific innervation 
targets express different transcriptional programs.
Foundational studies strongly suggest that motor neuron tar-
get specificity arises from transcriptional heterogeneity3 during 
development, but whether these differences persist into adulthood 
is unknown. We subclustered the α motor neuron transcriptomes 
(as above; Methods and Fig. 4b). This analysis revealed 12 clusters. 
Most α motor neurons fall in one large population that consists of 
clusters 0, 1 and 4. Other clusters diverge transcriptionally from 
this main population and express specific distinguishing markers 
(Fig. 4c). Cluster 3 expresses Cpne4 and Fign specifically (Fig. 4c 
and Supplementary Table 2f)—genes that were recently shown to 
be highly expressed in intrinsic foot (IF) motor neurons during 
development37. Furthermore, clusters 7 and 8 express high levels of 
Sema3e (Fig. 4c), which, within the developing lumbar spinal cord, is 
a specific genetic marker for gluteus maximus (GLUT)-innervating 
motor neurons40, as well as shoulder-innervating motor neurons in 
the cervical spinal cord41. Sema3e encodes a protein that, together 
with its receptor PlexinD1, contributes to synaptic specificity 
between sensory and motor neurons in that pool40,41. These findings 
raise the hypothesis that single-nucleus transcriptomics is sufficient 
to distinguish subpopulations of α motor neurons that, in the adult 
mouse specifically, innervate unique muscle groups.
To test whether the α motor neuron clusters that we identi-
fied by transcriptomics correspond to functionally defined motor 
pools, which collectively innervate a specific muscle, we performed 
intramuscular injections of fluorescently conjugated cholera toxin 
beta (CTB) subunit—a recombinant protein that is taken up by 
motor neuron axon terminals and transported retrogradely to the 
cell body42. By performing simultaneous CTB labeling and in situ 
hybridization against candidate marker genes for a given popula-
tion, we are able to perform whole-transcriptome characterization 
Fig. 4 | α motor neuron pool, position and electrophysiological subtype reflect transcriptional differences. a, Transverse schematic shows α motor 
neurons (blue) innervating extrafusal muscle fibers. b, UMAP with 12 subclustered α motor neuron populations. Inset shows all α motor neurons from Fig. 3b  
that were subclustered. c, Novel marker gene expression across α motor neuron subpopulations. Dot size is proportional to the percent of each cluster 
expressing the marker gene, whereas blue color intensity is correlated with expression level. d, Representative in situ hybridization against novel (Hcrtr2) 
and known (Cpne4) instrinsic foot (IF) motor pool markers in longitudinal sections, overlaid with CTB-labeled cells that innervate the gluteus maximus 
(GLUT) and IF. n = 5 (IF) and 4 (GLUT) biologically independent animals. e, Proportion of CTB-labeled cells from GLUT and IF that are labeled with Hcrtr2 
and Cpne4 shows novel and known markers that selectively label the IF motor pool. n = 5 (IF) and 4 (GLUT) biologically independent animals. f, Schematic 
illustrating SF (blue), FR (purple) and FF (red) α motor neuron populations innervating type I, type IIa and type IIb fibers, respectively. g, Heat map 
showing all α motor neurons, hierarchically clustered and colored by expression of differentially expressed genes between fast (Chodl+) and slow (Sv2a+) 
α motor neurons, shows three cell populations corresponding to SF, FR and FF motor neurons. Red and blue bars show gene modules enriched in fast- and 
slow-firing α motor neurons, respectively. h, Representative in situ hybridization in longitudinal sections against novel (Kcnq5 and Prkcd) and known (Chodl 
and Sv2a) fast- and slow-firing motor neuron markers, respectively. Images show CTB-labeled cells that innervate a muscle with predominantly fast-twitch 
fibers (TA) and slow-twitch fibers (SOL). n = 5 (TA) and 4 (SOL) biologically independent animals. i, Proportion of CTB-labeled cells from TA and SOL 
that are labeled with Chodl and Kcnq5. The TA has a significantly larger proportion of Chodl+ and Kcnq5+ cells than the SOL, although Kcnq5+ cells are 
significantly less frequently found in both populations. n = 5 (TA) and 4 (SOL) biologically independent animals. Adjusted P (Padj) = 0.0197 (Chodl) and  
P = 0.0262 (Kcnq5). j, Proportion of CTB-labeled cells from TA and SOL that are labeled with Sv2a and Prkcd. The SOL pool has a significantly larger 
proportion of Prkcd+ and Sv2a+ cells than the TA. n = 5 (TA) and 4 (SOL) biologically independent animals. All differential expression calculated using 
Wilcoxon rank sum test and adjusted for multiple comparisons (Bonferroni method) (Padj < 0.01 and log2 FC > 0.5). All expression values were log 
normalized in Seurat50. Scale bars, 50 µm (h) and 75 µm (all others). One-way ANOVA with post hoc Sidak multiple comparison test between same-gene 
conditions. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and ****P < 0.0001. Error bars are s.e.m.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 24 | April 2021 | 572–583 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
579

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
Stac2
Kcnn3
Mapk4
Kcnc2
Plcl2
Gm43122
AC129186.1
Rreb1
Prkcd
Sv2a
Kcnq5
Megf11
Cdh6
Layn
Maf
Kcnt2
Nrp2
Plxdc1
Rspo2
Chodl
Slc44a5
Hmcn1
Shisa9
Mpped2
Ppp1r1c
Sema3e
A330008L17Rik
Cdh8
Clca3a1
Prom1
Gab1
Cdh9
Gm2164
Erbb4
Kcnq5
Chodl
Megf11
Hcrtr2
Grik1
Cpne4
Kcnh7
Cacna1e
Grm5
Etl4
Ptchd4
Pdgfd
Htr1f
Sdk2
Rreb1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Cluster
−1
0
1
2
Average expression
Percent expressed
0
25
50
75
100
a
c
d
α motor neurons
2
0
4
6
1
3
5
7
10
9
8
11
From Fig. 3b
b
e
f
g
Sacral Lumbar
Thoracic
Cervical
Fast- and slow-firing 
α motor neurons
Type IIb fiber
Type I fiber
Type IIa fiber
h
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
Value
Log-normalized counts
Fast
module
Slow
module
CTB
Composite
Hcrtr2
Cpne4
GLUT
IF
CTB
Composite
Kcnq5
Chodl
TA
SOL
CTB
Composite
Prkcd
Sv2a
TA
SOL
FF
FR
SF
Chodl
Kcnq5
Chodl
Kcnq5
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fast motor markers
% total CTB
+ cells
TA
SOL
*
*
Sv2a
Prkcd
Sv2a
Prkcd
0
20
40
60
80
100
Slow motor markers
% total CTB
+ cells
Positive
Negative
TA
SOL
****
****
i
j
Hcrtr2
Cpne4
Hcrtr2
Cpne4
0
20
40
60
80
100
IF markers
% total CTB+ cells
Positive
Negative
****
****
IF
GLUT
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 24 | April 2021 | 572–583 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
580

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
of functionally defined cell populations (akin to performing 
laser-capture microdissection on an anatomically distinct popu-
lation of cells). In other words, the individual marker genes that 
we derive are not the end goal of these experiments but, rather, 
a means to define the full transcriptome of functionally defined 
motor neuron populations. To accomplish this, we first demon-
strated that IF adult motor neurons express the developmentally 
defined IF marker Cpne4 (Fig. 4d,e), whereas other populations of 
motor neurons (GLUT) do not. This experiment enabled the ten-
tative conclusion that cluster 3 from our transcriptional data cor-
responds to IF motor neurons labeled by CTB, because Cpne4 was 
exclusively expressed in that population using orthogonal meth-
ods. However, to conclusively demonstrate this finding, we tested 
a novel, functionally intriguing marker that we found specifically 
expressed in cluster 3 of our single-nucleus experiment (Hcrtr2). 
Similarly, this gene was a robust marker of IF motor neurons (87% 
of IF motor neurons are Hcrtr2+) and not substantially expressed in 
GLUT motor neurons (21% of GLUT motor neurons are Hcrtr2+) 
(Fig. 4d,e). It is intriguing that a specific marker of IF motor neu-
rons, Hcrtr2, encodes a membrane-bound hypocretin (orexin) 
receptor, a gene whose disruption causes muscle weakness and 
cataplexy in animal models43.
We next examined whether Sema3e+ clusters present in our dataset 
correspond to the GLUT motor pool. Indeed, we found an increase 
in proportion of both Sema3e+ and Cdh8+ cells in GLUT-innervating 
motor neurons when compared to the IF motor pool (Extended 
Data Fig. 6a). Overall, our results demonstrate that motor pools in 
the adult mouse have distinct transcriptional properties that can 
be resolved by single-nucleus sequencing of α motor neurons. Still, 
there are far more motor pools (~50)4 than clusters (12). To explain 
this discrepancy, we propose that transcriptional differences among 
adult α motor neurons are more subtle than those that emerge during 
embryonic development, as is the case in the olfactory system44, and 
single-nucleus profiling is only sufficient to delineate more dramatic 
transcriptional differences. We show that the embryonic marker for 
GLUT-innervating motor neurons (Sema3e) is less specific in the 
adult mouse, suggesting that future work should seek to use more 
robust, novel markers (like the ones identified here) to map tran-
scriptional subpopulations onto their peripheral targets. The abun-
dance of specifically expressed genes in each novel population will 
empower further functional study of the adult motor system.
Fast- and slow-firing α motor neurons have divergent 
transcriptional signatures
Skeletal muscles innervated by motor neurons are composed of slow 
(type I), intermediate (type IIa) and fast (type IIx/IIb) twitch fibers, 
each of which requires different patterns of synaptic input (Fig. 4f)31. 
Likewise, α motor neurons innervating these fibers are divided into 
slow-firing (SF), fast fatigue-resistant (FR) and fast-fatigable (FF) 
cell types, each with specific electrophysiological and metabolic 
properties33. Importantly, these groups of α motor neurons have 
drastically different susceptibilities to degeneration in neuromuscu-
lar disorders such as ALS5,45. Thus, determining the transcriptional 
programs that define these classes of motor neurons might pro-
vide insight into divergent function and susceptibility to disease5,31. 
Past work has begun to address this question, leading to the discov-
ery of several markers of FF/FR (Chodl and Mmp9)5 and SF (Sv2a) 
motor neurons. However, the broader transcriptional differences 
beyond these few validated markers have thus far remained elusive.
To identify the gene expression modules that underlie differences 
among SF, FR and FF motor neurons, we segmented all α motor neu-
rons by their mutually exclusive expression of the known markers 
Chodl (fast firing) and Sv2a (slow firing)46. We identified differen-
tially expressed genes between Chodl+ and Sv2a+ α motor neurons 
and then hierarchically clustered cells based on expression of this 
gene set (Fig. 4g). This analysis was sufficient to segment α motor 
neurons into three main populations (Fig. 4g). It is clear that fast 
and slow gene modules are expressed in reciprocal populations of α 
motor neurons across virtually all motor pools but in different pro-
portions (Extended Data Fig. 6c,d). Notably, hierarchical clustering 
of cells revealed three main populations of cells, two of which are 
Chodl+ and one that is Sv2a+. As Chodl is expressed in both FF and 
FR motor neurons, and Sv2a is expressed in SF motor neurons, this 
raises the possibility that the three populations might, in fact, cor-
respond to FF, FR and SF α motor neurons. We identified novel tran-
scripts to distinguish each population, including a putative marker 
of FF α motor neurons (Kcnq5) and a specific marker of SF motor 
neurons (Prkcd). To confirm these findings, we demonstrated that 
Kcnq5 is expressed in a subpopulation of Chodl+ (FF/FR) and Mmp9+ 
(FF/FR) α motor neurons (Extended Data Figs. 6e,f and 7a). We also 
validated that Prkcd is expressed in Sv2a+ α motor neurons and is 
excluded from Mmp9+ motor neurons (Extended Data Fig. 7b,c).
To validate that the expression of the fast- and slow-firing gene 
modules that we identified define electrophysiological subtypes 
of motor neurons, we leveraged unique properties of the soleus 
(SOL) and tibialis anterior (TA) muscles, which consist of predomi-
nantly slow- and fast-twitch fibers, respectively5,47. We performed 
intramuscular CTB injections that label TA- and SOL-innervating 
motor neurons and measured expression of novel FF and SF marker 
genes by in situ hybridization (Fig. 4h–j and Extended Data Figs. 6b 
and 7d,e). In SOL-innervating motor neurons, Prkcd was expressed 
in 69% of cells, whereas Kcnq5 was expressed in just 29%. This trend 
was opposite in the TA, which contained 54% Kcnq5+ cells and only 
28% Prkcd+ cells (Extended Data Fig. 7d,e). We observed almost 
identical patterns of expression for Prkcd and Sv2a; however, it was 
clear that, within these motor pools, Kcnq5 was expressed in only 
a subpopulation of FF motor neurons. Intriguingly, the proportion 
of Kcnq5+ cells in the TA (54%) is quite close to the proportion of 
type IIb fibers in that muscle47. These data support the conclusion 
that Kcnq5 is expressed in FF motor neurons, whereas Chodl is more 
broadly expressed in FF and FR motor neurons—although future 
electrophysiological characterization will be required to demon-
strate this conclusively. In addition, Prkcd is a robust and specific 
marker of SF motor neurons.
Both the FF and SF expression modules contain genes that 
encode subunits of voltage-gated potassium channels (Table 2). 
Potassium channel subtypes play a vital role in determining the 
resting membrane potential and basal firing rate of neurons. The 
differential expression of potassium channel isoforms suggests a 
mechanism through which α motor neuron electrophysiological 
Table 2 | Enriched Gene Ontology (GO) terms among genes in fast- and slow-firing expression modules
Voltage-gated K+ channels
Calmodulin binding
Calcium ion binding
Protein kinase C activity
GO term
GO:0005249
GO:0005516
GO:0005509
GO:0019901
GO term adj P value
4.40 × 10−5
1.50 × 10−4
6.70 × 10−4
4.10 × 10−2
Fast enriched
Kcnq5, Kcnt2
Edil3, Cdh6, Dgkg, Mctp1, Mcc
Prkcb
Slow enriched
Kcnq3, Kcnc2, Kcnd2
Adcy8, Esrrg, Kcnn3, Kcnq3, Unc13c Crtac1, Plch1, Fstl4, Dner
Prkcd
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 24 | April 2021 | 572–583 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
581

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
properties are established31. Furthermore, we found that SF neurons 
specifically express Prkcd, which encodes a protein with a funda-
mental role in determining how cells respond to oxidative stress and 
DNA damage. In contrast, FF motor neurons do not express Prkcd 
but, instead, express high levels of Prkcb (Table 2), which encodes 
a key regulator of autophagy. Dysregulation of each of these path-
ways is thought to be fundamental to ALS ontology and progres-
sion. Collectively, these data reveal a rich transcriptional basis for 
the functional diversity of fast- and slow-firing motor neurons.
Discussion
We report here a detailed molecular characterization of the adult 
mammalian motor system at single-cell resolution. Using a trans-
genic motor neuron enrichment strategy, we have greatly expanded 
the transcriptional characterization of these populations and dis-
covered new divisions within the autonomic and somatic motor sys-
tems. While we were concluding our studies, an independent group 
used an orthologous nuclei enrichment and sequencing strategy to 
provide insight into the heterogeneity of cholinergic neurons in the 
adult mouse spinal cord48.
Within the autonomic motor system, we discovered 16 subpopu-
lations of sympathetic visceral motor neurons, including several 
clusters that localize to the sacral spinal cord. Visceral motor neuron 
subtypes express entirely different repertoires of neuromodulatory 
peptides, such as somatostatin, neurotensin and proenkephalin. 
This suggests an underlying peptidergic logic that governs transmis-
sion between visceral motor neurons and their peripheral targets—a 
long-standing hypothesis that has never been comprehensively dem-
onstrated. Together, our findings inspire the possibility that specific 
visceral motor neuron populations might someday be selectively 
targeted with therapies to treat autonomic dysfunction in humans.
Within the somatic motor system, we present novel α and γ 
motor neuron markers and have identified a new skeletal motor 
neuron population (γ*), which shares the expected features of the 
elusive β motor neuron population. Furthermore, we found that 
transcriptional subpopulations of α motor neurons correspond 
to previously described, distinct motor pools37,41. We propose that 
other transcriptionally distinct α motor neuron populations in our 
dataset might similarly correspond to specialized motor pools, and 
we offer many novel markers to facilitate testing this hypothesis.
Our analysis also reveals gene modules that are selectively 
expressed in electrophysiologically and metabolically distinct pop-
ulations of fast- and slow-firing α motor neurons. These differen-
tially expressed genes offer insight into how motor neuron subtypes 
establish unique biophysical properties that are specifically matched 
to the properties of their muscle innervation targets31. Indeed, our 
analysis reveals that fast- and slow-firing α motor neurons express 
a divergent collection of potassium channel subunits that are spe-
cifically required to tune the resting membrane potential and firing 
rate in neurons. These expression profiles might also help suggest 
approaches to rescue aberrant function in FF motor neurons, which 
specifically degenerate in ALS5,33,45,49.
We have identified new markers for motor neuron populations, 
unlocking unprecedented genetic access to these important cells in 
the adult spinal cord. Defining the transcriptomes of distinct motor 
neuron types introduces the possibility of engineering more refined 
stem cell models and provides a single-cell framework for charac-
terizing their behavior in health and disease.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research report-
ing summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary infor-
mation, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of 
author contributions and competing interests; and statements of 
data and code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41593-020-00795-0.
Received: 4 October 2020; Accepted: 23 December 2020;  
Published online: 15 February 2021
References
	1.	 Haase, G. et al. GDNF acts through PEA3 to regulate cell body positioning 
and muscle innervation of specific motor. Neuron 35, 893–905 (2002).
	2.	 Song, M.-R. & Pfaff, S. L. Hox genes: the instructors working at motor pools. 
Cell 123, 363–365 (2005).
	3.	 Arber, S. Motor circuits in action: specification, connectivity, and function. 
Neuron 74, 975–989 (2012).
	4.	 Dasen, J. S., Tice, B. C., Brenner-Morton, S. & Jessell, T. M. A hox regulatory 
network establishes motor neuron pool identity and target-muscle 
connectivity. Cell 123, 477–491 (2005).
	5.	 Kaplan, A. et al. Neuronal matrix metalloproteinase-9 is a determinant of 
selective neurodegeneration. Neuron 81, 333–348 (2014).
	6.	 Maniatis, S. et al. Spatiotemporal dynamics of molecular pathology in 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science 364, 89–93 (2019).
	7.	 Sathyamurthy, A. et al. Massively parallel single nucleus transcriptional 
profiling defines spinal cord neurons and their activity during behavior. Cell 
Rep. 22, 2216–2225 (2018).
	8.	 Sweeney, L. B. et al. Origin and segmental diversity of spinal inhibitory 
interneurons. Neuron 97, 341–355.e3 (2018).
	9.	 Prigge, J. R. et al. Nuclear double-fluorescent reporter for in vivo and ex vivo 
analyses of biological transitions in mouse nuclei. Mamm. Genome https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00335-013-9469-8 (2013).
	10.	Sunkin, S. M. et al. Allen Brain Atlas: an integrated spatio-temporal  
portal for exploring the central nervous system. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, 
D996–D1008 (2013).
	11.	Burrill, J. D., Moran, L., Goulding, M. D. & Saueressig, H. PAX2 is expressed 
in multiple spinal cord interneurons, including a population of EN1+ 
interneurons that require PAX6 for their development. Development 124, 
4493–4503 (1997).
	12.	Espinosa-Medina, I. et al. The sacral autonomic outflow is sympathetic. 
Science 354, 893–897 (2016).
	13.	Rosenberg, A. B. et al. Single-cell profiling of the developing mouse  
brain and spinal cord with split-pool barcoding. Science 360,  
176–182 (2018).
	14.	Thaler, J. P. et al. A postmitotic role for Isl-class LIM homeodomain proteins 
in the assignment of visceral spinal motor neuron identity. Neuron 41, 
337–350 (2004).
	15.	Dasen, J. S., De Camilli, A., Wang, B., Tucker, P. W. & Jessell, T. M. Hox 
repertoires for motor neuron diversity and connectivity gated by a single 
accessory factor, FoxP1. Cell 134, 304–316 (2008).
	16.	Gilbey, M. P. & Stein, R. D. Characteristics of sympathetic  
preganglionic neurones in the lumbar spinal cord of the cat. J. Physiol. 432, 
427–443 (1991).
	17.	Gladwell, S. J. & Coote, J. H. Inhibitory and indirect excitatory effects of 
dopamine on sympathetic preganglionic neurones in the neonatal rat spinal 
cord in vitro. Brain Res. 818, 397–407 (1999).
	18.	Yoshimura, M., Polosa, C. & Nishi, S. Slow EPSP and the depolarizing action 
of noradrenaline on sympathetic preganglionic neurons. Brain Res. 414, 
138–142 (1987).
	19.	de Groat, W. C. et al. The role of neuropeptides in the sacral autonomic reflex 
pathways of the cat. J. Auton. Nerv. Syst. 7, 339–350 (1983).
	20.	Parry, L. J., McGuane, J. T., Gehring, H. M., Kostic, I. G. T. & Siebel, A. L. 
Mechanisms of relaxin action in the reproductive tract: studies in the 
relaxin‐deficient (Rlx−/−) mouse. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1041,  
91–103 (2005).
	21.	Ivell, R., Kotula-Balak, M., Glynn, D., Heng, K. & Anand-Ivell, R. Relaxin 
family peptides in the male reproductive system—a critical appraisal.  
MHR Basic Sci. Reprod. Med. 17, 71–84 (2010).
	22.	Zogovic, B. & Pilowsky, P. M. Intrathecal neurotensin is hypotensive, 
sympathoinhibitory and enhances the baroreflex in anaesthetized rat.  
Br. J. Pharmacol. 166, 378–389 (2012).
	23.	Franz, D. N., Madsen, P. W., Peterson, R. G. & Sangdee, C. Functional roles 
of monoaminergic pathways to sympathetic preganglionic neurons. Clin. Exp. 
Hypertens. A 4, 543–562 (1982).
	24.	Miles, G. B., Hartley, R., Todd, A. J. & Brownstone, R. M. Spinal cholinergic 
interneurons regulate the excitability of motoneurons during locomotion. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 2448–2453 (2007).
	25.	Zagoraiou, L. et al. A cluster of cholinergic premotor interneurons modulates 
mouse locomotor activity. Neuron 64, 645–662 (2009).
	26.	Enjin, A. et al. Identification of novel spinal cholinergic genetic subtypes 
disclose chodl and Pitx2 as markers for fast motor neurons and partition 
cells. J. Comp. Neurol. 518, 2284–2304 (2010).
	27.	Maluenda, J. et al. Mutations in GLDN, encoding gliomedin, a critical 
component of the nodes of Ranvier, are responsible for lethal arthrogryposis. 
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 99, 928–933 (2016).
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 24 | April 2021 | 572–583 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
582

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
	28.	Stepien, A. E., Tripodi, M. & Arber, S. Monosynaptic rabies virus reveals 
premotor network organization and synaptic specificity of cholinergic 
partition cells. Neuron 68, 456–472 (2010).
	29.	Demireva, E. Y., Shapiro, L. S., Jessell, T. M. & Zampieri, N. Motor neuron 
position and topographic order imposed by β- and γ-catenin activities. Cell 
147, 641–652 (2011).
	30.	Price, S. R. & Briscoe, J. The generation and diversification of  
spinal motor neurons: signals and responses. Mech. Dev. 121,  
1103–1115 (2004).
	31.	Muller, D. et al. Dlk1 promotes a fast motor neuron biophysical signature 
required for peak force execution. Science 343, 1264–1266 (2014).
	32.	Friese, A. et al. Gamma and alpha motor neurons distinguished by expression of 
transcription factor Err3. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 13588–13593 (2009).
	33.	Stifani, N. Motor neurons and the generation of spinal motor neuron 
diversity. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 8, 1–22 (2014).
	34.	Enjin, A. et al. Sensorimotor function is modulated by the serotonin receptor 
1d, a novel marker for gamma motor neurons. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 49, 
322–332 (2012).
	35.	Morisaki, Y. et al. Selective expression of osteopontin in ALS-resistant motor 
neurons is a critical determinant of late phase neurodegeneration mediated 
by matrix metalloproteinase-9. Sci. Rep. 6, 27354 (2016).
	36.	Barker, D., Emonet-Dénand, F., Harker, D. W., Jami, L. & Laporte, Y. Types of 
intra- and extrafusal muscle fibre innervated by dynamic skeleto-fusimotor 
axons in cat peroneus brevis and tenuissimus muscles, as determined by the 
glycogen-depletion method. J. Physiol. 266, 713–726 (1977).
	37.	Mendelsohn, A. I., Dasen, J. S. & Jessell, T. M. Divergent hox coding and 
evasion of retinoid signaling specifies motor neurons innervating digit 
muscles. Neuron 93, 792–805 (2017).
	38.	Machado, T. A., Pnevmatikakis, E., Paninski, L., Jessell, T. M. & Miri, A. 
Primacy of flexor locomotor pattern revealed by ancestral reversion of motor 
neuron identity. Cell 162, 338–350 (2015).
	39.	Landmesser, L. T. The generation of neuromuscular specificity. Annu. Rev. 
Neurosci. 3, 279–302 (1980).
	40.	Fukuhara, K. et al. Specificity of monosynaptic sensory-motor connections 
imposed by repellent Sema3E-PlexinD1 signaling. Cell Rep. 5, 748–758 (2013).
	41.	Pecho-Vrieseling, E., Sigrist, M., Yoshida, Y., Jessell, T. M. & Arber, S. 
Specificity of sensory-motor connections encoded by Sema3e-Plxnd1 
recognition. Nature 459, 842–846 (2009).
	42.	Sürmeli, G., Akay, T., Ippolito, G. C., Tucker, P. W. & Jessell, T. M. Patterns of 
spinal sensory-motor connectivity prescribed by a dorsoventral positional 
template. Cell 147, 653–665 (2011).
	43.	Lin, L. et al. The sleep disorder canine narcolepsy is caused by a mutation in 
the hypocretin (orexin) receptor 2 gene. Cell 98, 365–376 (1999).
	44.	Li, H. et al. Classifying Drosophila olfactory projection neuron subtypes by 
single-cell RNA sequencing. Cell 171, 1206–1220 (2017).
	45.	Nijssen, J., Comley, L. H. & Hedlund, E. Motor neuron vulnerability  
and resistance in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Acta Neuropathol. 133, 
863–885 (2017).
	46.	Chakkalakal, J. V., Nishimune, H., Ruas, J. L., Spiegelman, B. M. &  
Sanes, J. R. Retrograde influence of muscle fibers on their innervation 
revealed by a novel marker for slow motoneurons. Development 137, 
3489–3499 (2010).
	47.	Kammoun, M., Cassar-Malek, I., Meunier, B. & Picard, B. A simplified 
immunohistochemical classification of skeletal muscle fibres in mouse.  
Eur. J. Histochem. 58, 2254 (2014).
	48.	Alkaslasi, M. R. et al. Single nucleus RNA-sequencing defines unexpected 
diversity of cholinergic neuron types in the adult mouse spinal cord. Preprint 
at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.16.193292 (2020).
	49.	Taylor, J. P., Brown, R. H. J. & Cleveland, D. W. Decoding ALS: from genes to 
mechanism. Nature 539, 197–206 (2016).
	50.	Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell 177, 
1888–1902 (2019).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc. 2021
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 24 | April 2021 | 572–583 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
583

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
Methods
Data reporting. No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample 
size, but our sample sizes (such as minimum cluster size) are similar to those 
reported in previous publications7,13,50. No randomization was used in assigning 
experimental conditions to animals. All quantification of microscopy images was 
performed blinded. CTB experiments were included in analysis if, under blinded 
conditions, it was determined that CTB-labeled cells were easily distinguishable 
from background staining (for example, successful retrograde labeling occurred). 
Additional information can be found in the Life Sciences Reporting Summary.
Statistics. For in situ hybridization quantifications, one-way analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) tests with Sidak and Tukey post tests were used to determine statistical 
significance of differences among specific comparisons (Sidak) or all conditions 
(Tukey). For single-cell analysis, all pseudo-bulk differential expression was 
calculated using the Wilcoxon rank sum test and adjusted for multiple comparisons 
(Bonferroni method), implemented, by default, in Seurat50. These tests did not 
require assumptions of normally distributed data.
Mouse crosses. CHaT-IRES-Cre (Chat-CRE/Chat-CRE) mice were purchased from 
JAX (stock no. 006410m B6; 129S6-Chattm2(cre)Lowl/J) and crossed with ROSAnT-nG/
ROSAnT-nG (stock no. 023035 B6; 129S6-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(CAG-tdTomato*,-EGFP*)Ees/J). 
F1 heterozygous reporter mice were aged to P100–150 and then sacrificed for 
subsequent sequencing experiments. All in situ hybridization was performed 
using wild-type male and female P100–150 B6 mice purchased from JAX (stock 
no. 000664). Mice were housed at ~55% humidity, 25 °C, on a 12:12-h light/dark 
cycle. Humane experiments were performed with ethical oversight by the Stanford 
Administrative Panel on Laboratory Testing (protocol no. 30643).
Mouse nuclei collection. Four to eight mice in five independent experiments 
were euthanized with CO2 and decapitated caudal to the brain stem. Their spinal 
columns were severed just caudal to the sacral spinal cord and rapidly cut out as 
described7. Briefly, a blunt 18-gauge syringe containing ice-cold PBS was inserted 
into the caudal end of the spinal cord and used for rapid hydraulic extrusion of the 
entire, intact cord. Two spinal cords at a time were homogenized with a Dounce 
Homogenizer in 2 ml of nuclei extraction buffer (Supplementary Table 4a). Spinal 
cords were homogenized with ten strokes of Pestle A, followed by five strokes of 
Pestle B. The entire homogenate was transferred to a 25-ml, round-bottom plastic 
ultracentrifuge tube, and 8 ml of nuclei spin buffer 1 (Supplementary Table 4a) was 
added. Five milliliters of nuclei spin buffer 2 (Supplementary Table 4a) was layered 
gently underneath the homogenate, and the gradient was spun for 15 min at 4,000g 
in a 4 °C benchtop swinging bucket centrifuge (Beckman, 5810R). The supernatant 
was rapidly discarded, and the nuclei were gently resuspended in 5 ml of nuclei 
spin buffer 1. Five milliliters of nuclei spin buffer 3 was gently layered underneath, 
and the resulting gradient was spun for 15 min at 4,000g at 4 °C. The supernatant 
was rapidly discarded, and the pellet was resuspended in 400 µl of nuclei FACS 
buffer. Next, 0.5 µl of DAPI was added to enable doublet discrimination on  
the sorter.
Fluorescence-activated nuclei sorting. Fluorescence-activated nuclei sorting 
was performed on a BD Biosciences FACSAria II flow cytometer. Briefly, after 
calibration of the FACS machine or power-up of the flow cytometer, single nuclei 
were gated using forward scatter, side scatter and DAPI measurements to ensure 
that doublets were gated out. After this initial gating, EGFP+/tdTomato− nuclei 
were identified using a two-dimensional scatterplot. These nuclei stood out from 
the main population, enabling double gating. To ensure that our samples would 
contain both cholinergic and non-cholinergic nuclei, we then sorted ~10,000–
15,000 EGFP+/tdTomato− nuclei and 20,000–25,000 EGFP−/tdTomato+ nuclei 
into 400 µl of 10× loading buffer (Supplementary Table 4a). After sorting was 
completed, this nuclei mixture was spun at 300g for 5 min and resuspended in 10× 
loading buffer according to 10× loading criteria for the precise number of nuclei 
sorted—a number that varied.
Droplet-based snRNA-seq. For droplet-based snRNA-seq, libraries were prepared 
using the Chromium Single Cell 3′ Reagent Kit v3 according to the manufacturer’s 
protocol (10x Genomics). The generated snRNA-seq libraries were sequenced 
using NextSeq 500/550 High Output v2 kits (150 cycles) to an average read depth 
of ~500,000 reads per cell.
Mouse CNS in situ hybridization. Mice were humanely euthanized using CO2 for 
5 min before decapitation. The spinal cord was rapidly hydraulically extruded, as 
above, and briefly dried. For longitudinal sections, the spinal cord was placed into a 
plastic freezing mold and frozen briefly on dry ice, before adding O.C.T. compound 
freezing media (Tissue-Tek) to ensure that the spinal cord was frozen completely 
flat to the mold. For transverse sections, spinal cords were cut into three segments: 
roughly lumbosacral, thoracic and cervical. Sections were mounted and cut to 
a thickness of 20 µm using a Leica CM3050 S Cryostat. Sections were processed 
immediately or stored for 1–2 weeks at −80 °C.
Sections were processed for RNAScope v2 (ACD Biosciences) according to 
manufacturer instructions for fresh frozen tissue. All in situ hybridization probes 
used are listed in Supplementary Table 4b. Briefly, tissue sections were fixed with 
4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) at 4 °C and subsequently dehydrated with 5 min 
each of 50% EtOH, 70% EtOH and, finally, 100% EtOH. Samples were dried, 
and a hydrophobic barrier was drawn around each section. Samples were then 
incubated with Protease IV (ACD Biosciences) for 15 min at room temperature 
before removing and washing in 1× PBS. Before staining, probes were equilibrated 
to 40 °C for 10 min and then cooled to room temperature. Mixtures of probes in 
channels 1–3 were diluted and then incubated on samples for 2 h in a humidified 
40° hybridization oven. Samples were washed twice in PBS and then incubated 
in the hybridization oven at 40° with Amp-1-FL, Amp-2-FL, Amp-3-FL and 
Amp-4-FL for 30, 15, 30 and 15 min, respectively (with 2× washes in between 
each incubation). Samples were then washed twice, briefly dried and mounted 
with DAPI-containing VECTASHIELD mounting media (Vector Laboratories, 
H-1200-10). Subsequent imaging was performed using a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal 
microscope. Image analysis and background correction were performed in ImageJ.
Analysis of snRNA-seq data. Counts per gene were generated by aligning reads to 
the mm10 genome (Mus_musculus.GRCm38—NCBI: GCA_000001635.2) using 
CellRanger software (v3.0.0) (10x Genomics) running on the Sherlock Stanford 
Computing Cluster. To account for unspliced nuclear transcripts, reads mapping 
to pre-mRNA were counted. After this, the CellRanger aggr pipeline was used to 
aggregate all libraries and normalize the read depth between libraries before data 
merging (with the default parameters) to generate a gene count matrix. We then 
used the cell detection method employed by CellRanger to exclude doublets and 
empty droplets (10x Genomics).
Normalization, clustering and subtype annotation. Most subsequent analysis 
was performed using the Seurat R Package50 (https://satijalab.org, v3.0). All 
43,890 transcriptomes were normalized for read depth with the CellRanger aggr 
function and then loaded into Seurat. The nuclei were batch corrected using 
the Seurat Integrate function as previously described50, which enables cells from 
different experiments to be projected into the same high- and low-dimensional 
spaces. Principal component analysis was performed on the whole dataset, and 
the top 15 components were used to generate a uniform manifold approximation 
and projection (UMAP). The same principal components were used to perform 
graph-based clustering via the FindClusters function, which identified 39 total 
clusters, several of which were manually identified as doublet clusters and removed. 
To annotate remaining clusters, a manually curated list of markers for major 
cell types was assembled from the literature, including excitatory interneurons, 
inhibitory interneurons, cholinergic neurons, oligodendrocytes, endothelial cells, 
astrocytes and microglia. Average expression of these marker genes was calculated 
using Seurat (AverageExpression). Clusters that were positive for these marker 
genes were annotated by cell type (for example, Aqp4+ clusters were classified as 
astrocytes).
To identify specific marker genes for each neuronal subtype, differential gene 
expression analysis was performed using the Seurat FindAllMarkers function, 
which leverages Wilcoxon rank sum test differential expression testing. Briefly, 
differentially expressed genes were identified for each subtype with respect to all 
remaining cells. Each subtype was downsampled to 250 cells to compensate for 
stoichiometric biases. A false discovery rate (FDR)-corrected P value threshold was 
set at P < 0.01, and only markers with a log2 fold change (FC) > 0.5 were included 
in subsequent analysis. To find robust markers, lists of differentially expressed 
marker genes were rank order based on the average expression level in all cells not 
included in the subtype of interest (low background expression yields high rank). 
Even though this occasionally resulted in the prioritization of markers that are not 
ubiquitously expressed in the subtype of interest, we determined that this method 
empirically produces robust markers and viewed the loss of signal in some cells 
as a likely result of a high dropout rate for single-nucleus sequencing. However, 
only genes detected in at least 25% of the cells within the given identity class were 
considered as candidate subtype markers. Skeletal and visceral motor neurons, 
as well as cholinergic interneurons, were each separately subsetted, subclustered 
and UMAP projected. Differential expression analysis was performed on clusters 
within each population, as above and explained in the main text.
To determine batch-to-batch variability and reproducibility of effects, all levels 
of clustering were plotted as UMAPs for each replicate, along with the age, sex 
and number of mice that were pooled per replicate (Extended Data Fig. 8). This 
analysis demonstrated that cluster identity was largely invariant to sex, age and 
number of mice pooled.
Retrograde labeling. Motor neurons innervating the TA, SOL or IF were 
retrogradely labeled by contralateral intramuscular injection of CTB subunit 
conjugated to Alexa 488. Adult mice were deeply anesthetized with 2–3% 
isoflurane mixed with oxygen. To access the TA and SOL muscles, a small 
incision was made on the front of one hindlimb (TA) and on the lateral side of the 
contralateral hindlimb (SOL). For IF muscle injections, CTB solution was directly 
injected into the footpad. Injections were performed with a 10-µl Hamilton syringe 
equipped with a 33-gauge needle. For all, muscles were injected at three sites with 
0.5 µl of 0.5-1% CTB-488 solution. After each injection, the wound site was closed 
with 7-mm Reflex clips. Spinal cords (and injected muscles) were harvested 5 d  
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
after injection. For the isolation, muscles were fixed for 20 min in 4% PFA at 
room temperature. They were washed in PBS, cryopreserved overnight in 30% 
sucrose and embedded in O.C.T. compound. For the SOL and TA, longitudinal 
muscle sections were cut at 30 µm on the cryostat. Sections were immunostained 
with rabbit anti-CTB (Abcam) and bungarotoxin conjugated to CF55 (Biotium). 
Muscles were analyzed by microscopy to confirm the specificity of CTB labeling.
Tissue preparation. Mice were transcardially perfused with PBS, and spinal 
cords were removed by hydraulic extrusion. Spinal cords were fixed in 4% PFA 
overnight at 4 °C. The next day, tissues were washed with PBS before overnight 
cryoprotection in 30% sucrose. Tissues were embedded in O.C.T. compound, and 
20-µm longitudinal sections were acquired on a Leica CM3050S cryostat.
Combined in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Cryosections were 
rinsed in PBS and baked at 60 °C for 45 min. Slides were then fixed in 4% PFA for 
1 h at room temperature. Ethanol dehydration was then performed with 50%, 70%, 
100% and 100% ethanol for 5 min each. After air drying, sections were treated with 
RNAScope hydrogen peroxide for 10 min, followed by antigen retrieval at 95 °C 
in RNAScope Target Retrieval Buffer. Slides were then baked at 60 °C for 45 min. 
The remaining steps of the in situ hybridization procedure were performed using 
the RNAScope Multiplex Fluorescent Reagent Kit v2 according to manufacturer 
guidelines. Upon completion of the in situ hybridization, CTB immunostaining 
was performed. Briefly, spinal cord sections were blocked in PBS containing 
0.2% Triton-X and 10% donkey serum (Jackson ImmunoResearch). Rabbit 
anti-CTB (ab34992, Abcam) diluted at 1:8,000 in PBS containing 0.2% Triton-X 
was incubated overnight at 4 °C. The next day, secondary antibody labeling was 
performed with donkey anti-rabbit Alexa 488 (Invitrogen).
Image analysis. All sections with CTB retrograde labeling were imaged on a 
confocal microscope (Leica SP8, Leica Biosystems). ×10 tile scans were acquired 
at high resolution (2,048 × 2,048) with a z-step size of 2.5 µm using LAS Navigator. 
Maximum intensity images were generated from merged tile scans (LAS X 
Software, Leica Biosystems). To prevent counting false-positive motor neurons that 
were artifactually labeled with CTB leakage, cells with high levels of CTB backfill 
were uniformly identified in each sample through thresholding. All CTB+ motor 
neurons were then scored for the presence or absence of a particular RNAScope 
probe set.
Visceral motor neuron spatial localization. We determined where cells 
within each visceral motor neuron subcluster localize along this axis by the 
following method. Briefly, a list of approximately 100 genes that localize to the 
intermediolateral cell column (iMLC) was compiled from the Allen Spinal Cord 
Atlas10 (Supplementary Table 4c). Among these genes, we identified 29 marker 
genes differentially expressed in at least one visceral motor neuron subcluster. 
Differentially expressed genes among visceral clusters were identified as above. 
We then counted the number of iMLC cells that were positive for each gene in all 
available adult spinal cord sections in the Allen Spinal Cord Atlas and noted the 
relative position of each positive cell along the rostral–caudal spinal cord axis. For 
each marker gene, we divided the number of positive cells at each rostral–caudal 
section by the average positive cell count for that gene across all sections. We 
then normalized this cell density by the maximum number of cells in any section 
that were positive for that gene, to generate a normalized cell count representing 
the relative enrichment of positive cells in different sections of the spinal cord. 
Owing to the sparsity of the data, we fit a polynomial function (order = 8) to 
the normalized count, producing 29 independent polynomial functions (gene 
densities) that reflect the density of cells expressing each gene over the adult mouse 
spinal cord. We then estimated the positional density of each scRNA-seq visceral 
motor neuron cluster as the weighted average of the gene densities for which the 
gene is differentially expressed in the cluster. The averaging weights were calculated 
as the log2 FC of the gene expression level with a given cluster with respect to 
the mean expression of the gene across all clusters. This generates an estimated 
positional density for each cluster along the rostral–caudal spinal cord spatial atlas 
as reported.
If the log2 FC was > 0 and the FDR-adjusted P value was < 0.01, we considered 
a cluster enriched for expression of that gene.
Visceral motor neuron spatial validation by in situ hybridization. Spinal 
cords from wild-type mice were rapidly hydraulically extruded and cut into six 
uniform pieces, spanning from sacral to upper thoracic spinal cord, and frozen in 
cryopreservant. Four sequential cryostat sections were cut at 20 µm every 600 µm 
along the rostral–caudal axis to fully sample the thoracic and sacral autonomic 
columns. All subsequent tissue processing for RNAScope v2 (ACD Biosciences) 
was performed according to manufacturer instructions for fresh frozen tissue.
Background subtraction was performed on each channel of all images. For each 
image, masks of all cholinergic cells were made using the ChAT channel. To make 
the masks, a pixel value threshold and size cutoff were applied to remove noise, and 
the resulting images were converted into binary form. Using the binary images, 
masks corresponding to non-visceral motor neuron cells were manually removed, 
and, occasionally, visceral motor neuron masks were manually split. Images 
without visceral motor neurons were not processed.
For each visceral motor neuron mask, mean and maximum pixel values were 
obtained from the non-ChAT channels, which contain RNA scope data from 
the genes of interest (Rxfp1, Fbn2, Nts, Creb5, Piezo2, Cdh8 and Cpne4). This 
was done by redirecting each binary image to the corresponding image/channel 
and analyzing particles. For each gene of interest, a threshold was set on the 
mean and maximum pixel values such that visceral motor neurons surpassing 
the threshold were counted as expressing the gene of interest. The total number 
of visceral motor neurons, the number of visceral motor neurons expressing 
the gene of interest and the percentage of visceral motor neurons expressing the 
gene of interest were plotted as a function of distance along the rostral–caudal 
axis. The analysis was performed by a researcher who was blinded to the genes 
that were probed for.
Accession codes. All raw and processed sequencing data have been deposited in 
the Gene Expression Omnibus under accession number GSE161621.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All sequencing data are available in raw and processed forms from the National 
Center of Biotechnology Information’s Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no. 
GSE161621). An interactive web portal for exploring the dataset is available at 
http://www.spinalcordatlas.org.
Code availability
All custom code used to analyze data and generate figures is available in the form of 
a Jupyter Notebook at https://github.com/neurojacob/blum_et_al_2021.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants R35NS097263 
(to A.D.G.) and R01NS083998 (to J.A.K.), the Robert Packard Center for ALS Research 
at Johns Hopkins (to A.D.G.), the Blavatnik Family Foundation (to J.A.B.) and the Brain 
Rejuvenation Project of the Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute. Sorting was performed on 
an instrument in the Shared FACS Facility obtained using NIH S10 Shared Instrument 
Grant S10RR025518-01. Portions of Figs. 1d and 2b were generated using objects from 
BioRender.com.
Author contributions
J.A.B. and A.D.G. designed the experiments and wrote the paper. All authors reviewed 
and edited the manuscript. J.A.B. performed experiments and computational analysis 
of the data. S.K. and J.L.S. helped plan and perform experiments and analyze data. 
L.N. helped with mouse husbandry. K.A.G., A.K., P.T.H. and O.G. helped perform 
experiments. J.A.K. and W.J.G. helped analyze data and provided advice on designing 
experiments.
Competing interests
A.D.G. has served as a consultant for Aquinnah Pharmaceuticals, Prevail Therapeutics 
and Third Rock Ventures and is a scientific founder of Maze Therapeutics. W.J.G. has 
affiliations with 10x Genomics (consultant), Guardant Health (consultant) and Protillion 
Biosciences (co-founder and consultant). J.A.B. has served as a consultant for Maze 
Therapeutics.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-020-00795-0.
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material 
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-020-00795-0.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.D.G.
Peer review information Nature Neuroscience thanks Alain Chédotal and the other, 
anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
Extended Data Fig. 1 | See next page for caption.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Single-nucleus transcriptional analysis of the adult mouse spinal cord reveals canonical cell types. a, Canonical cell class labels, 
visualized on UMAP. b, Average log-normalized marker gene expression across canonical cell classes. c-d, Representative in situ hybridization against 
Chat/Nos1 in transverse sacral (c) and thoracic (d) spinal cord hemi-sections. n = 3 biologically independent animals. e-f, Average log-normalized 
expression of Zeb2 (e) and Fbn2 (f) across all cholinergic clusters (labeled), overlaid on UMAP. Dotted line surrounds clusters corresponding to visceral 
motor neurons. g, Representative in situ hybridization against Chat/Fbn2 in transverse thoracic spinal cord hemi-section. n = 3 biologically independent 
animals. Scale bars=200 µm (c-d) and 100 µm (g). LAC = lateral autonomic column (c,d), VH = ventral horn (c,d).
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Novel markers of skeletal motor neurons confirmed by Allen Spinal Cord Atlas in situ hybridizations. a-d, Transverse schematic 
illustrating expected positions of skeletal motor neurons in ventral horn (VH, green) in lumbar spinal cord. Second row—corresponding in situ hybridization 
against Tns1 (a), Bcl6 (b), Syn1 (c), and Actb (d). Third row—expression mask shows relative enrichment of Tns1 and Bcl6 in small and large cell bodies in 
the VH.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
Extended Data Fig. 3 | See next page for caption.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Visceral motor neuron populations express selective repertoires of neuropeptides and are spatially distinct. a, Estimated relative 
density of visceral motor neurons along the rostral-caudal axis of the spinal cord based on Allen Spinal Cord Atlas10. Density functions are combined 
density estimates of marker genes for each cluster (see Methods). Clusters were grouped according to shape of density function, with clusters 3,7, and 10 
clearly enriched in the sacral spinal cord. b, Validation of visceral spatial modeling from (a) via high-resolution in situ hybridization for Chat and visceral 
cluster markers (Piezo2, Cdh8, Creb5, Cpne4, Fbn2). Plots show number of motor neurons counted in the autonomic column, added across three counted 
slides in each region. Individual data points for total visceral motor neurons shown with filled circles, while marker gene-positive cell numbers shown with 
filled triangles. n = 2 (Piezo2, Cdh8, Creb5, Cpne4) or 5 (Fbn2) biologically independent replicates. Error bars are SEM. c, Average log-normalized expression 
of Rxfp1 and Nts across all visceral motor neuron clusters (labeled), overlaid on UMAP. d, Representative in situ hybridization against Chat/Fbn2/Rxfp1 
in transverse sacral spinal cord shows coexpression in the autonomic column but not in the ventral horn (VH). n = 3 biologically independent animals. 
Scale bar=100 µm. e, Average log-normalized expression of Adra2a across all visceral clusters (labeled) shows that sporadic expression exists across 
populations, overlaid on UMAP. f, Representative in situ hybridization against Chat/Piezo2/Cdh8 in cholinergic cells around the central canal (CC). Scale 
bar=50 µm. n = 2 biologically independent animals. g, Average log-normalized expression of Gldn across all cells in spinal cord shows clear enrichment 
in partition cell cluster (arrowhead), overlaid on UMAP. h, Average log-normalized expression of Nrxn3 across cholinergic interneurons shows that Nrxn3 
expression is limited to half of partition cells (arrowhead), overlaid on UMAP.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Resource
NaTurE NEuroSCIEnCE
Extended Data Fig. 4 | See next page for caption.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

===== Borodinsky2017_FrontNeuralCircuits+Xenopus+SpinalCord =====
REVIEW
published: 23 November 2017
doi: 10.3389/fncir.2017.00090
Xenopus laevis as a Model Organism
for the Study of Spinal Cord
Formation, Development, Function
and Regeneration
Laura N. Borodinsky *
Department of Physiology & Membrane Biology and Institute for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospital for
Children, University of California Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA, United States
Edited by:
Raúl E. Russo,
Instituto de Investigaciones
Biológicas Clemente Estable (IIBCE),
Uruguay
Reviewed by:
Flavio Zolessi,
University of the Republic, Uruguay
Nicholas C. Spitzer,
University of California, San Diego,
United States
*Correspondence:
Laura N. Borodinsky
lnborodinsky@ucdavis.edu
Received: 02 October 2017
Accepted: 08 November 2017
Published: 23 November 2017
Citation:
Borodinsky LN (2017) Xenopus laevis
as a Model Organism for the Study of
Spinal Cord Formation, Development,
Function and Regeneration.
Front. Neural Circuits 11:90.
doi: 10.3389/fncir.2017.00090
The spinal cord is the ﬁrst central nervous system structure to develop during vertebrate
embryogenesis, underscoring its importance to the organism. Because of its early
formation, accessibility to the developing spinal cord in amniotes is challenging, often
invasive and the experimental approaches amenable to model systems like mammals
are limited. In contrast, amphibians, in general and the African-clawed frog Xenopus
laevis, in particular, offer model systems in which the formation of the spinal cord, the
differentiation of spinal neurons and glia and the establishment of spinal neuron and
neuromuscular synapses can be easily investigated with minimal perturbations to the
whole organism. The signiﬁcant advances on gene editing and microscopy along with
the recent completion of the Xenopus laevis genome sequencing have reinvigorated the
use of this classic model species to elucidate the mechanisms of spinal cord formation,
development, function and regeneration.
Keywords: neural tube defects, spinal cord injury, morphogenetic proteins, sensorimotor response, spinal neuron
differentiation, axon guidance, calcium-dependent activity, neural plasticity
INTRODUCTION
The use of model organisms has been crucial to the progress toward understanding spinal cord
function. The frog has been a pioneer animal model for the study of spinal cord formation,
spinal cell specification and differentiation, spinal neuron axon guidance, neuromuscular junction
formation and plasticity as well as spinal cord injury and regeneration.
Among amphibians, Xenopus laevis has been an advantageous frog species for the study
of the spinal cord throughout development and in adulthood for several reasons. First, the
Xenopus laevis egg is approximately 1-mm diameter this means that is over 2300 times bigger
than the mouse egg, the most popular vertebrate species. This allows for accessible manipulation
of gene expression and genetic engineering by simple microinjection of constructs into the
egg or fertilized embryo. Second, the eggshell is transparent, enabling the direct visualization
of the first stages of spinal cord morphogenesis through non-invasive imaging approaches.
Third, microinjections at individual blastomeres of the 2- to 32-cell stage embryos result
in mosaic genetic manipulation, which can render internal control or tissue specificity for
the targeted gene misexpression. Fourth, the development of Xenopus laevis spinal cord
occurs much faster than for rodents and the developmental rate can be adjusted by growing
animals at different temperatures. Fifth, the organization of the spinal cord is simpler than
for higher vertebrates with overall fewer spinal cells, fewer types of spinal neurons and fewer
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
1
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 90

Borodinsky
Xenopus Toolkit for Spinal Cord Studies
connections between them. Nevertheless, the main kinds
of spinal cord cells are represented, i.e., sensory neurons,
interneurons, motor neurons and glial cells. Sixth, this species
exhibits remarkable regenerative capacity during development,
including the repair of the injured spinal cord, allowing for
the identification of factors that enable successful spinal cord
regeneration that might be missing in higher vertebrates. In spite
of the unique characteristics of this species, many fundamental
processes at the cellular and molecular level are highly conserved
across vertebrates, making Xenopus laevis a valuable organism to
study the mechanisms of human disease.
The features of Xenopus laevis mentioned above are few of
the reasons why this species have become a successful model
to study the first steps of neural induction and spinal cord
morphogenesis, spinal neuron differentiation, synaptogenesis,
including neuromuscular junction formation and maturation,
as well as synaptic plasticity and regeneration after spinal cord
injury. Here we compile both the pioneering and current studies
that have made significant contributions at both establishing
Xenopus laevis as a powerful model to study all aspects of spinal
cord development and function and advancing the field of spinal
cord research by uncovering the mechanisms underlying its
development, plasticity and repair.
FIRST STEP IN THE FORMATION OF THE
SPINAL CORD: NEURAL INDUCTION IN
Xenopus laevis
Neural induction in vertebrates is the process by which a subset
of ectodermal cells commits to the neural phenotype to originate
the brain and spinal cord through interactions of the induced
cells with neighboring cell layers (Spemann and Mangold,
1924). This event occurs very early in embryogenesis between
fertilization and gastrulation, underscoring the importance of
generating the neural tissue early on for the success of a
viable organism. The first molecular signatures involved in this
process were discovered through studies in Xenopus laevis. By
assessing spatiotemporal expression of tissue-specific proteins,
seminal studies showed that non-neural ectodermal cells express
a set of proteins that are missing from neuroectodermal cells
(Akers et al., 1986). Conversely, the expression of specific
neural proteins like neural cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM),
the homeobox transcription factor XiHbox8, are identified a
couple of hours after Xenopus laevis gastrulation (Jacobson
and Rutishauser, 1986; Sharpe et al., 1987), although the
mRNA for N-CAM for instance is already detected during
late gastrulation, after the mesoderm contacts the ectoderm
(Kintner and Melton, 1987), suggesting that expression of neural-
specific proteins is a step that occurs after neural induction
(Jacobson and Rutishauser, 1986). The identification of the
inducing tissues resulted in a model that supports the interaction
between the mesoderm and the dorsal ectoderm (Spemann,
1938; Smith and Slack, 1983; Sharpe et al., 1987). These
interactions are organized by two centers identified in Xenopus
laevis and called the Nieuwkoop center, located in dorsal-
vegetal cells, which expresses Nodal-related endomesodermal
inducers and the blastula Chordin- and Noggin-expressing
center located in dorsal animal cells that contains both
prospective neuroectoderm and Spemann organizer precursor
cells (Kuroda et al., 2004).
The factors secreted by inducing cells that drive the
commitment to the neural phenotype include Noggin (Lamb
et al., 1993), Chordin (Sasai et al., 1995), Follistatin (Hemmati-
Brivanlou et al., 1994), Xnr3 (Hansen et al., 1997), all inhibitors of
the Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) pathway and Fibroblast
Growth Factor (FGF; Kengaku and Okamoto, 1993). The
signaling elicited by these factors in the dorsal ectoderm involves
translocation of Protein Kinase C to the membrane (Otte et al.,
1988, 1991; Otte and Moon, 1992) and recruitment of signaling
molecules like Smad10 (Lesueur and Graff, 1999; LeSueur et al.,
2002) and the phosphorylation of Smad1 in the linker domain
that inhibits its transcriptional activity and nuclear translocation,
serving as an integration of several signaling pathways (Pera et al.,
2003).
The two models that have emerged from these founding
studies have supported a first model of ectodermal cells
becoming neural by default, through inhibiting the BMP
pathway; in the second model FGF instructs the dorsal
ectodermal cells to become neural. More recently, the merging
of these two models was proposed (Marchal et al., 2009).
By antagonizing BMP signaling through the expression of a
dominant negative (DN) cofactor of the BMP pathway, Xenopus
epidermis was converted into neural tissue. However, this
is prevented when FGF4 is knocked down; moreover, BMP
signaling inhibition upregulates FGF4 expression. These findings
led to the unified model for neural induction dependent on
BMP inhibition that in turn activates FGF, which instructs
expression of neural phenotype regulators (Marchal et al.,
2009).
The factors that drive the neural phenotype downstream
neural induction have also been identified by pioneering
research in Xenopus laevis, and then findings extended to
higher vertebrates. Prominent transcription factors are early
downstream drivers of the neural commitment and include Zic3
(Nakata et al., 1997), SoxD (Mizuseki et al., 1998b), Zic-r1
and Sox2 (Mizuseki et al., 1998a), which then directly promote
expression of proneural genes initiating neural and neuronal
differentiation, or they work synergistically with other pathways
to initiate expression of the neural phenotype (Mizuseki et al.,
1998a).
More recent studies in this model system have revealed
novel players in the process of neural induction and early
neural specification. Norrin was identified as required for
neuroectoderm
specification
by
recruiting
β-catenin
and
inhibiting BMP/TGF-β, thus coordinating these two major
signaling pathways (Xu et al., 2012). Efforts have been made to
identify the mechanisms responsible for global shifts in gene
expression when ectodermal cells become restricted to the
neural identity. A study in Xenopus laevis led to the discovery
that the activity of histone methyltransferase is crucial for the
upregulation in the expression of genes controlling neural
induction, likely through the repression of the Oct4-related
Xenopus gene Oct-25 (Nicetto et al., 2013).
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
2
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 90

Borodinsky
Xenopus Toolkit for Spinal Cord Studies
SPINAL CORD FORMATION THROUGH
THE LENS OF Xenopus laevis
NEURULATION
Once the neuroectoderm is induced the emerging neural plate,
which appears as a dorsal thickening of the ectoderm, transits
through dramatic morphogenic events to transform itself into
the neural tube, the precursor of the spinal cord and the brain.
Studies in Xenopus laevis have come once again to illuminate
onto the cellular and molecular mechanisms that mediate neural
tube formation. A combination of biochemical signals and
mechanical forces orchestrate changes in cell shape, including
apical constriction and cell elongation, necessary for the bending
of the neural plate, the elevation of neural folds followed by
the lateromedial migration and cell intercalation that leads
to the mediolateral narrowing and anteroposterior elongation of
the neural tissue, process known as convergent extension (for
recent review see Sokol, 2016).
Apicobasal cell elongation accounts for thickening and
narrowing of the neuroepithelium. In addition, mediolateral
cell intercalation within each layer narrows the neural plate in
the transverse axis while elongating it in the anteroposterior
axis (Keller et al., 1992a,b,c). Neural plate shaping is closely
followed by its bending. Initially, a furrow is formed in the
notoplate as a result of the medial hinge point cell apical
constriction. Then neural plate lateral edges rise forming
incipient neural folds. Subsequent folding includes further neural
fold elevation, convergence and rolling towards the midline.
Continuing apicobasal elongation, cell apical constriction,
crawling of lateral neural plate cells under the epidermis
and continuing mediolateral intercalation are involved in
this phase. During neural plate folding cell intercalation
occurs at a higher rate compared to the shaping phase,
accelerating convergent extension of the neuroepithelium
(Jacobson et al., 1986). Subsequently, neural fold tips come
into contact and fuse at the dorsal midline (Davidson and
Keller, 1999). Finally, radial intercalation between the two
cell layers forms a single-layered neural tube (Edlund et al.,
2013).
As neurulation progresses different populations of cells in
the neuroepithelium, it exhibit diverse types of cell behaviors
(Wallingford, 2005). Apical constriction of superficial neural
plate cells requires a precise spatiotemporal regulation of
cytoskeletal and cell adhesion molecule dynamics. It was
discovered in Xenopus that the actin binding protein Shroom is
necessary for neural tube closure in amphibians and mammals
by inducing apical constriction through enriching the apical
neural plate surface with actin filaments and recruitment of
the small GTPase Rap1 (Haigo et al., 2003). Neural plate
cells exhibit Ca2+ dynamics (Wallingford et al., 2001) which
elicit contraction events in these cells driven by transient
contractile apical pools of actin (Christodoulou and Skourides,
2015).
Apical constriction also requires endocytosis at the apical
neural plate cell membrane (Lee and Harland, 2010). A more
recent study showed that through the activity of the Planar Cell
Polarity pathway, Rab11-positive recycling endosomes localize to
the medial apical cell junctions during neural tube formation;
this polarization is necessary for neural plate folding (Ossipova
et al., 2014). Moreover, a recently published study from our
lab demonstrates that endocytosis of the adherens junction
molecule C-cadherin is disrupted when folate receptor-1 is
downregulated from the apical membranes of superficial neural
plate cells, impairing neural plate cell apical constriction and
neural tube formation (Balashova et al., 2017). The study
provides a mechanism for folate action during neural tube
formation that explains the vulnerability of this process to folate
disturbances and the benefits of folate supplementation in the
prevention of neural tube defects in humans (Blom et al., 2006).
Our study, through the use of Xenopus laevis as a model system,
uncovers specific functions of folate and its receptor beyond
its role as a vitamin and enabler of DNA synthesis, since cell
division is not necessary for neural tube formation in Xenopus
(Harris and Hartenstein, 1991), in spite of the necessity of
folate/folate receptor-1 for appropriate neural plate cell apical
constriction and neural tube closure in this species (Balashova
et al., 2017).
The
process
of
convergent
extension
occurs
through
cell
elongation
and
intercalation
and
is
also
dependent
on Ca2+ dynamics (Wallingford et al., 2001). In addition,
the non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway dependent on
Disheveled is necessary for convergent extension (Wallingford
and Harland, 2001). Other signaling pathway that has been
identified as necessary in regulating microtubule dynamics
for Xenopus neural fold elevation and cell intercalation is
the Repulsive Guidance Molecule-Neogenin interaction (Kee
et al., 2008). Microtubule polymerization is also the target
of the Zn2+ transporter ZIP12 that when knocked down
impairs Xenopus neural tube formation and neurite extension
in developing spinal neurons (Chowanadisai et al., 2013;
Figure 1).
SPINAL NEURON DIFFERENTIATION AND
SPINAL CORD MATURATION
The development of spinal cord function relies on the
assignment of specific identities to spinal neurons and glia
followed by the establishment of synaptic connections. Our
current understanding of the functional differentiation of
spinal
neurons
has
nourished
from
studies
in
Xenopus
laevis. Pioneering studies by Spitzer and Baccaglini (1976)
investigated
the
development
of
electrical
excitability
in developing spinal neurons both in vivo and in vitro.
They found that shortly after neural tube closure Ca2+-
dependent action potentials are elicited in immature sensory
spinal
neurons
in
vivo
(Spitzer
and
Baccaglini,
1976).
As
maturation
progresses,
the
action
potential
depends
on both, Na+ and Ca2+, and gradually, the Na+-driven
component of the action potential becomes more predominant,
until
the
Ca2+-dependent
component
disappears,
after
3 days postfertilization (Spitzer and Baccaglini, 1976). The
shift
from
the
Ca2+-dependent
to
Na+-mediated
action
potential
in
developing
spinal
neurons
depends
on
ion
channel expression (O’Dowd, 1983; O’Dowd et al., 1988).
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
3
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 90

Borodinsky
Xenopus Toolkit for Spinal Cord Studies
FIGURE 1 | Examples of approaches and applications for the study of spinal cord development, function and regeneration in Xenopus laevis. The use of Xenopus
laevis as a model system spans from the ﬁrst steps of neural induction and spinal cord formation to the mechanisms of spinal cord regeneration. GCaMP,
genetically-encoded Ca2+ sensor; Lifeact, F-actin biosensor; Membrane-FP, Fluorescent protein tethered to the plasma membrane; DN, dominant negative;
CA, constitutively active. Drawings of embryos and tadpoles were adapted from Xenbase.org and published previously by Nieuwkoop and Faber (1994);
Copyright © 1994, Garland Publishing Inc.
In
particular
the
upregulation
of
the
delayed-rectifying
K+ current is crucial to the switch (Ribera and Spitzer,
1989; Burger and Ribera, 1996; Gurantz et al., 1996; Ribera,
1996).
The discovery of the Ca2+-dependent action potential in
developing neurons opened up a prominent and influential
research field focused on the role and the mechanisms
of Ca2+-mediated electrical activity during nervous system
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
4
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 90

Borodinsky
Xenopus Toolkit for Spinal Cord Studies
development. In Xenopus laevis immature spinal neurons, the
mechanisms underlying the spontaneous Ca2+ spikes involve
the activation of T-type Ca2+ channels (Gu and Spitzer,
1993) through a spontaneous initial depolarization which
appear to be facilitated by neurotransmitter signaling (Root
et al., 2008). This activity is important for the differentiation
and maturation of spinal neurons (Gu and Spitzer, 1995).
In particular, neurotransmitter phenotype specification is
dependent on the level of Ca2+ spike activity, with higher
frequencies driving the expression of inhibitory neurotransmitter
phenotypes
and
lower
frequencies
driving
expression
of
excitatory neurotransmitter phenotypes (Borodinsky et al.,
2004; Marek et al., 2010). The changes in neurotransmitter
phenotype are accompanied by changes in neurotransmitter
receptor in target cells including the skeletal muscle in
tadpole’s neuromuscular junctions (Borodinsky and Spitzer,
2007; Figure 1).
We learned from studies on the patterning of ventral and
dorsal spinal neuron identities in Xenopus laevis, the dependence
of this process on the notochord; notochordless embryos exhibit
fewer number of motor neurons and higher number of sensory
neurons, and commissural interneuron axons cross the midline
in a disorganized manner overall resulting in perturbed left-right
alternation of the locomotive behavior (Clarke et al., 1991).
Moreover, studies in our lab have demonstrated that the
Ca2+-mediated electrical activity interacts with other essential
developmental signaling pathways like Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
and BMPs to orchestrate the differentiation of spinal neurons
(Belgacem and Borodinsky, 2011, 2015; Swapna and Borodinsky,
2012; Borodinsky et al., 2015). Shh enhances activity of spinal
neurons (Belgacem and Borodinsky, 2011) while BMP inhibits it
(Swapna and Borodinsky, 2012). These studies identified novel
non-canonical signaling pathways for morphogenetic protein
action in the spinal cord. Furthermore, we discovered that Ca2+
spike activity is the mechanism by which Shh canonical signaling
switches off during the early stages of spinal cord development
(Belgacem and Borodinsky, 2015), phenomenon that is apparent
in frogs and mice (Lee et al., 1997; Balaskas et al., 2012).
This model system has also been crucial in the identification
of the mechanisms governing axon guidance of developing
spinal neurons. Studies from the Poo laboratory first used
Xenopus spinal neurons grown in culture to identify the
signaling mechanisms underlying chemoattraction and repulsion
of extending growth cones. They found that localized changes
in levels of cyclic nucleotides transduce the signal of guidance
cues like Netrin to change the direction of the growing axon
(Lohof et al., 1992; Zheng et al., 1994; Ming et al., 1997, 1999,
2001; Song et al., 1997, 1998; Xiang et al., 2002). Further studies
demonstrated that these mechanisms occur in vivo and the
signaling is also dependent on localized Ca2+ dynamics in growth
cones and filopodia (Gomez et al., 2001; Ming et al., 2001; Robles
et al., 2003; Henley et al., 2004; Shim et al., 2005; Wang and Poo,
2005; Robles and Gomez, 2006).
In addition to the extension and direction of axon growth,
Xenopus laevis spinal neurons have been used to determine
the mechanisms underlying neuronal polarity through the
establishement of dendrites vs. axons. Xenopus commissural
spinal interneurons exposed to semaphorin 3A revert the identity
of axons to dendrites by activating Cav2.3 channels through the
cGMP-mediated activation of PKG (Nishiyama et al., 2011).
ADVANCES IN THE UNDERSTANDING OF
SPINAL CORD FUNCTION THROUGH
RESEARCH IN Xenopus
The spinal cord is in charge of sensorimotor functions in
vertebrates. The elucidation of the mechanisms involved in the
establishment of the sensorimotor function during development
and the identification of the circuitry responsible for eliciting
a specific sensorimotor response have been common foci of
research. Xenopus offers an excellent system to study these
aspects of spinal cord development and function. In particular,
two important fronts of research have benefited greatly from the
studies done in Xenopus; one is the research on the mechanisms
of neuromuscular junction plasticity during development, and
the other is the identification of the circuitries in the spinal cord
that elicit the simple sensorimotor reflexes and the more complex
locomotor behaviors (Figure 1).
Taking advantage of the ease of in vivo time-lapse imaging
in developing tadpoles, the Cline lab fluorescently labeled
spinal motor neuron axons and nicotinic receptor clusters
in muscle cells through electroporation, and demonstrated
that axon branches and synaptogenesis are concurrent and
dynamic (Javaherian and Cline, 2005). They further identified the
Candidate Plasticity Gene 15 as necessary for axon arborization
and promotion of synaptogenesis at the neuromuscular junction
(Javaherian and Cline, 2005). The rules of pre and postsynaptic
interactions that govern plasticity events such as synaptic
depression and potentiation were first tested in Xenopus laevis
neuron-muscle connections, a simple prototype of developing
vertebrate neuromuscular junction. A transient increase in
intracellular Ca2+ concentration in the connected muscle
cell triggers a decrease in neurotransmitter release from the
presynaptic motor neuron. This depression is persistent and
dependent on the connection with the affected muscle cell and
not on a secreted extracellular factor (Cash et al., 1996). In
contrast, a burst of action potentials in the presynaptic motor
neuron leads to a sustained potentiation of synaptic activity of
the neuromuscular junction due to increase in probability of
neurotransmitter release (Wan and Poo, 1999). Neurotrophins
were identified in Xenopus neuromuscular junction studies as
effective mediators of synaptic potentiation. In particular Brain-
Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) was found to potentiate
synaptic efficacy, through cAMP signaling (Boulanger and Poo,
1999a), when paired with a presynaptic depolarization of the
motor neuron within a specific timing (Boulanger and Poo,
1999b). A more recent study has further the understanding
of BDNF action on activity-dependent neuromuscular junction
remodeling by demonstrating that stimulating motor neurons
induces the maturation of BDNF in the presynapse. While
immature BDNF promotes retraction of the less active synaptic
terminal, mature BDNF leads to stabilization of the active
terminal (Je et al., 2012).
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
5
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 90

Borodinsky
Xenopus Toolkit for Spinal Cord Studies
With regard to the understanding of the circuitry underlying
locomotor behavior in vertebrates, seminal work from Roberts
et al. (1981) took advantage of the simplicity of the neuroanatomy
and behavior of swimming larvae to answer fundamental
questions on the connectivity and organization of the underlying
neuronal networks. They discovered that the rhythmicity of
the swimming behavior resides in the spinal cord and is
inherent to each side of the cord (Roberts et al., 1981).
They also found that the commissural inhibitory spinal
interneurons are necessary for the strict alternation between
left and right motor neuron activity (Roberts et al., 1981).
Other studies have been equally insightful at revealing the
circuitry underlying the sensorimotor response upon touch
and the mechanisms responsible for the relationship between
the locomotor central pattern generator and motor neuron
activity (Sillar and Roberts, 1988; Li et al., 2003; Buhl et al.,
2015).
The neurophysiological substrate for the acquisition of
progressive refinement in the locomotor system has been
investigated by Sillar and Roberts (1988). They found that
changes in motor neuron firing properties and patterns of
innervation of the axial musculature in Xenopus laevis larvae
change during the first day after hatching so that different
pools of motor neurons progressively innervate a more restricted
region of muscle fibers (Zhang et al., 2011). The motor neuron
firing probability transitions from a single action potential per
swim cycle right after hatching to different firing probabilities
1 day after hatching, when diverse types of swimming behavior
are elicited (Zhang et al., 2011).
SPINAL CORD REGENERATION
All the aspects of spinal cord development and function
discussed above highlight the usefulness of Xenopus as a model
system because the processes occurring in the frog are conserved
across vertebrates including mammals, with the advantage of
being a simpler system, more amenable to in vivo and in vitro
approaches, live-imaging and physiology studies. Thus, this
model system enables the identification of the molecular and
cellular mechanisms underlying the conserved and fundamental
processes. Other features of Xenopus make this animal model
unique among other systems. This uniqueness can also be
advantageous; for instance, from investigating the mechanisms
that make this system different than other vertebrates we can
better understand the potential limitations that other species
including humans face. Before metamorphosis, the regenerative
capacity of frogs, and Xenopus in particular, is remarkable. Even
the adult frog is able to regenerate certain axons like the optic
nerve but not the spinal axons, due to some non-permissive
factors generated by the spinal cord oligodendrocytes and
myelin (Lang et al., 1995). Outstandingly, when the tadpole’s
tail is amputated, all the tissues including skin, notochord,
muscle and spinal cord regenerate (Figure 1). Every tissue
regenerates from a dedicated pool of stem cells that are activated
upon amputation (Gargioli and Slack, 2004). Interestingly,
the Xenopus tadpole tail exhibits this regenerative capacity
throughout development with the exception of a so-called
refractory period when the tail heals without regeneration. This
further uniqueness enables the study within the same model
system of the factors that are permissive of the regenerative
process. The Slack laboratory took advantage of this aspect of
Xenopus laevis and discovered that BMP and Notch signaling
(downstream of BMP) are necessary for tail regeneration and
sufficient for overriding the refractory period (Beck et al.,
2003). BMP signaling appears to be required for appropriate
neural cell proliferation to replenish the spinal cord (Beck
et al., 2006). It has also been shown that a restricted rate
of apoptosis is required during the first 24 h post injury for
successful regeneration during the permissive stages and that
a more extensive apoptosis may interfere with appropriate
regeneration during the refractory stages (Tseng et al., 2007).
The extent of apoptosis appears to be controlled by the
activity of the V-ATPase H+ pump that is upregulated in the
regenerating tissue and repolarizes the membrane potential of
regenerating cells after an initial depolarization is triggered
by the injury (Adams et al., 2007). In agreement with these
studies we found that cells from the regenerating tail exhibit
spontaneous Ca2+
transients during the first 24 h post
amputation. Suppressing this activity impairs tail regeneration,
apparently by impairing activation of stem cells for replenishing
the spinal cord and muscle (Tu and Borodinsky, 2014). In
recent studies gene expression profiles during tail regeneration
were collected from Xenopus laevis (Lee-Liu et al., 2014) and
tropicalis (Love et al., 2011) amputated tadpoles at different
periods post injury and in regenerative and non-regenerative
stages. From these excellent resources, insightful studies have
emerged demonstrating that injury increases production of
reactive oxygen species that are upstream Wnt/β-catenin and
the upregulation of FGF20 expression, which contribute to the
signaling mechanisms necessary for tail regeneration (Love et al.,
2013).
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Xenopus is a classic model for embryology and physiology
research and has been perfectly suited for studies on the
formation, development, maturation and repair of the spinal
cord.
The
recent
completion
of
the
sequencing
of
the
Xenopus laevis genome (Session et al., 2016), and Xenopus
tropicalis genome since 2010 (Hellsten et al., 2010), allows
for the use of both in genetic studies; along with the
remarkable advances in systems biology, including genomics,
metabolomics and proteomics, the opportunities for discovery
that this model system offers are reinvigorated (Lombard-
Banek et al., 2017; Tandon et al., 2017). Additionally the
accessibility of novel approaches for gene editing like TALENs
(transcription activator-like effector nucleases) and CRISPR-Cas
(clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats-
CRISPR associated nucleases) expand the use of Xenopus as
a genetically tractable model for loss and gain of function
studies (Tandon et al., 2017). Salient questions remain in
every aspect of spinal cord research that was covered in
this review and other aspects that were not included. The
signaling mechanisms affecting the formation of the spinal
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
6
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 90

Borodinsky
Xenopus Toolkit for Spinal Cord Studies
cord and responsible for birth defects like spina bifida demand
further investigation (Wallingford et al., 2013). The deeper
understanding of the mechanisms governing the switch from
neural stem cell to neuron is important for both the prevention
of spinal cord malformations during development and the
promotion of the recovery and regeneration in patients with
spinal cord injury. Finally, studies on the assembly and plasticity
of circuitry underlying spinal cord function can benefit from
the advances in microscopy and optogenetics to dissect out
the precise interactions among different types of neurons. The
prediction is that Xenopus will continue to offer an advantageous
platform for hypothesis-driven research that will contribute to
the understanding of spinal cord development, function and
disease.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
LNB wrote the manuscript.
FUNDING
The work in the lab has been supported by the Basil O’Connor
Starter Scholar Research Award Grant 5-FY09-131 from the
March of Dimes Foundation, Esther A. and Joseph Klingenstein
Fund,
Klingenstein
Foundation
Award
in
Neuroscience,
National Science Foundation (NSF) 1120796, NIH-National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS)
R01NS073055 and Shriners Hospital for Children 86500-NCA,
85220-NCA and 85300-NCA grants to LNB.
REFERENCES
Adams, D. S., Masi, A., and Levin, M. (2007). H+ pump-dependent changes in
membrane voltage are an early mechanism necessary and sufficient to induce
Xenopus tail regeneration. Development 134, 1323–1335. doi: 10.1242/dev.
02812
Akers, R. M., Phillips, C. R., and Wessells, N. K. (1986). Expression of an epidermal
antigen used to study tissue induction in the early Xenopus laevis embryo.
Science 231, 613–616. doi: 10.1126/science.3945801
Balashova, O. A., Visina, O., and Borodinsky, L. N. (2017). Folate receptor 1 is
necessary for neural plate cell apical constriction during Xenopus neural tube
formation. Development 144, 1518–1530. doi: 10.1242/dev.137315
Balaskas, N., Ribeiro, A., Panovska, J., Dessaud, E., Sasai, N., Page, K. M.,
et al. (2012). Gene regulatory logic for reading the Sonic Hedgehog signaling
gradient in the vertebrate neural tube. Cell 148, 273–284. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.
2011.10.047
Beck, C. W., Christen, B., Barker, D., and Slack, J. M. (2006). Temporal
requirement for bone morphogenetic proteins in regeneration of the tail and
limb of Xenopus tadpoles. Mech. Dev. 123, 674–688. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2006.
07.001
Beck, C. W., Christen, B., and Slack, J. M. (2003). Molecular pathways needed for
regeneration of spinal cord and muscle in a vertebrate. Dev. Cell 5, 429–439.
doi: 10.1016/s1534-5807(03)00233-8
Belgacem, Y. H., and Borodinsky, L. N. (2011). Sonic hedgehog signaling is
decoded by calcium spike activity in the developing spinal cord. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U S A 108, 4482–4487. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1018217108
Belgacem, Y. H., and Borodinsky, L. N. (2015). Inversion of Sonic hedgehog action
on its canonical pathway by electrical activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 112,
4140–4145. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1419690112
Blom, H. J., Shaw, G. M., den Heijer, M., and Finnell, R. H. (2006). Neural
tube defects and folate: case far from closed. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 724–731.
doi: 10.1038/nrn1986
Borodinsky, L. N., Belgacem, Y. H., Swapna, I., Visina, O., Balashova, O. A.,
Sequerra, E. B., et al. (2015). Spatiotemporal integration of developmental
cues in neural development. Dev. Neurobiol. 75, 349–359. doi: 10.1002/dneu.
22254
Borodinsky, L. N., Root, C. M., Cronin, J. A., Sann, S. B., Gu, X., and Spitzer, N. C.
(2004). Activity-dependent homeostatic specification of transmitter expression
in embryonic neurons. Nature 429, 523–530. doi: 10.1038/nature02518
Borodinsky, L. N., and Spitzer, N. C. (2007). Activity-dependent neurotransmitter-
receptor matching at the neuromuscular junction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A
104, 335–340. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0607450104
Boulanger, L., and Poo, M. M. (1999a). Gating of BDNF-induced synaptic
potentiation by cAMP. Science 284, 1982–1984. doi: 10.1126/science.284.54
22.1982
Boulanger, L., and Poo, M. M. (1999b). Presynaptic depolarization facilitates
neurotrophin-induced synaptic potentiation. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 346–351.
doi: 10.1038/7258
Buhl, E., Soffe, S. R., and Roberts, A. (2015). Sensory initiation of a co-ordinated
motor response: synaptic excitation underlying simple decision-making.
J. Physiol. 593, 4423–4437. doi: 10.1113/JP270792
Burger, C., and Ribera, A. B. (1996). Xenopus spinal neurons express
Kv2 potassium channel transcripts during embryonic development. J. Neurosci.
16, 1412–1421.
Cash, S., Zucker, R. S., and Poo, M. M. (1996). Spread of synaptic depression
mediated by presynaptic cytoplasmic signaling. Science 272, 998–1001.
doi: 10.1126/science.272.5264.998
Chowanadisai, W., Graham, D. M., Keen, C. L., Rucker, R. B., and Messerli, M. A.
(2013). Neurulation and neurite extension require the zinc transporter ZIP12
(slc39a12). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 110, 9903–9908. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1222142110
Christodoulou, N., and Skourides, P. A. (2015). Cell-Autonomous Ca2+ Flashes
elicit pulsed contractions of an apical actin network to drive apical constriction
during neural tube closure. Cell Rep. 13, 2189–2202. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.
11.017
Clarke, J. D., Holder, N., Soffe, S. R., and Storm-Mathisen, J. (1991).
Neuroanatomical and functional analysis of neural tube formation in
notochordless Xenopus embryos; laterality of the ventral spinal cord is lost.
Development 112, 499–516.
Davidson,
L.
A.,
and
Keller,
R.
E.
(1999).
Neural
tube
closure
in
Xenopus laevis involves medial migration, directed protrusive activity,
cell
intercalation
and
convergent
extension.
Development
126,
4547–4556.
Edlund, A. F., Davidson, L. A., and Keller, R. E. (2013). Cell segregation, mixing,
and tissue pattern in the spinal cord of the Xenopus laevis neurula. Dev. Dyn.
242, 1134–1146. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24004
Gargioli, C., and Slack, J. M. (2004). Cell lineage tracing during Xenopus
tail
regeneration.
Development
131,
2669–2679.
doi:
10.1242/dev.
01155
Gomez, T. M., Robles, E., Poo, M., and Spitzer, N. C. (2001). Filopodial calcium
transients promote substrate-dependent growth cone turning. Science 291,
1983–1987. doi: 10.1126/science.1056490
Gu, X., and Spitzer, N. C. (1993). Low-threshold Ca2+ current and its role in
spontaneous elevations of intracellular Ca2+ in developing Xenopus neurons.
J. Neurosci. 13, 4936–4948.
Gu, X., and Spitzer, N. C. (1995). Distinct aspects of neuronal differentiation
encoded by frequency of spontaneous Ca2+ transients. Nature 375, 784–787.
doi: 10.1038/375784a0
Gurantz, D., Ribera, A. B., and Spitzer, N. C. (1996). Temporal regulation
of Shaker- and Shab-like potassium channel gene expression in single
embryonic spinal neurons during K+ current development. J. Neurosci. 16,
3287–3295.
Haigo, S. L., Hildebrand, J. D., Harland, R. M., and Wallingford, J. B. (2003).
Shroom induces apical constriction and is required for hingepoint formation
during neural tube closure. Curr. Biol. 13, 2125–2137. doi: 10.1016/s0960-
9822(03)00910-2
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
7
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 90

Borodinsky
Xenopus Toolkit for Spinal Cord Studies
Hansen, C. S., Marion, C. D., Steele, K., George, S., and Smith, W. C. (1997). Direct
neural induction and selective inhibition of mesoderm and epidermis inducers
by Xnr3. Development 124, 483–492.
Harris, W. A., and Hartenstein, V. (1991). Neuronal determination without
cell division in Xenopus embryos. Neuron 6, 499–515. doi: 10.1016/0896-
6273(91)90053-3
Hellsten, U., Harland, R. M., Gilchrist, M. J., Hendrix, D., Jurka, J., Kapitonov, V.,
et al. (2010). The genome of the Western clawed frog Xenopus tropicalis. Science
328, 633–636. doi: 10.1126/science.1183670
Hemmati-Brivanlou, A., Kelly, O. G., and Melton, D. A. (1994). Follistatin, an
antagonist of activin, is expressed in the Spemann organizer and displays direct
neuralizing activity. Cell 77, 283–295. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90320-4
Henley, J. R., Huang, K. H., Wang, D., and Poo, M. M. (2004). Calcium mediates
bidirectional growth cone turning induced by myelin-associated glycoprotein.
Neuron 44, 909–916. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.11.030
Jacobson, A. G., Oster, G. F., Odell, G. M., and Cheng, L. Y. (1986). Neurulation
and the cortical tractor model for epithelial folding. J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol.
96, 19–49.
Jacobson, M., and Rutishauser, U. (1986). Induction of neural cell adhesion
molecule
(NCAM)
in
Xenopus
embryos.
Dev.
Biol.
116,
524–531.
doi: 10.1016/0012-1606(86)90153-3
Javaherian, A., and Cline, H. T. (2005). Coordinated motor neuron axon growth
and neuromuscular synaptogenesis are promoted by CPG15 in vivo. Neuron 45,
505–512. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.12.051
Je, H. S., Yang, F., Ji, Y., Nagappan, G., Hempstead, B. L., and Lu, B. (2012).
Role of pro-brain-derived neurotrophic factor (proBDNF) to mature BDNF
conversion in activity-dependent competition at developing neuromuscular
synapses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 109, 15924–15929. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1207767109
Kee, N., Wilson, N., De Vries, M., Bradford, D., Key, B., and Cooper, H. M.
(2008). Neogenin and RGMa control neural tube closure and neuroepithelial
morphology by regulating cell polarity. J. Neurosci. 28, 12643–12653.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4265-08.2008
Keller, R., Shih, J., and Domingo, C. (1992a). The patterning and functioning of
protrusive activity during convergence and extension of the Xenopus organiser.
Dev. 116, 81–91.
Keller, R., Shih, J., and Sater, A. (1992b). The cellular basis of the convergence and
extension of the Xenopus neural plate. Dev. Dyn. 193, 199–217. doi: 10.1002/aja.
1001930302
Keller, R., Shih, J., Sater, A. K., and Moreno, C. (1992c). Planar induction of
convergence and extension of the neural plate by the organizer of Xenopus.
Dev. Dyn. 193, 218–234. doi: 10.1002/aja.1001930303
Kengaku, M., and Okamoto, H. (1993). Basic fibroblast growth factor induces
differentiation of neural tube and neural crest lineages of cultured ectoderm
cells from Xenopus gastrula. Development 119, 1067–1078.
Kintner, C. R., and Melton, D. A. (1987). Expression of Xenopus N-CAM RNA in
ectoderm is an early response to neural induction. Development 99, 311–325.
Kuroda, H., Wessely, O., and De Robertis, E. M. (2004). Neural induction
in Xenopus: requirement for ectodermal and endomesodermal signals
via
Chordin,
Noggin,
β-Catenin,
and
Cerberus.
PLoS
Biol.
2:E92.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0020092
Lamb, T. M., Knecht, A. K., Smith, W. C., Stachel, S. E., Economides, A. N.,
Stahl, N., et al. (1993). Neural induction by the secreted polypeptide noggin.
Science 262, 713–718. doi: 10.1126/science.8235591
Lang, D. M., Rubin, B. P., Schwab, M. E., and Stuermer, C. A. (1995). CNS myelin
and oligodendrocytes of the Xenopus spinal cord—but not optic nerve—are
nonpermissive for axon growth. J. Neurosci. 15, 99–109.
Lee, J. Y., and Harland, R. M. (2010). Endocytosis is required for efficient
apical constriction during Xenopus gastrulation. Curr. Biol. 20, 253–258.
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.12.021
Lee-Liu, D., Moreno, M., Almonacid, L. I., Tapia, V. S., Muüoz, R., von
Marées, J., et al. (2014). Genome-wide expression profile of the response to
spinal cord injury in Xenopus laevis reveals extensive differences between
regenerative and non-regenerative stages. Neural Dev. 9:12. doi: 10.1186/1749
-8104-9-12
Lee, J., Platt, K. A., Censullo, P., and Ruiz I Altaba, A. (1997). Gli1 is a target of
Sonic hedgehog that induces ventral neural tube development. Development
124, 2537–2552.
Lesueur, J. A., and Graff, J. M. (1999). Spemann organizer activity of Smad10.
Development 126, 137–146.
LeSueur, J. A., Fortuno, E. S. III, McKay, R. M., and Graff, J. M. (2002). Smad10 is
required for formation of the frog nervous system. Dev. Cell 2, 771–783.
doi: 10.1016/s1534-5807(02)00172-7
Li, W. C., Soffe, S. R., and Roberts, A. (2003). The spinal interneurons and
properties of glutamatergic synapses in a primitive vertebrate cutaneous flexion
reflex. J. Neurosci. 23, 9068–9077.
Lohof, A. M., Quillan, M., Dan, Y., and Poo, M. M. (1992). Asymmetric
modulation of cytosolic cAMP activity induces growth cone turning.
J. Neurosci. 12, 1253–1261.
Lombard-Banek, C., Portero, E. P., Onjiko, R. M., and Nemes, P. (2017). New-
generation mass spectrometry expands the toolbox of cell and developmental
biology. Genesis 55:e23012. doi: 10.1002/dvg.23012
Love, N. R., Chen, Y., Bonev, B., Gilchrist, M. J., Fairclough, L., Lea, R., et al. (2011).
Genome-wide analysis of gene expression during Xenopus tropicalis tadpole tail
regeneration. BMC Dev. Biol. 11:70. doi: 10.1186/1471-213x-11-70
Love, N. R., Chen, Y., Ishibashi, S., Kritsiligkou, P., Lea, R., Koh, Y.,
et al. (2013). Amputation-induced reactive oxygen species are required for
successful Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Nat. Cell Biol. 15, 222–228.
doi: 10.1038/ncb2659
Marchal, L., Luxardi, G., Thomé, V., and Kodjabachian, L. (2009). BMP inhibition
initiates neural induction via FGF signaling and Zic genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U S A 106, 17437–17442. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0906352106
Marek, K. W., Kurtz, L. M., and Spitzer, N. C. (2010). cJun integrates calcium
activity and tlx3 expression to regulate neurotransmitter specification. Nat.
Neurosci. 13, 944–950. doi: 10.1038/nn.2582
Ming, G., Henley, J., Tessier-Lavigne, M., Song, H., and Poo, M. (2001). Electrical
activity modulates growth cone guidance by diffusible factors. Neuron 29,
441–452. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(01)00217-3
Ming, G. L., Song, H. J., Berninger, B., Holt, C. E., Tessier-Lavigne, M., and
Poo, M. M. (1997). cAMP-dependent growth cone guidance by netrin-1.
Neuron 19, 1225–1235. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80414-6
Ming, G., Song, H., Berninger, B., Inagaki, N., Tessier-Lavigne, M., and
Poo, M. (1999). Phospholipase C-γ and phosphoinositide 3-kinase mediate
cytoplasmic signaling in nerve growth cone guidance. Neuron 23, 139–148.
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80760-6
Mizuseki, K., Kishi, M., Matsui, M., Nakanishi, S., and Sasai, Y. (1998a). Xenopus
Zic-related-1 and Sox-2, two factors induced by chordin, have distinct activities
in the initiation of neural induction. Development 125, 579–587.
Mizuseki, K., Kishi, M., Shiota, K., Nakanishi, S., and Sasai, Y. (1998b). SoxD: an
essential mediator of induction of anterior neural tissues in Xenopus embryos.
Neuron 21, 77–85. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80516-4
Nakata, K., Nagai, T., Aruga, J., and Mikoshiba, K. (1997). Xenopus Zic3, a primary
regulator both in neural and neural crest development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U S A 94, 11980–11985. doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.22.11980
Nicetto, D., Hahn, M., Jung, J., Schneider, T. D., Straub, T., David, R., et al. (2013).
Suv4–20h histone methyltransferases promote neuroectodermal differentiation
by silencing the pluripotency-associated Oct-25 gene. PLoS Genet. 9:e1003188.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003188
Nieuwkoop, P. D., and Faber, J. (Eds). (1994). Normal Table of Xenopus laevis
(Daudin): A Systematical and Chronological Survey of the Development from
the Fertilized Egg Till the End of Metamorphosis. New York, NY: Garland
Publishing Inc.
Nishiyama, M., Togashi, K., von Schimmelmann, M. J., Lim, C. S., Maeda, S.,
Yamashita, N., et al. (2011). Semaphorin 3A induces CaV2.3 channel-
dependent conversion of axons to dendrites. Nat. Cell Biol. 13, 676–685.
doi: 10.1038/ncb2255
O’Dowd, D. K. (1983). RNA synthesis dependence of action potential
development in spinal cord neurones. Nature 303, 619–621. doi: 10.1038/303
619a0
O’Dowd, D. K., Ribera, A. B., and Spitzer, N. C. (1988). Development of voltage-
dependent calcium, sodium and potassium currents in Xenopus spinal neurons.
J. Neurosci. 8, 792–805.
Ossipova, O., Kim, K., Lake, B. B., Itoh, K., Ioannou, A., and Sokol, S. Y.
(2014). Role of Rab11 in planar cell polarity and apical constriction during
vertebrate neural tube closure. Nat. Commun. 5:3734. doi: 10.1038/ncomm
s4734
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
8
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 90

Borodinsky
Xenopus Toolkit for Spinal Cord Studies
Otte, A. P., Koster, C. H., Snoek, G. T., and Durston, A. J. (1988). Protein
kinase C mediates neural induction in Xenopus laevis. Nature 334, 618–620.
doi: 10.1038/334618a0
Otte, A. P., Kramer, I. M., and Durston, A. J. (1991). Protein kinase C and
regulation of the local competence of Xenopus ectoderm. Science 251, 570–573.
doi: 10.1126/science.1990433
Otte, A. P., and Moon, R. T. (1992). Protein kinase C isozymes have distinct
roles in neural induction and competence in Xenopus. Cell 68, 1021–1029.
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90074-m
Pera, E. M., Ikeda, A., Eivers, E., and De Robertis, E. M. (2003). Integration of IGF,
FGF, and anti-BMP signals via Smad1 phosphorylation in neural induction.
Genes Dev. 17, 3023–3028. doi: 10.1101/gad.1153603
Ribera, A. B. (1996). Homogeneous development of electrical excitability via
heterogeneous ion channel expression. J. Neurosci. 16, 1123–1130.
Ribera, A. B., and Spitzer, N. C. (1989). A critical period of transcription
required for differentiation of the action potential of spinal neurons. Neuron
2, 1055–1062. doi: 10.1016/0896-6273(89)90229-8
Roberts, A., Kahn, J. A., Soffe, S. R., and Clarke, J. D. (1981). Neural control
of swimming in a vertebrate. Science 213, 1032–1034. doi: 10.1126/science.
7196599
Robles, E., and Gomez, T. M. (2006). Focal adhesion kinase signaling at sites
of integrin-mediated adhesion controls axon pathfinding. Nat. Neurosci. 9,
1274–1283. doi: 10.1038/nn1762
Robles, E., Huttenlocher, A., and Gomez, T. M. (2003). Filopodial calcium
transients regulate growth cone motility and guidance through local activation
of calpain. Neuron 38, 597–609. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00260-5
Root, C. M., Velázquez-Ulloa, N. A., Monsalve, G. C., Minakova, E., and
Spitzer, N. C. (2008). Embryonically expressed GABA and glutamate drive
electrical activity regulating neurotransmitter specification. J. Neurosci. 28,
4777–4784. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4873-07.2008
Sasai, Y., Lu, B., Steinbeisser, H., and De Robertis, E. M. (1995). Regulation of
neural induction by the Chd and Bmp-4 antagonistic patterning signals in
Xenopus. Nature 376, 333–336. doi: 10.1038/376333a0
Session, A. M., Uno, Y., Kwon, T., Chapman, J. A., Toyoda, A., Takahashi, S., et al.
(2016). Genome evolution in the allotetraploid frog Xenopus laevis. Nature 538,
336–343. doi: 10.1038/nature19840
Sharpe, C. R., Fritz, A., De Robertis, E. M., and Gurdon, J. B. (1987). A homeobox-
containing marker of posterior neural differentiation shows the importance
of predetermination in neural induction. Cell 50, 749–758. doi: 10.1016/0092-
8674(87)90333-3
Shim, S., Goh, E. L., Ge, S., Sailor, K., Yuan, J. P., Roderick, H. L., et al. (2005).
XTRPC1-dependent chemotropic guidance of neuronal growth cones. Nat.
Neurosci. 8, 730–735. doi: 10.1038/nn1459
Sillar, K. T., and Roberts, A. (1988). A neuronal mechanism for sensory gating
during locomotion in a vertebrate. Nature 331, 262–265. doi: 10.1038/33
1262a0
Smith, J. C., and Slack, J. M. (1983). Dorsalization and neural induction:
properties of the organizer in Xenopus laevis. J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol. 78,
299–317.
Sokol, S. Y. (2016). Mechanotransduction during vertebrate neurulation. Curr.
Top. Dev. Biol. 117, 359–376. doi: 10.1016/bs.ctdb.2015.11.036
Song, H., Ming, G., He, Z., Lehmann, M., McKerracher, L., Tessier-Lavigne, M.,
et al. (1998). Conversion of neuronal growth cone responses from repulsion to
attraction by cyclic nucleotides. Science 281, 1515–1518. doi: 10.1126/science.
281.5382.1515
Song, H. J., Ming, G. L., and Poo, M. M. (1997). cAMP-induced switching
in
turning
direction
of
nerve
growth
cones.
Nature
388,
275–279.
doi: 10.1038/40864
Spemann, H. (1938). Embryonic Development and Induction. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press; H. Milford, Oxford University Press.
Spemann, H., and Mangold, H. (1924). über induktion von embryonalanlagen
durch implantation artfremder organisatoren. Arch. Mikrosk. Anat. Entwickl.
100, 599–638. doi: 10.1007/BF02108133
Spitzer, N. C., and Baccaglini, P. I. (1976). Development of the action
potential in embryo amphibian neurons in vivo. Brain Res. 107, 610–616.
doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(76)90148-7
Swapna, I., and Borodinsky, L. N. (2012). Interplay between electrical activity and
bone morphogenetic protein signaling regulates spinal neuron differentiation.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 109, 16336–16341. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1202818109
Tandon, P., Conlon, F., Furlow, J. D., and Horb, M. E. (2017). Expanding the
genetic toolkit in Xenopus: approaches and opportunities for human disease
modeling. Dev. Biol. 426, 325–335. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.04.009
Tseng, A.-S., Adams, D. S., Qiu, D., Koustubhan, P., and Levin, M. (2007).
Apoptosis is required during early stages of tail regeneration in Xenopus laevis.
Dev. Biol. 301, 62–69. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.10.048
Tu, M. K., and Borodinsky, L. N. (2014). Spontaneous calcium transients manifest
in the regenerating muscle and are necessary for skeletal muscle replenishment.
Cell Calcium 56, 34–41. doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2014.04.004
Wallingford, J. B. (2005). Neural tube closure and neural tube defects: studies in
animal models reveal known knowns and known unknowns. Am. J. Med. Genet.
C Semin. Med. Genet. 135C, 59–68. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.30054
Wallingford, J. B., Ewald, A. J., Harland, R. M., and Fraser, S. E. (2001). Calcium
signaling during convergent extension in Xenopus. Curr. Biol. 11, 652–661.
doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00201-9
Wallingford, J. B., and Harland, R. M. (2001). Xenopus Dishevelled signaling
regulates both neural and mesodermal convergent extension: parallel forces
elongating the body axis. Development 128, 2581–2592.
Wallingford, J. B., Niswander, L. A., Shaw, G. M., and Finnell, R. H. (2013). The
continuing challenge of understanding, preventing, and treating neural tube
defects. Science 339:1222002. doi: 10.1126/science.1222002
Wan, J., and Poo, M. (1999). Activity-induced potentiation of developing
neuromuscular synapses. Science 285, 1725–1728. doi: 10.1126/science.285.
5434.1725
Wang, G. X., and Poo, M. M. (2005). Requirement of TRPC channels in netrin-
1-induced chemotropic turning of nerve growth cones. Nature 434, 898–904.
doi: 10.1038/nature03478
Xiang, Y., Li, Y., Zhang, Z., Cui, K., Wang, S., Yuan, X. B., et al. (2002). Nerve
growth cone guidance mediated by G protein-coupled receptors. Nat. Neurosci.
5, 843–848. doi: 10.1038/nn899
Xu, S., Cheng, F., Liang, J., Wu, W., and Zhang, J. (2012). Maternal
xNorrin, a canonical Wnt signaling agonist and TGF-β antagonist, controls
early neuroectoderm specification in Xenopus. PLoS Biol. 10:e1001286.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001286
Zhang, H. Y., Issberner, J., and Sillar, K. T. (2011). Development of a
spinal locomotor rheostat. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 108, 11674–11679.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1018512108
Zheng, J. Q., Felder, M., Connor, J. A., and Poo, M. M. (1994). Turning of
nerve growth cones induced by neurotransmitters. Nature 368, 140–144.
doi: 10.1038/368140a0
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Borodinsky. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or
licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in
accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction
is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
9
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 90

===== Brennan2022_NatComm_Microglia+SCIrepair =====
ARTICLE
Microglia coordinate cellular interactions during
spinal cord repair in mice
Faith H. Brennan
1,2, Yang Li3, Cankun Wang
3, Anjun Ma
3, Qi Guo3, Yi Li
4,6, Nicole Pukos1,2,
Warren A. Campbell1, Kristina G. Witcher1,5, Zhen Guan1,2, Kristina A. Kigerl1,2, Jodie C. E. Hall
1,2,
Jonathan P. Godbout1,5, Andy J. Fischer
1, Dana M. McTigue1,2, Zhigang He
4, Qin Ma
3 &
Phillip G. Popovich
1,2✉
Traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) triggers a neuro-inﬂammatory response dominated by
tissue-resident microglia and monocyte derived macrophages (MDMs). Since activated
microglia and MDMs are morphologically identical and express similar phenotypic markers
in vivo, identifying injury responses speciﬁcally coordinated by microglia has historically been
challenging. Here, we pharmacologically depleted microglia and use anatomical, histo-
pathological, tract tracing, bulk and single cell RNA sequencing to reveal the cellular and
molecular responses to SCI controlled by microglia. We show that microglia are vital for SCI
recovery and coordinate injury responses in CNS-resident glia and inﬁltrating leukocytes.
Depleting microglia exacerbates tissue damage and worsens functional recovery. Conversely,
restoring select microglia-dependent signaling axes, identiﬁed through sequencing data, in
microglia depleted mice prevents secondary damage and promotes recovery. Additional
bioinformatics analyses reveal that optimal repair after SCI might be achieved by co-opting
key ligand-receptor interactions between microglia, astrocytes and MDMs.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
OPEN
1 Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 2 Belford Center for Spinal Cord Injury, Center
for Brain and Spinal Cord Repair, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 3 Department of Biomedical Informatics,
The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 4 F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children’s Hospital, Department of
Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 5 Institute for Behavioral Medicine Research, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 6Present address: Institute of Neuroscience, Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. ✉email: phillip.popovich@osumc.edu
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;

M
icroglia are central nervous system (CNS)-resident
macrophages and comprise ~10% of all CNS cells1–3.
Microglia help maintains CNS homeostasis via constant
interaction with both neuronal and nonneuronal cells4,5. In
clinical and experimental CNS lesions, including spinal cord
injury (SCI)6–9, microglia together with monocyte-derived mac-
rophages (MDMs), are the predominant cell types initiating
neuroinﬂammatory reactions and both cell types can repair
damaged CNS tissue or cause bystander (secondary) injury to
neurons, glia and endothelia10–14. Since microglia and MDMs
adopt similar morphologies and share phenotypic markers in the
pathological CNS, it has been difﬁcult to ascribe distinct roles for
either cell type in vivo. However, with the advent of new research
tools including microglia-speciﬁc
depletion techniques and
advanced sequencing technologies, it is now possible to study
how microglia control diverse cellular and molecular responses
after SCI. Here, we apply these tools in three different SCI models
and show that optimal repair after SCI and likely other forms of
neurological disease, require microglia.
Results
Microglia are required to achieve optimal recovery of function
and restore lesion homeostasis after SCI. To assess the effects of
microglia on functional recovery after SCI, microglia were
depleted by feeding mice chow laced with a CSF1R antagonist
(PLX5622) beginning two weeks before receiving a 75 kdyne T9
contusion SCI, with feeding continuing until 35 days post-injury
(dpi) (Fig. 1a). Quality control studies show that two weeks of
continuous feeding is sufﬁcient to deplete 99% of spinal cord
microglia (Sup. Fig. 1a–h), and >95% depletion was still achieved
by 35 dpi (Sup. Fig. 2)15. PLX5622 does not cause locomotor
deﬁcits in uninjured mice (Sup. Fig. 1i–o), nor does the drug
deplete circulating myeloid-lineage cells or their ability to
respond to inﬂammatory challenges (e.g., LPS) (Sup. Fig. 1 p–z’).
These observations conﬁrm published data16–18.
All mice, even those without microglia, display normal
overground locomotion before SCI, but at 1 dpi, develop near-
complete paralysis (Fig. 1b, c). In SCI mice-fed vehicle, locomotor
recovery improved gradually but plateaued after 3 weeks
(Fig. 1b–d). While mice fed PLX5622 diet recovered similarly
to mice fed vehicle diet for 7 dpi, after that they performed worse
than controls, with only 2/7 mice (29%) achieving consistent
plantar stepping by 35 dpi compared to 100% of controls (Fig. 1b).
These exacerbated locomotor deﬁcits were accompanied by severe
deﬁcits in trunk stability and tail position from 14–35 dpi
(Fig. 1c). Non-subjective behavioral analysis using the horizontal
ladder test conﬁrmed the essential role played by microglia in
regulating spontaneous recovery of function after SCI. Microglia
depletion did not affect baseline performance on this task, but,
without microglia, the number of mistakes (i.e., missed ladder
rungs) increased at 20, 27, and 34 dpi (p < 0.0001 vs. vehicle)
(Fig. 1d). Impaired functional recovery was associated with
exacerbated myelin and axon pathology (Fig. 1e–l).
Since microglia help maintain tissue homeostasis and coordi-
nate local immune responses, we predicted that depleting
microglia would affect the recruitment of monocyte-derived
macrophages (MDMs), the predominant inﬁltrating leukocyte
subpopulation after SCI. Consistent with published data8,19,
reactive macrophages (mostly F4/80+P2ry12−MDMs) were
restricted to the lesion core in SCI mice fed vehicle (Fig. 1m).
Conversely, in SCI mice without microglia, large, ectopic MDM
clusters migrated into spared white matter (Fig. 1n–q). MDMs in
these clusters were larger and reminiscent of the ‘foamy’
macrophages that have been linked to neurotoxicity and myelin
pathology20,21 (Fig. 1r, s). Without microglia, the contiguous
border of hypertrophied glia (“glial scar”) that normally separates
the lesion core from spared white matter, was attenuated
(Fig. 1t–x). Since the glial scar is achieved partly through
proliferation of astrocytes22 and NG2 glia23, we quantiﬁed the
number
of
proliferating
(BrdU+GFAP+)
astrocytes
and
NG2+BrdU+ cells in the injured spinal cord. Without microglia,
astrocyte (Fig. 1y, z) and NG2 cell proliferation decreased (Sup.
Fig. 3). The roles that microglia play in promoting optimal
recovery of function and restoring tissue homeostasis through
regulation of glial scarring, intraspinal inﬂammation and limiting
axonal dieback, also were evident in more severe models of SCI,
including complete forceps crush injuries at the T9 or L1 spinal
levels (Sup. Fig. 4). Having replicated the microglia depletion
phenotype in these models, we next performed gene sequencing
in mice with a 75 kdyne T9 contusion SCI.
Microglia coordinate the earliest phases of tissue repair after
SCI by regulating the injured spinal cord transcriptome. To
gain insight into how microglia inﬂuence tissue homeostasis after
SCI, sham SCI spinal cords from mice-fed vehicle or PLX5622
were analyzed using bulk RNA sequencing. Since microglia are
exquisitely sensitive to changes in tissue homeostasis24, we pre-
dicted that microglia-dependent effects on the injured spinal cord
transcriptome would be evident by 7 dpi.
At 7 dpi, the main effect of SCI was to increase gene expression
(Fig. 2a). Conversely, the main effect of microglia depletion was
to decrease gene expression in injured spinal cord (Fig. 2b). The
reduction in gene expression after microglia depletion cannot be
explained by a loss of microglia intrinsic genes. Indeed, microglia-
speciﬁc genes account for only 37.7% (320/849) of reduced genes
in both sham and SCI groups (Fig. 2b–d). In contrast, 422 unique
genes (~50% of all genes reduced by PLX) were reduced only in
the SCI group; these are microglia-dependent genes (Fig. 2d).
Next, we determined the nature of the post-SCI transcriptional
changes that are controlled by microglia. Although the main
effect of SCI was to increase gene expression, 593 genes were
downregulated after SCI, and most (538/593 or 89.7%) were
unaffected by microglia depletion (Fig. 2e). In contrast, without
microglia, 51.2% of genes that were normally increased after SCI
(512 of the top 1000) were no longer increased (Fig. 2f). These
microglia-dependent genes encode proteins required for: lipid
transport/processing, cell cycle, complement, cytokines, pattern
recognition receptors, interferons, interleukins, and other factors
related to injury responses, proliferation, and tissue remodeling
(Supplemental Table 1).
Next, using the GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit (WebGestalt)25, we
determined that microglia-dependent genes control the following
major biological processes after SCI: phagocytosis, cytokine
production, response to cytokines, endocytosis and protein
secretion (Fig. 2g, j). The main microglia-dependent molecular
functions increased by SCI were toll-like receptor binding,
chemokine
activity,
chemokine
receptor
binding,
cytokine
receptor activity, and cytokine activity (Fig. 2h). In line with
this, the main cellular components affected by SCI and microglia
depletion were membrane domains and structures involved in
endocytosis (e.g., exterior side of plasma membrane, lysosome,
vacuole) (Fig. 2i). Additional analysis using the Reactome
pathway database26 conﬁrmed that after SCI, microglia are
important for activating signal transduction, immune responses,
metabolism, metabolism of proteins, hemostasis and cell cycle
(Supplemental Table 2). Gross and histopathological observation
of spinal cords with and without microglia at 7, 14 and 21 dpi
conﬁrmed the predictions made from bulk RNAseq data, i.e., that
microglial coordinate the cellular and molecular processes needed
to achieve optimal hemostasis, preservation of myelin and axons,
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

phagocytosis of myelin debris, controlled spatiotemporal recruit-
ment of MDMs, and glial border formation (Sup. Fig. 5).
To
understand
if
these
microglia-dependent
effects
are
encoded by a consistent genetic “signature”, a Venn diagram
was created to visualize genes in the top 5 biological processes
that were both increased after SCI and were also microglia-
dependent (Fig. 2k). Although most genes (n = 140/171) were
involved in only 1 or 2 processes, 31 genes were involved in ≥3
biological processes: 17 genes were involved in 3 processes; 10
genes were involved in 4 processes; and 4 genes (Tnf, Tlr2, Syk,
and Pycard) were involved in all of the top 5 biological processes
(Fig. 2k, Supplemental Table 3). Gene network analysis, with
y
G
GFAP BrdU
PLX5622
Vehicle
PLX5622
Vehicle
o
m
m’
n
m’
n’
P2RY12 F4/80
MBP CD68 P2RY12
k
r
z
w
x
w’
x’
w’
x’
f’
e’
0
7
14
21
28
35 dpi
1
3
5
7
9
Vehicle
PLX5622
*
**
**
0
7
14
21
28
35 dpi
1
3
5
7
9
11
BMS Subcore
Vehicle
PLX5622
***
**** **** ****
-1
20
27
34 dpi
0.2
0.4
0.6
Mistakes/cm
****
****
****
Vehicle
PLX5622
c
d
e
g
h
i
Lesion
Gray matter
White matter
f
f’
e’
g’
h’
l
j
s
PLX5622
Vehicle
Eriochrome cyanine Neurofilament
10-20
20-30
30-40
40-50
50-100
100-200
200+
0
10
20
30
40
50
Cell area (µm2)
% of CD68+ cells
****
*
*
***
PLX5622 
Vehicle 
**
x10 3
# GFAP+BrdU+ cells
0.6 R
0
0.6 C
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Distance from epicentre (mm)
****
***
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
10
20
30
40
Distance from epicentre (mm)
GFAP+ area (%)
v
t
u
****
Veh PLX
50
60
70
80
90
Area under curve
 (arb. units)
**
Veh PLX
0
10
20
30
40
Epi. GFAP+ area (%)
***
PLX5622
Vehicle
PLX5622
Vehicle
PLX5622
Vehicle
Veh PLX
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Lesion length (mm)
**
Veh PLX
0
10
20
30
40
Spared myelin (%)
***
Veh PLX
0
10
20
30
40
50
Neurofilament (%)
**
Veh PLX
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
***
Lesion vol. (mm3)
n’
PLX5622
Vehicle
PLX5622
Vehicle
F4/80
GFAP 
 F4/80+P2RY12- area (%)
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
10
20
30
40
Distance from epicentre (mm)
**
****
****
BMS Score
b
a
 -14    0       7                    35
PLX5622 diet
Vehicle diet
75 kdyne 
T9 SCI
dpi
BrdU
Perfuse
Veh PLX
0
20
40
60
80
 F4/80+P2RY12- area (%)
**
Veh PLX
0
10
20
30
40
***
p
q
Central
GM
Ventral 
WM
 F4/80+P2RY12- area (%)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3

linkages of co-expression and predicted functional interactions,
was
performed
to
understand
how
these
31
genes
were
interrelated (Fig. 2l). Every gene connected to at least 8 others
by co-expression and/or functional interaction, indicating that
this gene network is a “core” transcriptional signature of
microglia-dependent functions after SCI. Indeed, using Gene-
MANIA (https://genemania.org) to explore gene interactions, we
found that a key SCI-dependent and microglia-dependent node
positioned at the edge of the network was Ccl2 (Fig. 2m), and a
key node positioned at the center of the network was Tlr2
(Fig. 2n).
Restoring
microglia-dependent
signaling
networks
in
microglia-depleted spinal cord promotes tissue healing and
neurological recovery. If the “core” transcriptional signature of
microglia-dependent functions identiﬁed above is required to
achieve homeostatic neuroinﬂammation, gliosis, and vascular
repair after SCI, then it should be possible to restore tissue
homeostasis to the injured spinal cord and improve recovery of
function in microglia-depleted mice by introducing into the
injury site, key microglia-dependent signaling molecules. Notably,
Tlr2 and Ccl2 were notably deﬁcient in the injured spinal cord of
microglia-depleted
mice (Fig.
2k–n). Since CCL2 controls
intraspinal MDM recruitment27, and TLR2 agonists confer neu-
roprotection after SCI28–30, we posited that injecting a combi-
nation of recombinant CCL2 (rCCl2) and PAM3CSK4, a TLR2
agonist (TLR2 ag) into the injury site would reverse the microglia
depletion phenotype.
Mice were fed vehicle or PLX5622 starting two weeks before
SCI, and then at 2 dpi, coinciding with the normal peak of
endogenous CCL2 production31 and Tlr2 expression28,32, vehicle
or rCCL2 and TLR2 ag were injected into the injury site in an
effort to recruit and then reprogram inﬁltrating MDM pheno-
types. In these same mice, at 3 dpi, preceding peak MDM
recruitment after experimental SCI8, TLR2 ag was injected (i.p.).
Pilot studies revealed this to be the optimal paradigm for
enhancing MDM recruitment and lipid phagocytosis in animals
without microglia (Sup. Fig. 6). When this paradigm was applied
in an independent replicate experiment with survival extended to
35 dpi (Fig. 3a), rCCL2 + TLR2 ag injections prevented the
exacerbated pathology and functional impairment caused by
microglia depletion (Fig. 3b–v). However, in SCI mice with
microglia, the same treatment impaired neurological recovery
(Fig. 3b–d) and exacerbated lesion pathology (Fig. 3e–z). When
sections from each group were stained for GFAP and Oil Red O,
it was evident that re-introduction of microglia-dependent
signals, i.e., rCCL2 + TLR2 ag, restored lipid binding, phagocy-
tosis, glial scarring, MDM corralling, i.e., cellular functions that
were otherwise impaired in microglia-depleted injured spinal
cords (Fig. 3w–z). Collectively, these data indicate that post-
injury induction
of CCL2 and TLR2 signaling,
a
“core”
transcriptional
signature
of
microglia-dependent
functions
revealed by bulk RNAseq, is needed to effectively coordinate
the restorative/reparative effects of neuroinﬂammation and
reactive astrogliosis after SCI. However, interfering with or
amplifying this microglia-dependent signaling network worsens
injury outcomes.
Single
cell
RNA
sequencing
(scRNA-seq)
reveals
time-
dependent and cell-speciﬁc changes in the injured spinal cord
transcriptome. To better understand how microglia coordinate
interactions between various cell types to achieve optimal post-
injury tissue homeostasis and recovery of function33,34, single-cell
RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) was used. RNA was prepared and
barcoded from 21,016 single cells (16,003 genes) isolated from
spinal cords pooled from sham, 7 dpi, or 28 dpi mice fed vehicle
or PLX5622 (Fig. 4a). Uniform Manifold Approximation and
Projection for Dimension Reduction (UMAP)35 clustering and
annotation revealed 14 cell types that have transcriptional proﬁles
consistent with: microglia (33.4%), MDMs (32.3%), endothelial
cells (5.1%), monocytes (5.1%), astrocytes (4.6%), T cells (3.7%),
ependymal cells (3.4%), B cells (3.1%), intermediate progenitors
(2.9%), neutrophils (2.5%), erythroid cells (1.3%), oligoden-
drocyte lineage (1.2%), pericytes (0.8%), and leptomeningeal cells
(0.6%) (Fig. 4b). Cell types were conﬁrmed by identifying the
most signiﬁcant differentially expressed genes (DEGs) for each
cluster (Fig. 4c, Sup. Fig. 7) then cross-referencing DEG proﬁles
with independent libraries36,37. Microglia and MDM clusters
were over-represented in our integrated library, likely a result of
capture-bias and/or high tolerance of these cells to the dissocia-
tion process38. Monocle 3 was used to further assess microglia
and MDM cluster robustness across pseudotime. When pseudo-
time information was extracted and reduced to one dimension,
we found extensive separation between microglia and MDM
peaks, with ~80% of cells uniquely identiﬁed as microglia and
~73% of cells uniquely identiﬁed as MDMs. Thus, only ~20% of
microglia and ~27% of MDMs could be considered ambiguously
clustered “CNS macrophages” located in the interface between
microglia and MDMs.
In vehicle and PLX5622 groups, SCI clearly affected the
composition of spinal cord cells, including those in blood vessels
and meninges (Fig. 4d–f). At baseline, >50% of cells were resident
glia (37.55% microglia; 17.27% astrocytes), with fewer numbers of
endothelial cells and vessel-associated leukocytes and MDMs
(Fig. 4d, d’). However, after SCI, as MDMs inﬁltrate the injured
tissue (MDMs, sham = 10.31%, 7 dpi = 40.64%, 28 dpi = 33.65%),
Fig. 1 Microglia depletion worsens motor recovery and increases tissue pathology after 75 kdyne T9 contusion SCI. a Experimental timeline. b–d BMS
scores (b), BMS subscores (c) and horizontal ladder (d) data. e, f Eriochrome cyanine (e) and neuroﬁlament staining (f). Scale bar = 200 μm. g, h Three-
dimensional reconstructions of the lesions. Scale bar = 200 μm. i–l Myelin sparing (i), axon sparing (j), lesion volume (k) and lesion length (l)
quantiﬁcation. m, n Representative lesion epicenters showing microglia (P2RY12+ cells) and MDMs (P2RY12-F4/80+ cells). Scale bar = 250 μm.
o–q Microglia depletion reduces overall MDMs (o) but enables MDMs to migrate beyond the central GM (p) into spared tissue (q). r Representative
epicenter ventromedial white matter phagocytic MDMs (CD68+P2RY12- cells). Scale bar = 25 μm. s Microglia depletion increases the size of
phagocytically active MDMs. t–v GFAP labeling along the spinal axis (t, u) and lesion epicenter (v). w, x Representative astroglial borders at the lesion
epicenter Scale bar = 200 μm. y Representative ventromedial white matter showing proliferating astrocytes (arrows). Scale bar = 38 μm. z Astrocyte
proliferation quantiﬁcation. R, rostral, C, caudal. b–d Two-way repeated measures ANOVA with Bonferroni post hoc; b Group x Time effect: p = 0.0013,
post hoc group effect: 21d: p = 0.008, 28d: p = 0.043, 35d: p = 0.0044; c Group x time effect p < 0.0001, post hoc group effect: 21d, 28d, 35: p < 0.0001;
d Group x time effect p < 0.0001, post hoc group effect: 20d, 27d, 34d: p < 0.0001. i–l, p, q, u, v Student’s two-sided t tests; i, p = 0.001, j, p = 0.004,
k, p = 0.0006, l, p = 0.002, p, p = 0.0045, q, p = 0.0009, u, p = 0.0095 v, p = 0.0007; o, s, t, z Two-Way ANOVA with Bonferroni post hoc, mean and
SEM, n = 7 mice/group; o SS = 399.6, df = 13, F = 6.963, p = 0.0088; s: 10–20 μm, p < 0.0001; 20–30 μm, p = 0.025; 100–200 μm, p = 0.046; >200 μm,
p = 0.0013; t SS = 459.4, df = 13, F = 38.21, p < 0.0001; z 0.6 mm rostral, p < 0.0001; 0.6 mm caudal, p = 0.0007; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001;
****p < 0.0001. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

the proportion of resident glia decreased (Fig. 4d’–f’). Overall, due
to microglia depletion (Fig. 4g) and a decrease in MDM
recruitment (Fig. 4h; Sup. Fig. 5g–j), fewer cells were isolated
from spinal cords of mice fed PLX5622 compared to vehicle
(PLX5622 = 1,936 vs. vehicle = 19,080).
Functional heterogeneity of microglia in injured spinal cord
revealed by scRNA-seq. Data in Fig. 1 and Sup. Fig. 5 indicates
that after SCI, microglia become activated and coordinate
intercellular communication to promote tissue repair. To deter-
mine how SCI affects the functional potential of microglia,
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5

we computationally selected the microglia cluster from SCI mice
to reveal microglia-speciﬁc gene expression changes before and
after SCI (Fig. 5a). Eleven major microglia subsets were identiﬁed
(Fig. 5b, c, Sup. Fig. 8): (1) ‘Homeostatic 1’ and (2) ‘Homeostatic
2’ expressed high levels of P2ry12 and Csf1r; (3) ‘Proliferating’
expressed ribosomal genes (e.g., Fau, Rps); (4) ‘Non-lipid pha-
gocytosing’, high Lgals1;39 (5) ‘Lipid processing 1’, high Lpl; (6)
‘Patrolling’, high homeostatic-like markers (e.g., Selplg); (7) ‘Lipid
processing 2’, high Ctsd; (8) ‘Antigen processing’, high Lyz2; (9)
‘Iron processing’, high Fth1; (10) ‘Interferon production’, high
Iﬁt3; and (11) ‘Antigen binding’, high H2-Aa1.
To determine the predominant microglia phenotype before
and after SCI, we quantiﬁed the proportion of each microglia
subset in vehicle samples at baseline and also at 7 and 28 dpi
(Fig. 5d–f). At baseline, Homeostatic 1 (64.7%) or Homeostatic 2
(26.3%) microglia predominate (Fig. 5d). However, by 7 dpi,
homeostatic microglia are replaced by Proliferating (33.7%), Non-
lipid phagocytosing (21.2%) and Lipid processing 1 microglia
(18.9%) (Fig. 5e). By 28 dpi, Non-lipid phagocytosing microglia
were replaced by Lipid processing 1 microglia (31%), and also
Patrolling (26.6%), Proliferating (18.9) and Iron processing
(12.3%) microglia (Fig. 5f). Lipid processing 2 microglia also
increased from baseline (from 1.5% to >6%) at both 7 and 28 dpi.
When microglial gene expression was analyzed on a per-cell basis,
representative microglia homeostatic genes decreased after SCI
(Fig. 5g), whereas proliferating (Fig. 5h), lipid processing (Fig. 5j,
l) and iron processing (Fig. 5m) genes increased; non-lipid
phagocytosing genes increased transiently at 7 dpi (Fig. 5i).
Over half (52.1%) of microglia genes that were decreased at
7 dpi were also decreased at 28 dpi (Fig. 5n–p). Consistently
decreased genes (e.g., P2ry12, Hexb, Lgmn, Csf1r, Cx3cr1) are
those that regulate mRNA metabolism, immune signaling,
differentiation, and apoptosis (Fig. 5p). When we explored
microglia genes that were increased by SCI, 47.3% were increased
at both 7 and 28 dpi (Fig. 5n, o, q). Consistently increased genes
(e.g., Apoe, Spp1, Fth1) were those that enhance translation,
transcription, cell metabolism, proliferation, response to heme
and oxidants, lipid processing (statin) pathways, and pathogen
phagocytosis (Fig. 5q). Almost half (49.0%) of the genes increased
in microglia were only increased at 7 dpi. These were also related
to enhancing metabolic activity and immune function. Few
(3.7%) genes were increased only at 28 dpi: C1qa, Ly6e, Ccl12,
Rgs1, B2m, Ccnd1, Cacybp, Itgax, Sf3b6, Lasp1, Jtb, Kcmf1, Ccl6,
Cd74, Btf3l4, Ube2d3, and Kdelr2 (Fig. 5q). Together, these data
validate the bulk RNA seq data (Fig. 2) and also show that the
main response of microglia to SCI is increased transcription of
genes that control proliferation, protein translation, metabolic
activity, iron and lipid processing, and immune responses.
Microglia control the recruitment and function of MDMs after
SCI. Next, to understand how MDMs respond to SCI and also
how microglia regulate MDM functions, we computationally
selected the MDM cluster (Fig. 6a). Injury and time-dependent
differences in MDM gene expression were noted (Fig. 6a), with 10
major MDM subsets identiﬁed (Fig. 6b, c, Sup. Fig. 9). These
subsets were: (1) ‘Patrolling’ - high Siglech; (2) ‘Cholesterol pro-
cessing’ - high Lpl; (3) ‘Antigen binding’ - high Fcrls; (4) ‘Lipid
processing’ - high Ctsd; (5) ‘Cathepsin inhibition’ - high Cst3; (6)
‘Matrix remodeling’ - high Mmp12; (7) ‘Interferon production’ -
high Iﬁt3; (8) MDMs transiently recruited that are high in ‘CNS
border associated genes’ (e.g., Ms4a7)40, termed ‘Border recruited’
MDMs; (9) ‘Lipid binding’ - high Gpnmb; and (10) ‘Calcium
binding’ - high S100a4. Although few MDMs could be collected
from uninjured spinal cords, Patrolling (50.3%) and Cholesterol
processing (24.3%) MDM subsets predominated at baseline
(sham vehicle, Fig. 6d). By 7dpi, these subsets were replaced by
Lipid binding (34.4%), Antigen binding (22.9%), Border recruited
(22.8%) and Calcium-binding MDMs (7%). By 28 dpi, Choles-
terol processing MDMs again comprise a major subset (33.7%),
and different MDM subsets emerge, including Cathepsin inhibi-
tion (27.6%) and Matrix remodeling MDMs (27.2%).
Microglia depletion limited the number of MDMs present, and
also skewed the phenotype of MDMs in the injured spinal cord at
7 and 28 dpi (Fig. 6e). Indeed, at 7 dpi without microglia, Lipid
binding (45% vs. 34.4%), Calcium-binding (12% vs. 7%) and
Lipid processing (7% vs. 2%) MDMs predominated, with fewer
Antigen binding (5% vs. 22.9%) and Border recruited MDMs
(12% vs. 22.8%) present (Fig. 6e). At 28 dpi without microglia,
Matrix remodeling (32.3% vs. 27.2%) and Lipid processing (6.2
vs. 4.7%) MDMs predominated, and fewer Cathepsin inhibition
(15.5% vs. 27.6%) and Cholesterol processing MDMs (14.3% vs.
33.7%) were present (Fig. 6e). The SCI and microglia-dependent
effects on MDM clusters were also assessed by analyzing gene
expression on a per-cell basis. Figure 6f–k shows selected gene
changes from 6 predominant MDM subsets, with Patrolling genes
decreased after SCI (Fig. 6f) but Cholesterol processing (Fig. 6g),
Lipid processing (Fig. 6i) and Lipid binding (Fig. 6k) genes
increased at 7 and/or 28 dpi. Microglia depletion decreased
Cholesterol processing (Fig. 6g) and Cathepsin inhibition genes
(Fig. 6j) but increased Lipid binding genes (Fig. 6k) at 28 dpi.
At 7 and 28 dpi, the main effect of SCI on MDMs was to
increase their expression of genes related to inﬂammation and
lipid processing (e.g., Cd68, Spp1, Lgals3, Vim, Ctsd, Cstb, Gpnmb,
Cd63, Lyz2, Apoe, and Igf1), although genes controlling antigen
processing and chemotaxis (e.g., Cd38, Cd28, Lrp1, Cxcr4, Cd36,
Il7r, Lrp1, Clec12a) and matrix remodeling (e.g., Mmp12, Fn1,
Cspg, and Timp2) were also increased in MDMs at 7 or 28 dpi,
respectively (Fig. 6l, n).
The main effect of microglia depletion was to increase overall
gene expression in MDMs (Fig. 6m, o). At 7 dpi, these genes were
mainly related to carbohydrate metabolism and vesicle transport
(Fig. 6p). At 28 dpi, MDM genes increased by microglia depletion
were mostly related to cell adhesion and cell membrane
reorganization (Fig. 6q).
Fig. 2 RNA sequencing shows microglia control immune responses to SCI. a–c Volcano plots showing SCI-dependent genes (a), microglia-dependent
genes in SCI (b), and microglia-dependent genes at baseline (c). Selected genes that changed the most are labeled. The main effect of SCI was increased
gene expression, and the main effect of microglia depletion was decreased gene expression. a–c Data generated from analysis performed In DeSeq2 (Wold
test) and Gene Network Analyst. d Pie chart showing more genes were decreased by microglia depletion in the SCI condition than the sham condition.
e, f Analysis of SCI-dependent genes shows microglia depletion only had a modest effect on SCI-decreased genes (e), but prevented an increase in most of
the top (51.2%) SCI-increased genes (f). g–i The 512 genes increased by SCI that failed to increase when microglia were depleted were entered into
pathway analysis for biological processes (g), molecular functions (h) and cellular components (i). j Heatmap showing speciﬁc genes involved in the
biological processes ‘Phagocytosis’ and/or ‘Cytokine production’ (scale = Z scores of FPKM values). k Venn diagram showing overlap between genes in
the top 5 biological process. l Network analysis showing co-expression (purple) and predicted functional interactions (orange) between genes that
overlapped in ≥3 of the top 5 biological processes (n = 31). m, n Interactions between the Ccl2 edge node (m) and Tlr2 center node (n) with other genes in
the network. N = 3-4 mice per group. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle. See also Supplemental Tables 1–3.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Next, we identiﬁed those MDM genes that were increased
(Fig. 6r) or decreased (Fig. 6s) by SCI and were also affected by
microglia depletion. As predicted from Fig. 6p, q, the main effect
of microglia depletion on SCI-dependent MDM genes was
increased gene expression (Fig. 6r, s, Sup. Fig. 10 for gene
names). GO term analyses of all MDM genes affected by SCI and
also increased without microglia showed that microglia normally
inhibit several functionally relevant pathways in MDMs including
collagen metabolism, antigen and extracellular matrix protein
binding, and negative regulation of cell activation and cell
adhesion (Fig. 6t, u). Thus, microglia control both the intraspinal
recruitment of MDMs and their functional potential upon entry
into the lesion site. Without microglia, MDM recruitment is
impaired, MDMs fail to adhere to and migrate within the primary
lesion zone, and those that do are poised for unchecked matrix
degradation.
d
b
c
j
i
f
g
e
EC Neurofilament
F4/80 P2RY12
a
 -14    0   2 3                    35
PLX5622 diet
Vehicle diet
SCI
-
dpi
i.s.
injection
Sal + PBS (Control)
Sal + PBS (Control)
rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag   
0
7
14
21
28
35 dpi
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
BMS score
-1
21
28
35 dpi
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
Mistakes/cm
0
7
14
21
28
35 dpi
1
3
5
7
9
11
BMS Subscore
Veh + 
Control
Veh + rCCL2 
+ Tlr2 ag
PLX + 
Control
0
10
20
30
40
Spared myelin (%)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Neurofilament (%)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Lesion length (mm)
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Lesion vol. (mm3)
l
k
h
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
10
15
20
25
30
GFAP+ area
(% section area)
50
60
70
80
90
A.U.C (arb. units)
0
10
20
30
40
Epicenter
GFAP+ area (%)
0
10
20
30
40
Epicenter F4/80+
P2RY12- area (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
A.U.C (arb. units)
-2
-1
0
1
2 
0
10
20
30
40
F4/80+P2RY12- area (%)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Oil Red O+ area (%)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Custer size (mm2)
0
5
10
15
# Oil Red O+ clusters
Veh + Control
Veh + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag
PLX + Control
PLX + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag
r
q
s
u
w
t
x
z
y
v
Oil Red O
Veh + 
Control
PLX + 
Control
PLX + rCCL2 
+ Tlr2 ag
Veh + rCCL2 
+ Tlr2 ag
Veh + Control
PLX + Control
Distance from epicenter (mm)
Distance from epicenter (mm)
GFAP F4/80
Veh +
Control 
Sal + PBS
Veh + rCCL2 
+ Tlr2 ag
PLX + 
Control
PLX+ rCCL2 
+ Tlr2 ag
m
n
o
p
m’
m’
o’
p’
***
***
**
***
***
****
**
*
********
* *
******
****
**** ** *
***
**
**
***********
****** *****
******* **
Veh + Control
PLX + Control
****
************
****
****
****
****
***
**
*****
****
rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag  
i.p. injection
PLX + rCCL2 
+ Tlr2 ag
PLX + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag
Veh + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag
PLX + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag
Veh + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag
Veh + Control
Veh + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag
PLX + Control
PLX + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag
Veh + Control
Veh + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag
PLX + Control
PLX + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag
Veh + Control
Veh + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag
PLX + Control
PLX + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag
****
**** * **
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7

scRNA-seq reveals SCI- and microglia-dependent effects on
astrocyte transcriptional proﬁles. Because microglia depletion
disrupts the stereotypical formation of a delimiting astroglial
border at the injury site (Fig. 1, Sup. Figs. 4 and 5), a phenotype
that is associated with the spreading of MDMs into spared tissue,
we next evaluated the effects of microglia depletion on the
astrocyte transcriptome after SCI. Computational isolation of the
astrocyte cluster revealed three major astrocyte subsets based on
DEGs broadly related to: 1) solute Transporter, (e.g., Slc1a2,
Atp1a2), 2) Metabolism, (e.g., Gng11, Adk), and 3) innate
immune Inﬂammation, (e.g., Fcer1g, C1qc) (Fig. 7a-c). Separation
of the UMAP plot by experimental condition revealed that in
control spinal cords (sham vehicle), Metabolism (52.9%) and
Transporter (44.2%) astrocytes predominate (Fig. 7d). However,
at 7 and 28 dpi, Metabolism astrocytes are replaced by Trans-
porter and Inﬂammation astrocytes (Fig. 7d). At 28 dpi, a time
corresponding with the formation of a “mature” astroglial border
in vivo41 101 astrocyte genes increased (e.g., C1qb, Fau, Tmsb4x,
Rps genes, ApoE, H2-D1, Fth1, and Ctsd), and 225 genes
decreased (e.g., Ntm, Neat1, Vegfa, Nﬁx, and Kcna2) relative to
sham (Fig. 7f). Notably, regardless of time post-injury, the SCI-
dependent increase in Inﬂammation astrocytes was microglia-
dependent; few Inﬂammation astrocytes were found in spinal
cords without microglia (Fig. 7e). Of all genes that were increased
in astrocytes at 28 dpi, 55% failed to increase without microglia
(Fig. 7g, i). These genes control cell proliferation (e.g., Rpl-, Rps-,
Fau), lipid processing (e.g., Apoe, Ctsz, Ctsd), and antigen pre-
sentation (B2m)42 (Fig. 7g–l). A few (5%) astrocyte genes that
were normally decreased after SCI, (including the cell adhesion
genes Ntm, Nfasc, Cadm4, and also Neat1, Atp1b2, Tsix, Lrig1,
Wsb1, Tcf25, Rapgef3, Ttyh1, and Appl2), did not decrease if
microglia were depleted (Fig. 7h, i). GO term analyses revealed
that depleting microglia prevents the biological processes and
molecular functions, and cellular components that control in
astrocytes, among other things, cytoplasmic translation, response
to IL-4, RNA binding, and tau protein binding (Fig. 7m–o).
Together these data show that many stereotypical astrocyte-
speciﬁc functions triggered by SCI, particularly inﬂammatory
gene upregulation, lipid processing, cell adhesion, and prolifera-
tion, are controlled by microglia.
Although microglia exert major effects on MDMs and
astrocytes, scRNA-seq also revealed microglia-dependent effects
on other cell types that help to explain anatomical and functional
outcomes after SCI in mice depleted of microglia. For example,
the persistence of blood in injured spinal cords without microglia
(Sup. Fig. 5) could indicate an increase in hemorrhage due to a
failure of Homeostatic endothelial cells to shift toward Differ-
entiating
and
Neovascularizing
endothelial
phenotypes
or
impaired clearance/phagocytosis of blood from the lesion site
(Sup. Fig. 11a–e). Microglia control the expression of endothelial
cell genes that are essential for vascular repair, including those
controlling proliferation, vessel remodeling, solute transport, and
responsiveness to inﬂammatory molecules (Sup. Fig. 11f–l). SCI-
and microglia-dependent effects were also observed in: ependy-
mal cells (particularly lipid processing genes; e.g., Apoe, Ctsd,
Tyrobp, Arl6, Prnc2, and Id4; Sup. Fig. 12), oligodendrocyte
lineage cells (e.g., Tmsb4x, Ntm; Sup. Fig. 13), neutrophils (e.g.
Cxcr4, Pram1, Ier3; Sup Fig. 14), and immature monocytes
(differentiation and antigen-presenting genes e.g., Rpl/Rps genes,
Ccnd3, H2-T23; Sup Fig. 15).
Microglia-dependent signaling networks in the injured spinal
cord. To quantitatively infer and analyze microglia-dependent
communication networks after SCI, we computationally isolated
the microglia, MDM, and astrocyte clusters from the scRNAseq
datasets, then used CellChat43 to extract complex signaling pat-
terns involving soluble and membrane-bound ligand-receptor
interactions. Unlike other methods (e.g., NicheNet, iTALK),
CellChat uses systematically curated classiﬁcations of ligand-
receptor pairs with functionally related signaling pathways, does
not exclude receptors that function as multi-subunit complexes,
and considers signaling cofactors and co-receptors that can act as
agonists and antagonists. “Chord plots” in Fig. 8 show autocrine
and paracrine signaling interactions with color-coded ligand-
receptor interaction scores, and the number of signiﬁcant inter-
actions in each condition.
In the intact spinal cord, a highly scored interaction is
microglia Psap (Prosaposin) with astrocyte Gpr37l1 (Fig. 8a, g).
Psap signaling via Gpr37l1 protects astrocytes from oxidative
stress and death44. When microglia are depleted in the intact
spinal cord, reduced microglia-dependent Gpr37l1 crosstalk is
compensated for in an autocrine manner by Astrocyte Psap
(Fig. 8d).
At 7 dpi, prominent signaling networks include microglial
Spp1, which interacts with MDM receptors Cd44, Cd45, and the
integrins Itgb5, Itgb1, Itgav (Fig. 8b, g). Spp1 encodes for
osteopontin, which limits inﬂammation and can promote axon
regeneration45,46. At 28 dpi, enriched microglial ligand-receptor
(L-R) interactions include Csf1r with MDM Csf1, an axis known
to promote SCI recovery16 (Fig. 8c, g). The microglial L-Rs
consistently enriched in sham, 7, and 28 dpi include cytokines
(Ccl3, Ccr5, Tgfbr1/2) that coordinate MDM recruitment,
microglial
Psap,
which
activates
the
neuroprotective
and
glioprotective astrocyte receptor Gpr37l1, and microglial cell
adhesion molecule 1 (Cadm1), which binds astrocyte and MDM
Cadm1 to promote cell adhesion (Fig. 8a–c, g). Figure 8g. shows
the microglial L-Rs enriched at speciﬁc time points after SCI, with
schematics showing how they interact with microglial, MDMs,
and astrocyte L-Rs in SCI conditions and their functional
implications (where known). Interestingly, several of these L-Rs
(Ccl4, Ccl3, Csf1r, Ptprc, Tgfbr2, Lgals9) were detected in our
bulk RNAseq data as being increased in SCI and failing to
increase without microglia present (Fig. 2, Supplemental Table 1).
Fig. 3 Treatment with rCCL2 and Tlr2 ag rescues the microglia depletion phenotype. a Experimental groups and timeline. Mice were continuously fed
vehicle or PLX5622 (PLX) and microinjected intraspinally (i.s.) with rCCL2 (or saline) and a Tlr2 agonist (PAM2CSK4, Tlr2 ag) (or saline) at 2 dpi and i.p.
with Tlr2 ag (or PBS) at 3 dpi. Behavior was monitored until the end point for tissue collection at 35 dpi. b–d Microglia depletion worsened SCI recovery
based on BMS scores (b), subscores (c) and horizontal ladder (d); rCCl2 and Tlr2 ag improved motor recovery in mice with microglia depletion but
worsened outcomes in mice with microglia. e–l Reprograming the MDM phenotype improved tissue sparing in microglia-depleted mice but worsened
pathology in control mice. Scale bar, e–h = 200 μm. m–s Glial scarring (m–p, q–s) and MDM pathology (m–p, r–v) in microglia-depleted mice was rescued
by rCCL2 and TLR2 ag. Scale bar, m–p = 220 μm. w–z Lipid phagocytosis as measured by Oil Red O showed rCCL2 and TLR2 ag improved lipid
phagocytosis in microglia depleted mice. Scale bar (w) = 200 μm. B–D: Two-Way repeated measures ANOVA with Bonferroni post hoc; i–l, r, s, u, v, x–z:
One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc tests; q, t Left is rostral; Two-Way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc tests; q SS = 1135, df = 28, F = 40.19,
p < 0.0001; T SS = 6674, df=28, F = 143.7, p < 0.0001; b-d, i-l, q, r-v, x-z: n = 6–8 mice per group (n = 7 Veh + control, n = 8 Veh + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag;
n = 8 PLX + Control, n = 6 PLX + rCCL2 + Tlr2 ag); mean ± SEM; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001. A.U.C, Area under the curve. Source
data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

a
2. Dissociate to single 
cell suspension
3. Droplet capture, 
barcoding and 
sequencing
1. Experimental 
timeline
Endothelial cells
Lepto-
meningeal cells 
Astrocytes
T cells
-14
0
7
28
Start diets
SCI or Sham
Cord collection
Cord collection
Days post-surgery
Vehicle     or     PLX5622
Ependymal 
cells
Neutrophils
Pericytes
Erythroid 
cells
Monocytes Intermediate 
progenitors
Oligodendrocyte 
lineage
B cells
Macrophages
Microglia
10
0
 -10
 -5             0             5            10
UMAP_1
UMAP_2
c
Intermediate progenitors
Neutrophils
Erythroid cells
Endothelial cells
Leptomeningeal cells
Astrocytes
Ependymal cells
Pericytes
Monocytes
Oligodendrocyte lineage
B cells
MDM
Microglia
T cells
P2ry12
Siglech
Tmem119
Gpnmb
Spp1
Fabp5
Ly6c1
Cldn5
Itm2a
H2−Aa
H2−Eb1
H2−Ab1
Slc1a2
Atp1a2
Atp1b2
Ccl5
Ms4a4b
Nkg7
Dbi
Nnat
Mt3
Ly6d
Cd79a
Cd79b
Stmn1
Hmgb2
Top2a
S100a9
S100a8
Retnlg
Hba−a2
Hbb−bs
Alas2
Olig1
Cspg5
Vcan
Apod
Dcn
Vtn
Mgp
Igfbp6
Gsn
0
1
2
0
25
50
75
100
Average
expression
Percent
expressed
d
Microglia
PLX5622 (3.08%)
Vehicle (96.92%)
0    7   28 dpi
Monocyte-derived
macrophages
Oligodendrocyte 
lineage
Microglia
Monocytes
Astrocytes
T cells
Ependymal 
cells
Neutrophils
Lepto-
meningeal 
cells
Erythroid 
cells
Endothelial cells
Inter-
mediate 
progen-
itors
Pericytes
B cells
21016 cells
b
MDM
PLX5622 (3.98%)
Vehicle (96.02%)
0    7   28 dpi
g
h
37.55
17.27
10.31
4.57
4.18
26.12
Endothelial 
Astrocytes
Other
Monocytes
MDM
Microglia
40.36
33.65
21.72
Other
MDM
Microglia
28.96
40.64
8.09
4.72
17.59
Endothelial 
Monocytes
Microglia
MDM
Other
Sham
1795 cells
10
0
 -10
UMAP_2
 -5        0      
5       10
UMAP_1
7 dpi
e
7439 cells
28 dpi
9846 cells
f
d’
e’
f’
4.27
Endothelial 
44.51
48.79
56.63
30.69
9.6
Fig. 4 Single-cell RNA sequencing of the mouse spinal cord reveals changes in cell composition after SCI and microglia depletion. a Mice received either
vehicle or PLX5622, starting 2 weeks before surgery, until 7 or 28 days post-surgery. At the end point, single-cell RNA sequencing was performed on fresh (un-
perfused) mouse spinal cords by dissecting a 1 cm piece of fresh tissue (T4–T13), including the meninges, centered on the laminectomy site. This method
optimizes cell viability, allows comparison of leukocyte proﬁles present in both sham and SCI conditions, and enriches for resident glia and peripheral immune
cells. b UMAP plot showing fourteen major cell types pooled from all groups. Each dot represents a single cell. c: Dot Plot showing the top 3 DEGs in each
cluster based on adjusted p values. The dot color indicates the average scaled RNA expression of that gene in the cell type, and the dot size represents the
percentage of cells in the cluster that express that gene. d–f UMAP plots of vehicle-fed mice split by time point. d’–f’ The percentage of cell types in d–f. g, h Pie
chart showing that most of the microglia (g) and MDMs (h) were derived from samples in the vehicle group. Data for each condition were pooled from n = 3–4
mice. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle. See also Sup. Fig. 7.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9

Figure 8h shows MDM and astrocyte L-Rs enriched in SCI
and the effect of microglia depletion on these interactions. At
7 dpi, with microglia depleted, there are dozens of additional
MDM L-Rs that are known to promote secondary injury,
including: Sema4d-Cd72/integrin, which induces axon growth
cone collapse47, CD28/CD86 interactions10, and CR3/Itgam
(Mac-1)48 (Fig. 8b, e, h). At 28 dpi, in addition to abolishing
microglia Psap interactions with astrocyte Gpr37l1, microglia
depletion also disrupts astrocyte autocrine Psap-Gpr37l1 inter-
actions and cadherin-cadherin (Cadm1) interactions important
for astrogliosis and cell-cell adhesion (Fig. 8c, f, h). Considered
with the scRNA-seq data, these communication maps reveal
52.1%
at 28 d
 only
at both 
7 &
28 d
 
33.8%
52.1%
at both 
7 &
28 d
10
0
 -10
  -5            0            5           10
UMAP_1
UMAP_2
Microglia
n
o
a
b
c
−4
−2
0
2
4
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
UMAP_1
UMAP_2
P2ry12
Ier5
Cx3cr1
Csf1r
Fau
Uba52
Lgals1
Pf4
Clec7a
Lpl
Cst3
Selplg
Ctsd
Ctsz
Lyz2
Cd93
Fth1
Ftl1
Ifit3
Ifit1
H2-Ab1
H2-Aa
Homeostatic 1
Homeostatic 2
Proliferating
Non-lipid phagocytosing
Lipid processing 1
Patrolling
Lipid processing 2
Antigen processing
Iron processing
Interferon production
Antigen binding
Sham Vehicle
Sham PLX5622
7 dpi Vehicle
7 dpi PLX5622
28 dpi Vehicle
28 dpi PLX5622
7018 Microglia
Homeostatic 1 P2ry12 Ier5 Adbr1 Txnip Il6ra
−4
−2
0
2
4
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
UMAP_1
UMAP_2
Homeostatic 1
Antigen 
binding
Interferon 
production
Iron processing
Antigen 
processing
Lipid processing 2
Lipid 
processing 
1
Homeostatic 2
Patrolling
Non-lipid 
phagocytosing
Proliferating
11 Microglia subsets:
0
2
4
Fau
0
1
2
3
Lgals1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Clec7a
0
2
4
6
Cst3
0
2
4
6
Ctsd
0
2
4
6
8
Fth1
0
1
2
3
4
P2ry12
Expression level
Sham Vehicle
7 dpi Vehicle
28 dpi Vehicle
****
****
****
****
****
****
****
****
i
g
h
l
j
k
m
64.7
26.3
−4
−2
0
2
4
UMAP_2
Sham Vehicle
674 microglia
d
33.7
18.9
6.9
6.2
21.2
5.7
−4
−2
0
2
4
UMAP_2
7 dpi Vehicle
2154 microglia
e
−4
−2
0
2
4
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
UMAP_1
UMAP_2
31.0
26.6
18.9
12.3
6.3
28 dpi Vehicle
3974 microglia
f
0
25
50
75
100
Microglia
Subset
−1 0
1
2
Average Expression
Percent expressed
Biological processes 
at 7 d
only 
49%
p
Structural constituent of ribosome
rRNA binding
Heme-copper terminal oxidase activity
Oxidoreductaseactivity, acting on 
  heme donors
Electron transfer activity
Cytoplasmic translation
Nucleoside triphosphate metabolic process
Nucleoside monophosphate metabolic process
Ribonucleoprotein complex subunit 
  organization 
Generation of precursor metabolites and 
  energy
Molecular functions 
pre-mRNA binding
SMAD binding
SH3 domain binding
mRNA binding
transcription activator, 
  RNA pol II-specific
Regulation of mRNA metabolic 
  process
RNA splicing
B cell activation
Immune response-regulating 
  signaling pathway
Myeloid cell differentiation
by SCI
by SCI
at 28 d
 only 3.7%
Biological processes
Molecular functions 
47.3%
Pathways
Cytoplasmic ribosomal proteins
Statin pathway
Electron transport chain
Iron homeostasis
Microglia pathogen phagocytosis pathway
TYROBP causal network
IL-5 signaling pathway
IL-6 singaling pathway
Apoptosis
TGF Beta Signaling Pathway
Pathways
at 7 d
 only 14.1%
q
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
UMAP_1
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
UMAP_1
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
0
60
120
180
240
LogFC
-Log10 (adj. p value)
Btg2
Ftl1
Fth1
Uba52
Spp1
Apoe
Cst7
Lpl
Apoc1
Csf1r
Hexb
Lgmn
P2ry12
Ier5
Jun
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
0
90
180
270
LogFC
-Log10 (adj. p value)
Spp1
Apoe
Ftl1
Rpl41
Uba52
Fth1
Serinc3
Hexb
Lgmn
Jun
P2ry12
Homeostatic 2 Cx3cr1 Csf1r Malat1 Lgmn Hexb
Proliferating Fau Uba52  Rps29 Rpl37 Rps21
Non-lipid phagocytosing Lgals1 Pf4 Igf1 Folr2 Ctla2a
Lipid processing 1 Lpl Clec7a Mif Spp1 Fn1
Patrolling Cst3 Selplg Cx3cr1Tmem119, Siglech
Lipid processing 2 Ctsd Ctsz Apoe Grn Trem2
Antigen processing Lyz2 Cd93 Cd38 Clec12a Clec4n
Iron processing Fth1 Ftl1 Apoe Fau Uba52
Interferon production Ifit3 Ifit1 Ifit2 Isg15 Irf7
Antigen binding H2-Ab1 A2-Aa H2-Eb1 Cd74 Klrb1b
Cst7
Apoc1
Lpl
Gpnmb
Lyz2
Fabp5
Cd52
Ccl4
Ms4a7
Csf1r
Cx3cr1
Klf2
Klf6
Tyrobp
Fabp5
Cd52
Clec7a
Igf1
Tyrobp
Serinc3
Cx3cr1
Cd81
Klf6
Neat1
Dusp1
Klf2
7 dpi Veh vs. Sham Veh
    by SCI
    by SCI
28 dpi Veh vs. Sham Veh
    by SCI
    by SCI
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

discrete microglia-dependent signaling networks that are required
for tissue repair and homeostasis post-SCI.
Discussion
Using reporter mice or antibodies that distinguish microglia from
MDMs49,50 and microglia-speciﬁc depletion techniques51–56,
both beneﬁcial16,18,57,58 and detrimental59,60 roles for microglia
in SCI have been observed. Data herein extend those reports and
show that microglia are essential for restoring tissue homeostasis
and achieving optimal recovery after SCI. Microglia exert these
beneﬁcial effects by regulating the transcriptional fate, function,
and
intercellular
crosstalk
between
various
non-neuronal
cell types.
SCI triggers the recruitment of monocytes, which differentiate
into MDMs61. Inﬁltrating MDMs persist indeﬁnitely as part of a
central ﬁbrotic lesion “core” that is sequestered from surrounding
healthy tissue by a reactive glial border. We show a core micro-
glial transcriptional signature or “sensome”, controls this neu-
roinﬂammatory cascade after SCI; without microglia, MDM
recruitment is delayed and when MDMs ﬁnally enter the injured
spinal cord, they fail to adhere to or be corralled within the
primary lesion. Instead, MDMs invade adjacent white matter
where they propagate secondary injury.
Building on recent observations21,62,63, we show that func-
tionally heterogeneous intraspinal microglia regulate the pro-
duction of MDM chemoattractants (e.g., CCL2) and also the
expression of MDM genes that control the recognition of DAMPs
(e.g., TLR2), lipid-binding, lipid processing, calcium-binding and
extracellular matrix proteases (e.g. Mmp12)64. Without microglia,
a degradative MDM phenotype predominates and exacerbates
tissue pathology.
Although we did not try to manipulate all aspects of the
microglia-MDM axis to effect more efﬁcient repair, nearly com-
plete rescue of the microglia depletion phenotype was achieved by
reconstituting microglia-depleted spinal cords with TLR2 ag and
rCCL2. CellChat data revealed that microglia-MDM CCL3/
CCL4-CCR5 interactions are key in the acute post-injury period.
However, amplifying chemokine signaling in injured spinal cords
with microglia present exacerbates pathology and worsened
functional recovery, indicating that hyper-activation of normal
microglia-MDM cross-talk can cause pathology. Interestingly,
delayed microglia depletion was reported to improve SCI
recovery59,60, suggesting that excessive or prolonged activation of
microglia subsets may be detrimental, although sex-speciﬁc
effects and use of different CSF1R inhibitors could also explain
these observations.
Microglia per se form a border around necrotic tissue16. Our
data show that microglia also control astroglial border formation
around SCI lesions, presumably by regulating the expression of
genes that control astrocyte survival, actin polymerization, pro-
liferation and adhesion, and gliosis (e.g. Apoe65, Tmsb4x).
Microglia modulate astrocyte fate and function through e.g. Psap-
Gpr37l1 and Cadm1-Cadm1, which protect against oxidative
stress44 and promote proliferation and adhesion to ECM proteins,
respectively. Gene changes in astrocyte and NG2 cells that are
microglia-dependent (e.g., Tmsb4x, Il4, and Ntm) could also
control cell proliferation and endogenous repair mechanisms in
these cells23. CellChat data also revealed that microglia normally
produce ligands like osteopontin (Spp1), that can promote CNS
regeneration and neuroprotection45,46,66.
Potential limitations of our study include the use of only female
mice aged 10–12 weeks and possible off-target effects of PLX5622.
Young female mice were used exclusively to eliminate morbidity
and other logistical challenges associated with performing SCI in
male and aged mice67. However, since microglia are sexually
dimorphic68 and their transcriptional phenotype changes with
age69, male vs. female and young vs. old cohorts should be
compared in future studies. Such comparative studies might also
have translational value since the SCI population is pre-
dominantly male and the median age at the time of injury has
increased from 29 in the 1970s to 43 more recently70. Also,
even though PLX5622 predominantly affects microglia (see Sup.
Fig. 2), the drug could have “off-target” effects, including on
monocyte-derived macrophages71. Despite these limitations, our
results provide a robust foundational dataset for examining how
biological factors (age, sex, injury level, and severity), environ-
mental variables (diet, enrichment, stress), and potential experi-
mental
therapeutics,
affect
microglia-dependent
repair
mechanisms after contusion SCI.
In summary, our data reveal a central role for microglia in
controlling SCI pathobiology and functional recovery and identify
molecules and interactions that should be manipulated in future
studies to repair the injured spinal cord.
Methods
Mice. All surgical and postoperative care procedures were performed in accordance
with The Ohio State University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Adult female (8–10 week old) female C57BL/6 J (WT) mice were purchased from
Jackson Laboratories (RRID: ISMR_JAX:000664). Mice were age and weight-
matched within experiments. Animals were housed under conventional ventilation
conditions on a 12 h light-dark cycle with ad libitum access to food and water.
Room temperature was between 20–26 °C and humidity was between 30–70%.
Pharmacological microglia depletion. A colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor
(Csf1R) antagonist, PLX5622 (formulated at 1200 mg/kg chow p.o; 290 ppm,
Plexxikon) was used to pharmacologically deplete microglia. PLX5622 is an orally
bioavailable, blood-brain barrier permeable compound that speciﬁcally inhibits
Csf1R tyrosine kinase activity with 50-fold selectivity over four related kinases51.
For all experiments using PLX5622, animals were randomly assigned to cages then
cages were randomly assigned to a diet group using QuickCalcs (GraphPad soft-
ware). Animals within a cage received the same diet. For dosing studies (Sup.
Fig. 1a–e, h), uninjured mice received PLX5622 chow continuously for 3, 7, 14, or
21 days. For drug washout studies (Sup. Fig. 1f, g, h), mice received PLX5622 diet
for 14 days, followed by 3 or 7 days of vehicle diet. Control mice received vehicle
diet for 21 days. For initial contusion SCI studies (35 days post-injury (dpi) end-
point) (Fig. 1, Sup. Fig. 2, Sup. Fig. 3), mice continuously received either vehicle or
PLX5622 diet from −14 dpi to 35 dpi. For crush SCI experiments, mice were
continuously fed vehicle or PLX5622 from −14 to 14 dpi (L1 crush, Sup. Fig. 4a–r)
or −14 to 28 dpi (T9 crush, Sup. Fig. 4s–v). For bulk RNAseq studies (7 dpi
endpoint) (Fig. 2), mice received continuous PLX5622 or vehicle diet from −14 to
7 dpi. For SCI timeline studies (7, 14, or 21 dpi endpoint) (Sup. Fig. 5), mice were
Fig. 5 Microglia adopt diverse, the time-dependent transcriptional phenotype in response to SCI. a Microglia were computationally isolated for analysis
between experimental conditions. b, c Microglia is subdivided into 11 subsets based on dominant gene expression. d–f UMAP plots showing the microglia
subsets split by time post-SCI. Numbers in pie charts show major subsets as a percent of total microglia in each group. g–m Violin plots showing gene-level
changes within individual microglia. Wilcox rank-sum tests, ****p < 0.0001. n, o Volcano plots showing increased genes (orange) and decreased genes
(blue) in microglia following SCI at 7 dpi (n) or 28 dpi (o). n–o Wilcox rank-sum tests. Selected genes are labeled. p Most of the microglia genes decreased
at 7 dpi remained decreased at 28 dpi; WebGestalt gene ontology and pathway analysis showed these genes control immune regulation and myeloid cell
differentiation. q Less than half of the microglia genes increased at 7 dpi were also increased at 28 dpi; WebGestalt gene ontology and pathway analysis
showed consistently increased genes control cell metabolism, translation, and response to heme, oxidants, and phagocytosis. Genes exclusively increased in
microglia at 7 dpi control aspects of chemotaxis and cell metabolism. Data for each condition were pooled from n = 3-4 mice. Source data are provided as a
Source Data ﬁle. See also Sup. Fig. 8.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11

continuously fed PLX5622 or vehicle diet from −14 to 7 dpi, 14 dpi, or 21 dpi. For
single-cell RNAseq studies (7 or 28 dpi endpoint) (Figs. 4–6, Sup. Figs. 6–14), mice
were continuously fed PLX5622 or vehicle diet from −14 until the endpoint. For
experiments using intraspinal injections, mice were continuously fed vehicle or
PLX5622 from −14 to 7 dpi (Sup. Fig. 6) or 35 dpi (Fig. 3). To ensure experi-
menters were blinded to diet groups, mice were acclimated to diet-free cages before
testing, and these cages were coded (e.g. ‘A’, ‘B’ ‘C’) prior to testing. Experimenters
were also blinded to diet group for histology, tissue processing, image acquisition,
and data analysis by coding the animals and tissue.
LPS administration. To determine whether PLX5622 affected myeloid lineage cells
other than microglia at baseline or following immune challenge, mice were fed
vehicle or PLX5622 chow starting two weeks before receiving four consecutive daily
0
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
****
a
Siglech
Gpr56
Lpl
Ch25h
Fcrls
Stab1
Ctsd
Apoe
Cst3
Cst7
Mmp12
Ctnnb1
Ifit3
Ifit2
Ms4a7
Ms4a6c
Gpnmb
Fabp5
S100a4
S100a6
Patrolling
Cholesterol processing
Antigen binding
Lipid processing
Cathepsin inhibition
Matrix remodeling
Interferon production
Border recruited
Lipid binding
Calcium binding
b
c
−2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
−10
−5
0
5
UMAP_1
UMAP_2
Patrolling
Cholesterol 
processing
Antigen 
binding
Lipid 
processing
Border
recruited
Lipid
binding
Calcium
binding
Interferon
Matrix
remodeling
Cathepsin 
inhibition
Sham Vehicle
Sham PLX5622
7 dpi Vehicle
7 dpi PLX5622
28 dpi Vehicle
28 dpi PLX5622
0.0
2.5
5.0
−10
−5
0
5
UMAP_1
UMAP_2
MDM
−2.5
6791 MDMs
28 dpi Vehicle
7 dpi Vehicle
Sham Vehicle
−10
−5
0
5
−2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
UMAP_1
UMAP_2
Biological 
processes
p
at 28 dpi
at 7 dpi
MDM genes     by SCI
at 7 dpi
at 28 dpi
at 28 dpi
at 7 dpi
q
r
carbohydrate derivative catabolism
regulation of mRNA metabolic process
golgi vesicle transport
proteasomal protein catabolism
glycoprotein metabolic process
mitogen-activated protein kinase binding
damaged DNA binding
amide transmembrane transporter activity
single-stranded DNA binding
hydrolase activity, on glycosyl bonds
sphingolipid binding
clathrin binding
calcium-dependent protein binding
protein N-terminus binding
cell adhesion molecule binding
membrane raft organization
inositol lipid-mediated signaling
receptor-mediated endocytosis
est. of protein localization to membrane
response to oxidative stress
Molecular 
functions
All MDM genes affected
by microglia depletion
MDM genes    by SCI
Biological processes 
Molecular functions 
positive reg. of defense response
e.g. Cd86, Ctss, Alox5ap
leukocyte proliferation
e.g. Cebpb, Csf1, H2-T23
negative reg. of cell adhesion
e.g. Lgals1, H2-M3, Map2k1
negative reg. of cell activation
e.g. Cd300lf, Cd9, Anxa1
collagen metabolic process
e.g. Vim, Il6ra, Ctsb
0
2
4
6
Enrichment ratio
extracellular matrix binding
e.g. Adam9, Ctss, Lgals1
antigen binding
e.g. H2-M3, H2-T23, Tap1
proteoglycan binding
e.g. Ctsb, Ctss, Gpnmb
divalent inorganic cation transmembr.
transptr activity e.g. Slc11a2, Slc30a5
MHC protein binding
e.g. H2-T23, Lag3, Tap1
0
5
10
15
Enrichment ratio
Increased by 
microglia depletion
Decreased by 
microglia depletion
Unaffected by 
microglia depletion
0      7      28   dpi
-   +   -   +   -   + PLX
Biological processes 
Molecular functions 
u
t
Increased by 
microglia depletion
Decreased by 
microglia depletion
8
SCI-dependent MDM activities normally 
suppressed by microglia
Rpl6
Fcer1g
Rpl32
Rpl37
Rps8
Fau
Uba52
Igf2r
Cd97
S100a10
Atp6v0d2
Anpep
Tmem205
Cyp4f18
Cd200r4
S100a11
Cd300lf
Vim
Prdx5
Psap
Emp1
Ahnak
Cyba
Tomm6
Metrnl
Anxa1
Tmsb10
Chil3
Xdh
Esyt1
Myof
Pld3
Rpl37a
Rps28
Cd68
Gpnmb
Lgals3
Fabp5
Rpl41
Syngr1
Ftl1
Ms4a7
Cstb
Msrb1
Lgals1
Ctsb
Emp3
Rps27
Rps29
Fxyd5
Rpl18
Tmed3
Rpsa
Cst7
Hsp90ab1
Lpl
Spp1
Rpl8
Apoe
Apoc1
Cd52
0      7      28   dpi
-   +   -   +   -   + PLX
-1 0
1
2
Row Z Score
Increased by 
microglia depletion
Decreased by 
microglia depletion
Unaffected by 
microglia depletion
-1 0
1
2
Row Z Score
96.7
94.5
5.4
3.3
8.2
89.5
70.9
18.4
10.7
17.5
82.0
5.9
93.4
28 dpi PLX5622
7 dpi PLX5622
Sham PLX5622
−10
−5
0
5
UMAP_1
d
e
s
l
7 dpi Veh vs. Sham Veh
m
28 dpi Veh vs. Sham Veh
    by SCI
    by SCI
without microglia
without microglia
7 dpi PLX vs. 7 dpi Veh
28 dpi PLX vs. 28 dpi Veh
n
o
f
g
h
i
j
50.3
24.3
22.9
34.4
22.8
33.7
27.2
27.6
55.6
12.0
45.0
12.0
15.5
14.3
32.3
5.4
5.4
7.0 5.1
4.7
11.1
11.1
11.1
11.1
7.0
8.0 5.0
5.0
11.2
11.2
6.2
5.0
Patrolling
Siglech, Gpr56, 
Serpinf1
 
Cholesterol
processing
Lpl, Ch25h, Ccl6
 
Antigen 
binding 
Fcrls, Stab1, Grn
 
Lipid 
processing
Ctsd, Apoe, Cd63
 
Cathepsin 
inhibition
Cst3, Cst7, Fau
 
Matrix 
remodeling
Mmp12, 
Ctnnb1, Timp2
 
Interferon 
production
Ifit3, Ifit2, Ifit1
 
Border 
recruited
Ms4a7, Ms4a6c, 
Tpt1
 
Lipid 
binding
Gpnmb, Fabp5, 
Fabp4
 
Calcium 
binding
S100a4, S100a6, 
S100a10
Sham Vehicle
Sham PLX5622
7 dpi Vehicle
7 dpi PLX5622
28 dpi Vehicle
28 dpi PLX5622
Siglech
0
1
2
3
Fcrls
0
1
2
3
4
Gpnmb
Cst3
Lpl
0
2
4
k
Ctsd
0
2
4
6
0
25
50
75
100
−1 0
1
2
Average Expression
****
**
****
**
****
*******
****
****
****
****
****
****
****
****
****
****
****
MDM
Subset
Percent expressed
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
LogFC
-Log10 (adj. p value)
Hexb
Lag3
Serinc3
Cd81
Gpr34
Btg2
Wfdc17
Gpnmb
Lgals1
Fabp5
Spp1
Apoc2
Plin2
Lgals3
Lyz2
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
15
30
45
60
LogFC
-Log10 (adj. p value)
Hexb
Siglech
Zfp36
Junb
Rhob
Ier5
Jun
Btg2
Spp1
Apoc4
Apoc1
Igf1
Mmp12
Lgals3
Fabp5
Ftl1
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
10
20
30
40
LogFC
-Log10 (adj. p value)
Thbs1
Ubb
Gal
Lag3
Mfge8
Arf5
Slc36a2
BC002163
Hp
Gpc1
Plaur
Atp6v0c-ps2
Rpl13
Rpl37
Gm13826
Pmepa1
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
20
40
60
80
LogFC
-Log10 (adj. p value)
Mfge8
Gpnmb
Npy
Ubb
Rpl34
Lgals1
Gm12191
Tomm6
BC002163
Cd300lf
Cd24a
Napsa
Rpsa
Lpl
Apoc1
    by SCI
    by SCI
without microglia
without microglia
185 cells
9 cells
3023 cells
100 cells
3313 cells
161 cells
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

i.p. injections of 1 mg/kg LPS (E. coli, serotype 055:B5, Sigma) or 0.1 M PBS72,73.
Body weight was measured before and during LPS challenge to conﬁrm bioactivity
of LPS in each treatment group (Sup. Fig. 1p–z’). Mice were anesthetized using 1.5x
the surgical dose of anesthetic (see above) 24 h after the last injection for ﬂow
cytometry or MethoCult assay (see below).
Flow cytometry
Blood. Blood was collected via cardiac puncture with a 25 G syringe and transferred
to blood collection tubes coated with EDTA. A 50 μl sample of whole blood per
mouse was used for ﬂow cytometry Sup. Fig. 1q–t).
Spleen. The spleen was rapidly dissected, weighed, and placed in a small volume of
DMEM (Sup. Fig. 1r, u–w’). Spleens were minced with sterile dissection scissors
and mashed through a 40 μm sterile cell ﬁlter using the plunger of a 3 ml syringe
and rinsed with 10 ml of IMDM.
Bone marrow (BM). Both femurs from each mouse were removed, cleaned, and
placed in a small volume of DMEM. Pictures of representative bones were captured
using an iPhone 6 s and pseudocolored in ImageJ (Sup. Fig. 1r, x–z’). Bone marrow
cells were isolated by ﬂushing bones with 10 ml of DMEM through a 40 μm sterile
cell ﬁlter.
Sample processing. Samples were processed as described previously74. Brieﬂy, blood,
BM, and spleen samples were diluted 1:5 with NH4Cl red blood cell lysis buffer
(StemCell Technologies, # 7850) and incubated for 5 mins at RT. Cells were cen-
trifuged (300 x g for 4 mins) and resuspended in 0.1 M PBS. Cells were then
incubated with 1:100 zombie green viability dye (BioLegend, 423112) for the
exclusion of dead cells. Cells were washed then resuspended in ﬂow buffer (0.1 M
PBS with 2% FBS) containing rat anti-CD16/32 (1:200; BD Bioscience) for 10 mins
on ice to block Fc receptors. Cells were then incubated with ﬂow cytometry anti-
bodies (see Key Resources Table) for 30 mins on ice, washed, and resuspended in
ﬂow buffer. 10 μl of liquid counting beads (BD Biosciences, 335925) were added to
allow for quantiﬁcation of absolute cell numbers (Sup. Fig. 1s, t, v, w, y, z). Samples
were processed on a BD Fortessa ﬂow cytometer (BD Biosciences) running FACS
Diva software (v9.0) (BD) and analyzed using FlowJo (v10.8.1) (BD). OneComp
ebeads (ThermoFisher, #01-1111-41) were used to set voltage intensities and
compensation thresholds to remove spectral overlap. Unstained controls, isotype
controls, and ﬂuorescence minus one controls were used to identify background
staining levels and determine gate placement. Doublets were excluded based on
linearity of FSC-A and FSC-H. From singlets, live cells were identiﬁed as the
Zombie-FITClo/- population. Neutrophils were designated Ly6G+Ly6C+ cells and
monocytes were designated Ly6G-Ly6C+ cells. The gating strategy for blood
samples (using the Veh + PBS mouse in Sup. Fig. 1r) is shown in Sup. Fig. 1q. This
gating strategy was the same for spleen and bone marrow, but using tissue-speciﬁc
controls to set the gates. CD11b and CD11c staining were also used to conﬁrm
cell identity.
Methocult assay. The MethoCultTM 430 GF M3434 ex vivo culture assay (Stem-
Cell Technologies) was used to determine whether treatment with PLX5622 affected
the ability of BM and spleen stem cells to differentiate into myeloid lineage cells
under baseline conditions and during the immune challenge (Sup. Fig. 1w’, z’). This
assay consists of a methocellulose media containing cytokines and growth factors to
support the development of cell colonies from single hematopoietic stem/progenitor
cells (HSPCs)74. After administering 1.5x surgical dose of anesthesia and preparing
single-cell suspensions (as described above for ﬂow cytometry), cells were counted
with a hemocytometer and 7 500 BM cells were plated, and 200 000 splenocytes were
plated. Each sample was cultured in a meniscus-free 6-well SmartDishTM 433
(StemCell Technologies) and placed in an incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO2. At 10 days
after plating, colonies were quantiﬁed by standard inverted light microscopy using a
StemGridTM 435 counting underlay (StemCell Technologies). Colonies were clas-
siﬁed as blast forming unit-erythrocyte (BFU-E), granulocyte (CFU-G), monocyte
(CFU-M), granulocyte/monocyte (CFU-GM), or granulocyte/erythrocyte/monocyte/
megakaryocyte (CFU-GEMM), based on colony composition and cell morphology.
Spinal cord injury and post-operative care
T9 contusion. Mice were anesthetized using a cocktail of ketamine (80 mg/kg; i.p.)
and xylazine (10 mg/kg; i.p.). For spinal contusion injuries, the ninth thoracic
vertebra (T9) was identiﬁed based on anatomical landmarks and the lamina
removed. Mice received a moderate (75 kdyne) contusion SCI using the Inﬁnite
Horizons impactor (Precision Systems and Instrumentation, LLC.)75. There were
no differences in injury parameters between experimental groups.
L1 crush and T9 crush. For L1 crush, the T11 lamina was removed. A bilateral
crush injury was performed at the ﬁrst lumbar (L1) spinal level by inserting #4
Dumont forceps (Fine Science Tools #11241-30, with tip width narrowing from
0.4–0.2 mm) 2 mm ventrally into the vertebral column on both sides of the spinal
cord then laterally compressing the spinal cord for 2 s without breaking the
dura41,76. Injury level and dura integrity were conﬁrmed at post-mortem dissection
and using histology. The same method was applied to crush the spinal cord under
vertebral level T9, except here the T9 lamina was removed.
Post-operative care. After SCI, the muscle was closed with 5.0 polyglactin dis-
solvable sutures, and the skin was closed with wound clips. Animals were injected
with saline (2 ml, s.q.) and then placed into warmed cages (35 °C) until they
recovered from anesthesia. To prevent dehydration and infection, mice were
supplemented with daily saline (1-2 ml s.q.) and Gentocin (1 mg/kg s.q.) for the
ﬁrst 5 dpi. Because acutely spinal injured mice cannot rear to reach the food hopper
in conventional cages, Vehicle or PLX5622 pellets were also placed in the cages for
easy access. Bladders were manually voided twice daily for the duration of the
experiments. Body weight and urinary pH were monitored weekly.
Axon tracing. To trace corticospinal (CST) axons in mice with a T9 crush SCI
(Sup. Fig. 4s–v’), mice were anesthetized with ketamine (80 mg/kg; i.p.) and
xylazine (10 mg/kg; i.p.). A rectangular cranial opening (1.5 mm × 1 mm) was
created above the sensorimotor cortex (Bregma: −0.3 to −1.8 mm, lateral: 1 mm to
2 mm) using a pneumatic drill and ﬁne forceps. 1 μl (total) of biotinylated dextran
amine (BDA; 10%) was injected at a depth of 0.6 mm into the sensorimotor cortex
at three sites in the window area using a Nanoliter 2000 system. BDA injections
were performed at 14 dpi, a time when CST axons are undergoing axon dieback
and activated macrophages are evident in the degenerating CST29. After injection,
the head was sutured closed and animals received 2 ml of saline s.c. and were kept
on warmers (37 °C) until anesthesia recovery.
BrdU. To label proliferating cells, mice were injected with the thymidine analog, 5-
bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU) (50 mg/kg i.p. in 0.9% saline; Sigma-Aldrich
#10280879001) daily from 1–7 dpi.
Behavior
Open ﬁeld locomotion. Two investigators, blind to the experimental condition,
assessed mouse hindlimb function in open-ﬁeld using the Basso Mouse Scale
(BMS) for locomotion77. BMS testing was performed at −1 (baseline), 1, 3, 7, 10,
and 14 dpi, and weekly thereafter until the experimental endpoint. BMS subscores
were also assigned to quantify ﬁner aspects of locomotion.
Horizontal ladder task. Three days before SCI, mice were trained to walk along a
horizontal ladder as described previously78. This task requires mice to navigate
across a horizontal ladder with rungs spaced 1.25 cm apart for 40 cm with a mirror
below. Mice were video recorded from the side view and the underside view during
the task. Mice were motivated to walk along the ladder by placing home cage
bedding at the end. A paw falling below the rungs of the ladder during a step in the
forward direction was counted as one mistake. The total number of mistakes was
averaged across three trials per mouse. Baseline data were recorded beginning 2 d
pre-SCI. SCI mice were tested on the horizontal ladder task at 3 weeks post-SCI,
and then weekly thereafter until the experimental endpoint.
Mechanical allodynia. Mechanical sensitivity was assessed by measuring threshold
responses to a calibrated von Frey rigid tip (IITC Life Science) as described
Fig. 6 Monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) adopt diverse, time-dependent transcriptional phenotype in response to SCI. a MDMs were
computationally isolated for analysis between experimental conditions. b, c MDMs subdivided into 10 subsets based on dominant gene expression.
d, e UMAP plots showing MDM subsets split by diet group and time post-SCI. Numbers in pie charts show major subsets as a percent of total MDMs in
each group. f–k Violin plots showing gene-level changes within individual MDMs. Wilcox rank-sum tests, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.0001, ****p < 0.0001.
l–o Volcano plots showing increased genes (orange) and decreased genes (blue) in following SCI and microglia depletion. Selected genes are labeled. Wilcox
rank-sum tests. p, q Pie charts of data in m and o showing that microglia depletion mostly caused an increase in MDM genes. Gene ontology shows these
increased genes carbohydrate metabolism, calcium signaling and cell adhesion. r, s The effect of microglia depletion on MDM genes that were increased (r)
or decreased (s) by SCI (see Sup. Fig. 10 for gene names in s). t, u Pathway analysis of all MDM genes affected by SCI and 7 or 28 dpi and also increased by
microglia depletion, showing that microglia normally suppress several biological processes (t) and molecular functions (u) in intraspinal MDMs after injury.
Data for each condition were pooled from n = 3–4 mice. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle. See also Sup. Figs. 9 and 10.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13

Row Z-Score
a
Hsd11b1
Transporter
Metabolism
Inflammation
55%
45%
Unaffected by 
microglia depletion
Prevented 
if microglia 
depleted
a
5%
94%
d
f
h
Prevented if 
microglia 
depleted
Exacerbated 
if microglia
depleted (1%)
6
 
4
 
2
 
0
Tmsb4x expression
Fth1 expression
6
  
4
  
2
  
0
Apoe expression
8
   
6
  
4
   
2
  
0
Unaffected by 
microglia depletion
g
i
j
Biological processes
c
b
0
20 40 60
posttranscriptional reg.of gene expression
ncRNA metabolic process
reg. of cell amide metabolic process
ribonucleoprotein subunit organization
organ /tissue specific immune response
APP metabolic process
ribonucleoprotein complex biogenesis
response to interleukin-4
translational elongation
cytoplasmic translation
Enrichment ratio
0 20 40 60 80
amide binding
hydrolase activity, on glycosyl bonds
ribonucleoprotein complex binding
translation regulator activity
tau protein binding
mRNA binding
translation initiation factor binding
tRNA binding
rRNA binding
structural constituent of ribosome
Enrichment ratio
0 10 20 30 40
lytic vacuole
contractile fiber
postsynaptic specialization
neuron to neuron synapse
ribonucleoprotein granule
rough ER
vesicle lumen
polysome
cytosolic part
ribosome
Enrichment ratio
Tmsb4x
Fth1
Apoe
Rplp1
Rpl37
Eef1a1
Fau
Rplp2
Hexb
Ctsd
Rpl23
Rpl17
Rpl13
Rps14
Uba52
Rps12
Rps9
Rps24
Rps29
Rplp0
Rps20
Rps3a1
Rps26
Flt1
Rpl6
Rpl37a
Rps10
Rpsa
Rps21
Rps8
Gng5
Rps4x
Rps5
Rpl27a
Rpl10a
Rps2
Ctsz
Rpl35a
Tpt1
Rps15a
Rpl32
Rps18
Rpl15
Rpl35
Itm2b
Rpl7
Rpl39
Rps7
Rpl13a
Rps16
Rpl9
Rps3
Rps11
Rpl29
Rpl21
B2m
Ntm
Neat1
Atp1b2
Tsix
Lrig1
Wsb1
Tcf25
Nfasc
Rapgef3
Cadm4
Ttyh1
Appl2
Malat1
Percent
expressed
Average
expression
Sham Vehicle
28 dpi Vehicle
7 dpi Vehicle
UMAP_1
UMAP_2
UMAP_2
UMAP_2
UMAP_2
Astrocytes
Sham Vehicle
28 dpi Vehicle
-1
0
1
2
0
9
18
27
36
45
LogFC
-Log10(adj. p value)
Apoe
Tmsb4x
Ctsd
Ntm
Slc7a10
Neat1
Sham Veh
Sham PLX
28d Veh
28d PLX
Genes decreased by SCI at 28 d
Genes increased by SCI at 28 d
m
n
o
k
l
Molecular functions
Cellular components
UMAP_1
-1     0     1
6
3
0
-3
-7.5       -5.0       -2.5         0.0        2.5        5.0
6
3
0
-3
-7.5    -5.0     -2.5      0.0      2.5      5.0
by SCI
by SCI
Slc1a2
Ndrg2
Atp1a2
Slc4a4
Ntsr2
Fam181b
Adk
Gng11
Tubb2a
Fcer1g
Ctss
Laptm5
C1qc
C1qb
6
3
0
-3
6
3
0
-3
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
25
50
75
100
61 %
51 92
70
76 %
70 96
83
98 %
92 100 
96
a
a
Sham PLX5622
28 dpi PLX5622
7 dpi PLX5622
UMAP_1
-7.5   -  5.0    -2.5      0.0      2.5      5.0
44.2
52.9
2.9
61.6
36.3
2.1
56.9
1.4
41.7
83.2
2.8
14
974 Astrocytes
310 cells
69 cells
245 cells
107 cells
39 cells
204 cells
71.8
7.7
20.5
59.4
40.6
Transporter
Metabolism
Inflammation
-        +        -        +     PLX
Sham            28 dpi
10
0
 -10
-5               0               5              10
UMAP_1
UMAP_2
Astrocyte
subset
e
Transporter
Metabolism
Inflammation
Fig. 7 Microglia depletion impairs SCI-induced transcriptional changes in astrocytes. a Astrocytes were computationally isolated for analysis between
experimental conditions. b Astrocytes were divided into three clusters based on dominant gene expression, and were characterized as: Transporter (green),
Metabolism (blue), and Inﬂammation (orange). c Dot Plot showing the top DEGs in each cluster. d, e UMAP plots showing astrocytes in the vehicle (d) and
PLX5622 (e) conditions. The Inﬂammation astrocyte subset increases proportion over time post-SCI only when microglia are present. Numbers in pie charts
show each subset as a percent of total astrocytes in each group. f To determine how microglia depletion affected long-term SCI-induced changes in astrocytes,
we compared 28 dpi astrocytes to sham vehicle astrocytes. Select genes are labeled. g Of all the genes increased in astrocytes at 28 dpi, 55% failed to increase
if microglia are absent. h Of all the genes decreased in astrocytes at 28 dpi, 5% failed to decrease if microglia are absent. i: Heatmap showing SCI-dependent
and microglia-dependent astrocyte genes. j–l Violin plots showing the ﬁrst 3 genes in h. The percentages under each violin indicate the percent of cells in the
group that express the genea. padj < 0.0001 compared to other groups, Wilcox rank-sum test, n = 107–310 astrocytes per group pooled from 3–4 mice per
group. m–o Astrocyte genes increased by SCI and reversed by microglia depletion were entered into gene ontology (GO) term analysis using WebGestalt.
Astrocyte biological processes (l), molecular functions (m), and cellular components (n) related to translation, cell proliferation, metabolism, and inﬂammation
were impaired by microglia depletion. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
14
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

previously79 (Sup. Fig. 1m). Mice were placed on a mesh platform in a clear
compartment (8 cm × 12 cm × 5.5 cm) that allows unrestrained exploration, loco-
motion, and grooming. Animals acclimated to the testing environment for 30 mins
before testing. The mid-line of the plantar surface of the left and right hind paws
was probed three times with progressively increasing force intensities to determine
the force that repeatedly elicits withdrawal of the hind paw from the calibrated
rigid tip. The log10stimulus intensity (mg*10) was the force required to elicit
consistent withdrawal of the hind paw. Measurements were taken on three dif-
ferent days and the data averaged over the three trials.
Thermal sensitivity. A hot plate task was used to assess thermal sensitivity80 (Sup.
Fig. 1n, o). Brieﬂy, mice were placed in a clear compartment (8 cm × 12 cm × 5.5 cm)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
15

that allows unrestrained exploration, locomotion, and grooming on a hot plate set to
25 °C. Mice were allowed to acclimate for 30 mins. The heat was set to increase to
50 °C over a period of 4 mins. The time and temperature at which mice reﬂexively
raised one or both hind paws was recorded, at which time the mice were removed
from the hot plate.
Tissue processing. Mice were anesthetized with a lethal mixture of ketamine/
xylazine (1.5 x surgical dose) then transcardially perfused with 0.1 M PBS followed
by 4% paraformaldehyde. Spinal cords were removed, post-ﬁxed in 4% PFA for 2 h
then transferred to 0.1 M PBS overnight before being cryoprotected by incubation
in 30% sucrose for 48 h. Images of representative spinal cords were captured on an
iPhone 6 s (Sup. Fig. 5a). Spinal cords were blocked into 10 mm segments centered
on the impact site with the dorsal columns facing up, then embedded in Tissue-Tek
optimal cutting temperature medium (VWR International), and rapidly frozen on
dry ice. Tissue sections were cut in series (10 μm thick, 10 slides per series) using a
Microm cryostat (HM 505 E) and collected on SuperFrost Plus slides (Thermo
Fisher Scientiﬁc). Contused thoracic spinal cord segments were cut along the
coronal (rostral-caudal) axis. Crushed thoracolumbar spinal cord segments were
cut along the horizontal (dorsal-ventral) axis. Slides were stored at −20 °C until
immunostaining.
Immunostaining
Fluorescence immunolabeling. Slides were dried at room temperature (RT) for 2 h,
rinsed (0.1 M PBS) then blocked with 4% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 0.3%
Triton X-100 (BP3+) in PBS for 1 h at RT. Sections were incubated overnight with
primary antibodies (Key Resources Table) at 4 °C in humidiﬁed chambers. After
washing in 0.1 M PBS (3 ×4 mins), sections were incubated with secondary anti-
bodies (Key Resources Table) diluted in 4% bovine serum albumin and 0.1%
Triton X-100 (BP+) in PBS. Sections were washed again in PBS (3 × 4 mins), then
coverslipped with Immumount (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). For BrdU labeling, after
the initial rinse but before blocking, slides were incubated with 2 N HCl for 25 mins
at 37 °C.
Immunoperoxidase labeling. After the initial rinse slides were incubated at RT in
methanol containing 6% H2O2 for 30 mins to quench endogenous peroxidase
activity. After washing in 0.1 M PBS (3 ×4 mins), blocking and primary antibody
incubations were performed as above. Sections were then incubated with bioti-
nylated secondary antibodies for 1 h at RT. Bound antibody was visualized using
Elite-ABC reagent (Vector laboratories) with ImPACT diaminobenzidine as a
substrate (Vector Laboratories Cat #SK-4105). Sections were dehydrated through
sequential 2 min incubations in 70%, 70%, 90%, and 100% ethanol solutions, fol-
lowed by 3 ×2 min incubations in Histoclear. Slides were coverslipped with Per-
mount (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc).
To visualize myelin, following immunoperoxidase development of
neuroﬁlament, slides were rinsed in dH2O and immersed in acetone for 8 mins.
Samples were then rinsed in dH2O before incubation in eriochrome cyanine (EC)
for 30 min at RT. Slides were washed in dH2O and differentiated in 5% iron alum
and borax ferricyanide for 5–10 mins before dehydration and coverslipping. The
injury epicenter in contusion SCI was deﬁned visually as the section with the
smallest visible rim of spared myelin.
Pathology
General pathology. EC/neuroﬁlament stained sections were digitized using a
ScanScope XT scanner (Aperio; OSU Comparative Pathology and Mouse Pheno-
typing Shared Resource; College of Veterinary Medicine) and ImageScope software
(Leica Biosystems). Lesion analysis was performed in ImageJ by inspecting sections
0.2 mm apart across a 4 mm segment extending from 2 mm rostral to 2 mm caudal
from the lesion epicenter. Lesioned tissue within this region, delineated by neu-
roﬁlament staining, was outlined in ImageJ using the polygon selection tool. Lesion
volume was calculated by: Σ (area of lesioned tissue per section x distance between
sections). Lesion length was the rostral-caudal distance spanned by sections con-
taining lesioned tissue. Three-dimensional reconstructions of contusion SCI lesions
were generated with M3D from MCID Elite Software. For lesion analysis in con-
tusion SCI, spared myelin and/or spared neuroﬁlament were outlined in ImageJ
using the polygon selection tool, and expressed as a percentage of the section area.
For crush SCI, the epicenter was deﬁned as the horizontal section at the level of the
central canal; the area of spared myelin was expressed as a percentage of EC+ tissue
in a 2 mm-length area of tissue centered on the crush site.
Microglia. For contusion SCI, sections 0.2 mm apart extending from 2 mm rostral
to 2 mm caudal to the epicenter were stained for P2RY12 and developed using
immunoperoxidase staining. Sections were digitized using a ScanScope XT scanner
(Aperio) and ImageScope (Leica Biosystems). For contusion SCI, the number of
P2RY12+ cells was counted using Imaris and expressed as a percentage of the
section area, which was outlined in ImageJ. For crush SCI, the area of microglia was
expressed as a percentage of P2RY12+ tissue in a 2 mm-length area of tissue
centered on the crush site.
MDMs. For contusion SCI, spinal sections 0.2 mm apart extending from 2 mm
rostral to 2 mm caudal to the epicenter were stained for P2RY12 and the pan
macrophage marker F4/80. Sections were imaged using a Leica TCS SP8 confocal
microscope. Because MDMs are difﬁcult to individually differentiate within the
central lesion core at 35 dpi, the abundance of intraspinal P2RY12-F4/80+ MDMs
in whole spinal cord sections was expressed as a percentage of the section area. For
epicenter region of interest (ROI) analysis, 0.1 mm2 boxes were placed in the center
of the section and over the ventromedial white matter. The area of P2RY12-F4/80+
staining in each ROI was selected using the threshold tool in ImageJ and expressed
as a percentage of the ROI area. To assess the size of phagocytically active MDMs
in remaining ventral white matter, sections were immunostained with P2RY12,
CD68, and myelin basic protein (MBP). Images were captured using a Leica TCS
SP8 confocal microscope. The spared ventral white matter was manually outlined
as accurately as possible, and the surface area of individual P2RY12-CD68+ cells in
this region were quantiﬁed using Imaris (total of 177–395 cells per animal). The
average cell area in this region was calculated for each animal. For crush SCI, the
area of F4/80+ cells in horizontal sections at the lesion epicenter were manually
outlined in ImageJ, and expressed as a percentage of F8/80+ tissue in a 2 mm-
length area of tissue centered on the crush site.
Cell proliferation. Sections were immunostained for GFAP, NG2 and BrdU then
imaged using a Leica TCS SP8 confocal microscope. GFAP+BrdU+ and
NG2+Brdu+ double-labeled cells were counted 0.6 mm rostral and caudal to the
epicenter and at the epicenter using Imaris v8.0 (Bitplane Scientiﬁc Software), or
only at the epicenter section for crush SCI. For this, GFAP/BrdU and NG2/BrdU
co-localization channels were built based on absolute staining intensity, and
touching objects were split. The channel was converted into a surface and
thresholds set based on cell area and encapsulation of a BrdU+ cell nucleus by
GFAP or NG2. NG2+ macrophages were excluded using morphological criteria81.
GFAP intensity analysis. To quantify the intensity of GFAP labeling, horizontal
sections from mice with crush SCI were immunostained for GFAP. Sections were
imaged using a Leica TCS SP8 confocal microscope and converted to 8-bit format.
With the rostral side oriented left, a rectangular box centered over the crush site
was drawn on the image. The box was 1.5 mm wide along the rostral-caudal axis
and as high as the pia mater; care was taken not to include background pixels. The
grayscale proﬁle along the horizontal axis was plotted in ImageJ and the data was
exported to Microsoft Excel.
Neurons. To estimate the number of neurons in horizontal sections of crushed
spinal cords, sections were immunostained for neuronal nuclei (NeuN). Four,
500 μm wide regions of interest (ROI) were overlaid on the section (ROI #1–4),
with ROI 1 starting at the lesion edge which was delimited by dense astrogliosis.
ROI #2–4 started at the end of the previous ROI, covering a total distance of 2 mm
from the lesion edge. NeuN+ cell bodies in each ROI were manually counted.
Lipid phagocytosis. Oil Red O stain was used to measure phagocytosed lipid debris.
Sections were rinsed in dH2O and 70% ethanol each for 2 min before being placed
in a saturated solution of Oil Red O (catalog # O0625-25G; Sigma-Aldrich) dis-
solved in 70% ethanol at 60 °C for 30 min. The tissue was differentiated in ethanol,
Fig. 8 CellChat analysis reveals that microglia-dependent cell-cell communication (CCC) and disruption of MDM and astrocyte CCC following
microglia depletion. a–f Chord plots showing interactions between microglia (brown), MDMs (blue) and astrocytes (orange) in sham, 7 dpi, and 28 dpi
spinal cords from vehicle (a–c) and microglia depleted (d–f) animals. Note the disorganization in astrocyte/MDM interactions in e and f vs. b and c. The
strength of the interaction is indicated by the CCC score. The score is deﬁned as the probability of CCCs by integrating gene expression data with prior
database knowledge43 of the interactions between signaling ligands, receptors, and their cofactors. Each chord plot has been scaled to appreciate the edges
depicting CCCs with smaller probabilities. The cell number of each cell type is indicated in the stacked bar graph under each chord plot. g Venn diagram
showing enriched microglial ligands and receptors (L-R) in sham, 7 dpi and 28 dpi spinal cords. Schematics show how they interact with microglial, MDMs
and astrocyte L-Rs in SCI conditions and their functional implications (where known). h Venn diagram showing MDM and astrocyte L-Rs enriched in SCI,
and the effect of microglia depletion on these interactions. Note the number of additional enriched MDM L-Rs, and alteration of several astrocyte signaling
axes, in the absence of microglia. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
16
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

washed in distilled water, and then coverslipped with Immumount (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc). The area and number of phagocytosed lipid clusters were manually
quantiﬁed in ImageJ.
Axon dieback. Tiled montages of horizontal sections stained for BDA, GFAP, and
F4/80 (depth of ~280 μm) were captured using a Leica TCS SP8 confocal micro-
scope. Retraction of BDA+ dorsal CST axons from the T9 crush lesion edge
(identiﬁed by GFAP labeling), was measured in one horizontal section per mouse
in ImageJ. Higher magniﬁcation images of BDA + axons were also captured.
MDM reprograming. Pilot studies were performed to optimize the dose and route
of administration of MDM-reprograming factors that yields a robust MDM
response in the microglia-depleted injured spinal cord. At 2 dpi, mice were injected
intraspinally with 1 μl of sterile saline containing 50 ng of recombinant mouse Ccl2
(rCcl2, R&D systems, 479-JE-05) and/or 500 ng of a Tlr2 agonist (Pam2CSK4, tlrl-
pm2s-1 InvivoGen; Tlr2 ag)29 at a rate of 300 nl/min using a Nanoliter 2000 sys-
tem. These times were chosen based on the peaks of endogenous intraspinal Ccl227
and Tlr2 expression28. To target the central gray matter, stereotaxic injections were
made at a depth of ~0.6 mm at the midline in the center of the injury. After
microinjection, muscle layers were sutured with 4-0 nylon suture and the skin was
closed with surgical staples. Post-operatively, animals received 1 ml of sub-
cutaneous saline, were kept warm on a heating plate during recovery from anes-
thesia, with free access to food and water. At 3 dpi, mice were also injected i.p. with
Tlr2 ag (50 μg/kg i.p.) or sterile PBS. Pilot animals were perfused at 7 dpi. Pilot
studies determined that injections of rCCL2 i.s., Tlr2 ag i.s. and i.p. elicit an
immune response in microglia depleted animals that is the most similar to the
normal inﬂammatory response (compare column 1 vs. column 7 in Sup. Fig. 6b, c),
so this combination was chosen for the 35 dpi study.
For the 35 dpi study, mice received vehicle or PLX5622 diet from −14–35 dpi
and either rCCL2 and Tlr2 ag i.s. (or saline) at 2 dpi and Tlr2 ag i.p. (or PBS) at
3 dpi. Mice received a 75 kdyne contusion SCI as described above. Post-operative
care, behavioral analysis (BMS and horizontal ladder), and pathology were
performed as described above.
Bulk RNA sequencing
Groups. Female mice (n = 34 per group) were fed Vehicle or PLX5622
(1200 mg/kg chow) from −14 to 7 days post-surgery. Mice in each diet group
received either a T9 laminectomy (sham) or 75 kdyne T9 contusion SCI.
Tissue dissociation. Mice were euthanized with 1.5x the surgical dose of ketamine
and xylazine then perfused transcardially with DEPC buffer until the liver and blood
were cleared. A 1 cm piece of spinal cord (centered on the T9 laminectomy site) was
quickly dissected and homogenized in 1 ml of TRIzol reagent (ThermoFisher). RNA
was extracted according to the manufacturers instructions. Brieﬂy, the tissue lysate
was centrifuged at 4 °C for 5 mins at 12,000 g. The supernatant was incubated for
5 mins to dissociate nucleoproteins. Samples were incubated with 0.2 ml of
chloroform for 2.5 mins then shaken vigorously for 15 sec. Samples were centrifuged
at 4 °C for 15 mins at 12 000 g. The aqueous phase was collected and mixed with
0.5 ml of isopropanol with 2 ul of glycogen then stored at −20 °C. Samples were
centrifuged (4 °C, 5 mins, 12,000 g) and the pellet was resuspended in 75% ethanol.
The sample was vortexed, centrifuged (4 °C, 5 mins, 7500 g), the supernatant
removed and pellet dried for 5–10 mins. The pellet was resuspended in 20 μl
RNAse-free water and warmed to 55 °C. RNA yield was determined using Nano-
drop. RNA was puriﬁed using the QIAGEN RNeasy spin column steps according to
manufacturers instructions. RNA quality and ﬁnal yield was then measured using a
RNA 6000 NanoAssay by Chip. Samples with RIN > 7 were included for analysis
(average RIN = 8.6). Samples were stored at −80 °C until sequencing.
Sequencing and analysis. RNA-seq was carried out by the UCLA Technology
Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics. In brief, the library was prepared using
Nugen Ovation RNA Ultra Low Input (500 pg) + Kapa Hyper. The quantity and
quality of cDNA were assessed using an Agilent 2100 Expert High Sensitivity DNA
Assay. cDNA samples were sequenced at UCLA Technology Center for Genomics
and Bioinformatics. Reads were aligned to the mouse GRCm38 reference genome
using STAR (v.2.4.0). Read counts for RefSeq genes (mm10) were generated by
HTSeq v.0.6.1. Low-count genes were ﬁltered and fragments per kilobase per
million mapped reads (FPKM) values were generated. In total, 17,939 genes were
identiﬁed. Differentially expressed genes were identiﬁed using the DESeq2 package
in R Studio (v3.6.3) and veriﬁed using Gene Network Analyst 3.082. Signiﬁcantly
increased or decreased genes had an adjusted p value of <0.05 and a LogFC cutoff
of < −1 (decreased) or >1 (increased) (https://www.networkanalyst.ca/). GO ana-
lysis was performed separately for up- and downregulated gene lists using Web-
based Gene Set Analysis Toolkit (WebGestalt), with the Gene Ontology Reference
Genome set as the reference gene list25. The Bioinformatics and Evolutionary
Genomics server (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/, Ghent Uni-
versity) was used to create gene Venn diagram in Fig. 2k. Genemania was used to
construct the network diagrams (Fig. 2l–n), with co-expression and predicted
functional interactions selected as linkages.
Single-cell RNA sequencing
Groups. Mice were fed Vehicle or PLX5622 (1200 mg/kg chow) from two weeks
before surgery until the experimental endpoint of 7 or 28 days post-surgery. Mice
received either a T9 laminectomy (sham) or 75 kdyne T9 contusion SCI. Samples
from 3-4 mice in the same group were pooled to yield data representative of
the group.
Tissue dissociation. Mice were euthanized with 1.5x the surgical dose of ketamine
and xylazine. A 1 cm piece of unperfused, fresh spinal cords (centered on the T9
laminectomy site) was quickly dissected. Tissue was dissociated to a single cell
suspension using a gentleMACS dissociator (Miltenyi) and mouse adult brain
dissociation kit (Miltenyi, 130-107-677). Dissociated cells were passed through a
sterile 70 μm ﬁlter to remove large particulate debris. Myelin debris was removed
using myelin removal beads (Miltenyi, 130-096-733). Dead cells were removed
using Viahance dead cell removal (BioPAL, #CP-50VQ02). Cells were diluted to
1000 cells/μl. This method optimized cell viability, allows comparison of leukocyte
proﬁles present in both sham and SCI conditions, and enriches for resident glia and
peripheral immune cells but does not enrich for neuronal populations83.
Sequencing. The single-cell suspension and Chromium Single Cell 3’ V3 reagents
(10X Genomics) were loaded into chips to collect individual cells encapsulated by
gel beads in emulsion (GEMs) using the 10X Chromium Controller. cDNA and
library ampliﬁcation for an optimal signal was 13–16 cycles. Sequencing was
conducted on HiSeq4000 (Novogene). Fastq sequence ﬁles were de-multiplexed,
aligned, and annotated using the mouse ENSMBL database and Cell Ranger
v3.0 software. Gene expression was counted using unique molecular identiﬁer
barcodes, and gene-cell matrices were constructed.
Analysis. Data processing and visualizations of the scRNA-seq data were performed
using the Seurat package (v.3.2.0) in R (3.6.3)84. Our initial dataset contained
23,696 cells with data for 24,062 genes in total. For the initial quality control
ﬁltering, we removed individual cells that having greater than 20% mitochondrial
RNA, cells detecting less than 200 genes or more than 3,000 genes, and genes that
were detected in less than three cells. After applying the quality control criteria,
21,016 single cells and 16,003 genes remained and were included in downstream
analyses. Data were scaled to 10,000 transcripts per cell, and transformed to log
space. The canonical correlation analysis (CCA) integration method of Seurat was
used to correct batch effects. Highly variable genes in the dataset were computed
based on dispersion and mean. Principal component analysis (PCA) was per-
formed on the top 2000 variable genes. The top 30 PCs were used to build a k-
nearest-neighbors cell–cell graph with k = 20 neighbors. Clusters were identiﬁed by
the use of the Louvain graph-clustering algorithm with a resolution set to 0.15. The
entire dataset was projected onto the two-dimensional space using uniform
manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) dimensionality reduction on the
top 30 principal components. For each cell cluster, we assigned the cell-type labels
using statistical enrichment for sets of marker genes, and manual evaluation of
gene expression for small sets of known marker genes. For example, the major
cluster designated “microglia” had enriched expression of P2ry12, Siglech, and
Tmem119, whereas the major cluster designated “MDMs” was enriched for Gpnmb,
Spp1, and Fabp549,83,85–90. The sub-clustering within cell types was performed
based on standard scree plot methods to determine the variability accounted for by
each PC. Although some cell clusters (e.g. astrocytes, endothelial cells) contained
relatively few cells, a bootstrap analysis, extrapolating to 10,000 cells, conﬁrmed the
robustness of clustering and our conclusions. We computationally selected indi-
vidual cell types for between-group analysis. Signiﬁcance of difference in violin/
scatter plots was determined using a Wilcoxon Rank Sum test with Bonferroni
correction. Signiﬁcantly increased or decreased genes had an adjusted p value of <
0.05 and the Seurat command “logfcthreshold” was 0.176 (1.5-fold change). DEG
lists esported as.csv ﬁles were entered into GraphPad Prism for creation of volcano
plots. Functional gene set enrichment analysis to identify gene ontology terms was
performed using Web-based Gene Set Analysis Toolkit (WebGestalt), with the
Gene Ontology Reference Genome set as the reference gene list25.
Prediction and quantiﬁcation of cell-cell communications using CellChat. The
cell-cell communications were predicted using the R package CellChat v 1.0.043.
Speciﬁcally, we isolated the microglia, MDM, and astrocyte clusters from our
scRNA-seq datasets within each of the six experimental conditions, i.e., Control
Sham, Control 7 dpi, Control 28 dpi, PLX5622 Sham, PLX5622 7 dpi, and PLX5622
28 dpi. Library-size normalization and log-transformation with a pseudocount 1
were performed on each gene expression matrix by the normalizeData function in
CellChat. We then loaded a gene expression matrix and its associated cell meta data
to create a CellChat object for each of the six experimental conditions using the
createCellChat function. We set the ligand-receptor interaction database as Cell-
ChatDB.mouse and ﬁltered genes in each CellChat object by retaining the signaling
genes to reduce computational load. Overexpressed genes and overexpressed
ligand-receptor interactions were identiﬁed using the identifyOverExpressedGenes
and identifyOverExpressedInteractions functions. Then, we calculated the cell-cell
communication probability by the computeCommunProb function. Finally, we
ﬁltered out the cell-cell communications if only a few cells (10 by default in
CellChat) were in certain cell types. The cell-cell communications among different
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
17

cell types within each experimental condition were visualized using the Chord
diagrams.
Trajectory inference. To better understand the trajectory of microglia and MDMs
after SCI, these objects were extracted then merged in Seurat v4.1.1. Based on the
expression matrix and metadata in the Seurat object, a new Monocle object was
created in Monocle 3 v 1.0.091. PCA dimension reduction and batch effect removal
were performed. UMAP embeddings were generated, with the minimum distance
set to 0.1 and 20 set as the number of neighbors. Cells were clustered and the
trajectory graph learned. Root cells were determined, and all cells were ordered
based on the root cells. Trajectory plots were generated with labels pseudotime, cell
types, samples, and marker genes. For prediction of ‘intermediate cells’ (CNS
macrophages), the pseudotime value was extracted for each cell, and density curves
were generated in ggpubr v0.4.0 for microglia and MDMs, respectively, in the same
plot. Based on density curves, we regard pseudotime with the lowest density
between 10 and 20 as intermediate cells. Please note that values of the y-axis in the
density plot indicate the estimated density instead of the occupied proportion of
the two cell types. Data, code and plots are available at https://github.com/OSU-
BMBL/Spinal-cord-scRNAseq.
Statistics and reproducibility. GraphPad Prism (v 8.0.2) was used for general data
visualization and statistical analyses. BMS and horizontal ladder data were analyzed
using two-way repeated-measures ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc tests. Two-
sided Student’s t-tests were used to compare differences in one variable between
two groups, One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc tests were used to
compare one variable between three or more groups. Two-way ANOVA with
Bonferroni post-hoc tests was used to compare two variables between two or more
groups. Linear regression was used to determine the relationship between tissue
pathology and functional recovery. All data are shown as mean and SEM, with
statistical signiﬁcance, determined at p < 0.05. Sample sizes were determined a
priori from historical data using behavioral measures as the primary outcome, with
power (1-β) set to 0.8 and α = 0.05. Bulk and single-cell RNA sequencing
experiments used groups of mice with sample sizes determined to be sufﬁcient by
previous studies18. Data in Fig. 1 were successfully reproduced in Fig. 3 and in Sup.
Fig. 5, and in two different SCI models in Sup. Fig. 4. Data in Fig. 3 (rCCL2 and
TLR2 ag) were successfully reproduced in Sup. Fig.`Yyyyy 6. Microglia depletion
data in Sup. Figs. 1, 2, and 5 were successfully reproduced twice in quality control
experiments for each batch of PLX5622 diet received. Data in Sup. Fig. 2 were
successfully reproduced in Sup. Fig. 5. Bulk and single-cell RNA sequencing
experiments in Figs. 2, 4–8 and Sup. Figs. 7–15 used 3-4 mice per group and were
not replicated due to cost and logistics. Figures were prepared in Adobe Illustrator
(v 25.2.3) and graphical images created with Biorender.com.
Reporting summary. Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Source data are provided with this paper and deposited to the Open Data Commons for
Spinal Cord Injury (ODC-SCI) Accession: 695, https://doi.org/10.34945/F5B012, Gene
expression data for bulk and single-cell RNA sequencing experiments are available on
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (GSE196928).
Code availability
The R code used for data analysis is available on GitHub at https://github.com/OSU-
BMBL/Spinal-cord-scRNAseq with the DOI code on Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.6590552 https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.6590552.
Received: 19 April 2022; Accepted: 1 July 2022;
References
1.
Ginhoux, F. et al. Fate mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia derive
from primitive macrophages. Science 330, 841–845 (2010).
2.
Kierdorf, K. et al. Microglia emerge from erythromyeloid precursors via Pu.1-
and Irf8-dependent pathways. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 273–280 (2013).
3.
Alliot, F., Godin, I. & Pessac, B. Microglia derive from progenitors, originating
from the yolk sac, and which proliferate in the brain. Brain Res. Dev. Brain
Res. 117, 145–152 (1999).
4.
Kettenmann, H., Hanisch, U. K., Noda, M. & Verkhratsky, A. Physiology of
microglia. Physiological Rev. 91, 461–553 (2011).
5.
Nimmerjahn, A., Kirchhoff, F. & Helmchen, F. Resting microglial cells are
highly dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo. Science 308,
1314–1318 (2005).
6.
Beck, K. D. et al. Quantitative analysis of cellular inﬂammation after traumatic
spinal cord injury: evidence for a multiphasic inﬂammatory response in the
acute to chronic environment. Brain: a J. Neurol. 133, 433–447 (2010).
7.
Fleming, J. C. et al. The cellular inﬂammatory response in human spinal cords
after injury. Brain: a J. Neurol. 129, 3249–3269 (2006).
8.
Kigerl, K. A., McGaughy, V. M. & Popovich, P. G. Comparative analysis of
lesion development and intraspinal inﬂammation in four strains of mice
following spinal contusion injury. J. Comp. Neurol. 494, 578–594 (2006).
9.
Sroga, J. M., Jones, T. B., Kigerl, K. A., McGaughy, V. M. & Popovich, P. G.
Rats and mice exhibit distinct inﬂammatory reactions after spinal cord injury.
J. Comp. Neurol. 462, 223–240 (2003).
10. Kigerl, K. A. et al. Identiﬁcation of two distinct macrophage subsets
with divergent effects causing either neurotoxicity or regeneration in the
injured mouse spinal cord. J. Neurosci.: Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 29, 13435–13444
(2009).
11. Gensel, J. C. et al. Macrophages promote axon regeneration with concurrent
neurotoxicity. J. Neurosci.: Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 29, 3956–3968 (2009).
12. Shechter, R. et al. Inﬁltrating blood-derived macrophages are vital cells playing
an anti-inﬂammatory role in recovery from spinal cord injury in mice. PLoS
Med. 6, e1000113 (2009).
13. Brennan, F. H. & Popovich, P. G. Emerging targets for reprograming the
immune response to promote repair and recovery of function after spinal cord
injury. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 31, 334–344 (2018).
14. Popovich, P. G. et al. Depletion of hematogenous macrophages promotes
partial hindlimb recovery and neuroanatomical repair after experimental
spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol. 158, 351–365 (1999).
15. Brennan, F.H., Hall, J.C.E., Guan, Z. & Popovich, P.G. Microglia limit lesion
expansion and promote functional recovery after spinal cord injury in mice.
bioRxiv, https://doi.org/10.1101/410258 (2018).
16. Bellver-Landete, V. et al. Microglia are an essential component of the
neuroprotective scar that forms after spinal cord injury. Nat. Commun. 10,
518 (2019).
17. Freria, C. M. et al. Deletion of the fractalkine receptor, CX3CR1, improves
endogenous repair, axon sprouting, and synaptogenesis after spinal cord
injury in mice. J. Neurosci. 37, 3568–3587 (2017).
18. Li, Y. et al. Microglia-organized scar-free spinal cord repair in neonatal mice.
Nature 587, 613–618 (2020).
19. Popovich, P. G., Wei, P. & Stokes, B. T. Cellular inﬂammatory response after
spinal cord injury in Sprague-Dawley and Lewis rats. J. Comp. Neurol. 377,
443–464 (1997).
20. Wang, X. et al. Macrophages in spinal cord injury: phenotypic and functional
change from exposure to myelin debris. Glia 63, 635–651 (2015).
21. Zhu, Y. et al. Macrophage transcriptional proﬁle identiﬁes lipid catabolic
pathways that can be therapeutically targeted after spinal cord injury. J.
Neurosci.: Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 37, 2362–2376 (2017).
22. Erturk, A. et al. Three-dimensional imaging of solvent-cleared organs using
3DISCO. Nat. Protoc. 7, 1983–1995 (2012).
23. Hesp, Z. C. et al. Proliferating NG2-cell-dependent angiogenesis and scar
formation alter axon growth and functional recovery after spinal cord injury
in mice. J. Neurosci. 38, 1366–1382 (2018).
24. Davalos, D. et al. ATP mediates rapid microglial response to local brain injury
in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 752–758 (2005).
25. Liao, Y., Wang, J., Jaehing, E. J., Shi, Z. & Zhang, B. WebGestalt 2019: gene set
analysis toolkit with revamped UIs and APIs. Nucleic Acids Res. 47,
W199–W205 (2019).
26. Jassal, B. et al. The reactome pathway knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Res. 48,
D498–D503 (2020).
27. Ma, M. et al. Monocyte recruitment and myelin removal are delayed following
spinal cord injury in mice with CCR2 chemokine receptor deletion. J.
Neurosci. Res. 68, 691–702 (2002).
28. Kigerl, K. A. et al. Toll-like receptor (TLR)-2 and TLR-4 regulate
inﬂammation, gliosis, and myelin sparing after spinal cord injury. J.
Neurochem. 102, 37–50 (2007).
29. Gensel, J. C. et al. Toll-Like Receptors and Dectin-1, a C-Type Lectin
Receptor, Trigger Divergent Functions in CNS Macrophages. J. Neurosci.: Off.
J. Soc. Neurosci. 35, 9966–9976 (2015).
30. Stivers, N. S. et al. The toll-like receptor 2 agonist Pam3CSK4 is
neuroprotective after spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol. 294, 1–11 (2017).
31. Pineau, I. & Lacroix, S. Proinﬂammatory cytokine synthesis in the injured
mouse spinal cord: multiphasic expression pattern and identiﬁcation of the
cell types involved. J. Comp. Neurol. 500, 267–285 (2007).
32. Kigerl, K. A., Rivest, S., Hart, R. P., Satoskar, A. R. & Popovich, P. G. Innate
immune responses mediated by Toll-Like Receptor (TLR) 2 and
TLR4 signaling are important for recovery after spinal cord injury. J.
Neurotrauma 22, 1164–1164 (2005).
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
18
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

33. Tang, F. et al. mRNA-Seq whole-transcriptome analysis of a single cell. Nat.
Methods 6, 377–382 (2009).
34. Ma, A. et al. IRIS3: integrated cell-type-speciﬁc regulon inference server from
single-cell RNA-Seq. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, W275–W286 (2020).
35. Becht, E., et al. Dimensionality reduction for visualizing single-cell data using
UMAP. Nat. Biotechnol. 10.1038/nbt.4314 (2018).
36. Zhang, Y. et al. An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of
glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci.: Off. J. Soc.
Neurosci. 34, 11929–11947 (2014).
37. Zeisel, A. et al. Cell types in the mouse cortex and hippocampus revealed by
single-cell RNA-seq. Science 347, 1138–1142 (2015).
38. Palazzo, I., Deistler, K., Hoang, T.V., Blackshaw, S. & Fischer, A.J. NF-κB
signaling regulates the formation of proliferating Müller glia-derived
progenitor cells in the avian retina. Development 147, dev183418 (2020).
39. Gaudet, A. D., Sweet, D. R., Polinski, N. K., Guan, Z. & Popovich, P. G.
Galectin-1 in injured rat spinal cord: implications for macrophage
phagocytosis and neural repair. Mol. Cell Neurosci. 64, 84–94 (2015).
40. Hammond, T. R. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing of microglia throughout
the mouse lifespan and in the injured brain reveals complex cell-state changes.
Immunity 50, 253–271 (2018).
41. Faulkner, J. R. et al. Reactive astrocytes protect tissue and preserve function
after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci.: Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 24, 2143–2155 (2004).
42. Rostami, J. et al. Astrocytes have the capacity to act as antigen-presenting cells
in the Parkinson’s disease brain. J. Neuroinﬂammation 17, 1–18 (2020).
43. Jin, S. et al. Inference and analysis of cell-cell communication using CellChat.
Nat. Commun. 12, 1088 (2021).
44. Meyer, R. C., Giddens, M. M., Schaefer, S. A. & Hall, R. A. GPR37 and
GPR37L1 are receptors for the neuroprotective and glioprotective factors
prosaptide and prosaposin. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 9529–9534 (2013).
45. Liu, Y. et al. A sensitized IGF1 treatment restores corticospinal axon-
dependent functions. Neuron 95, 817–833 e814 (2017).
46. Hashimoto, M., Sun, D., Rittling, S. R., Denhardt, D. T. & Young, W.
Osteopontin-deﬁcient mice exhibit less inﬂammation, greater tissue damage,
and impaired locomotor recovery from spinal cord injury compared with
wild-type controls. J. Neurosci.: Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 27, 3603–3611 (2007).
47. Tasaka, G., Negishi, M. & Oinuma, I. Semaphorin 4D/Plexin-B1-mediated
M-Ras GAP activity regulates actin-based dendrite remodeling through
lamellipodin. J. Neurosci.: Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 32, 8293–8305 (2012).
48. Brennan, F. H., Anderson, A. J., Taylor, S. M., Woodruff, T. M. & Ruitenberg,
M. J. Complement activation in the injured central nervous system: another
dual-edged sword? J. Neuroinﬂammation 9, 137 (2012).
49. Butovsky, O. et al. Identiﬁcation of a unique TGF-beta-dependent molecular
and functional signature in microglia. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 131–143 (2014).
50. Bennett, M. L. et al. New tools for studying microglia in the mouse and human
CNS. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, E1738–E1746 (2016).
51. Dagher, N. N. et al. Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor inhibition prevents
microglial plaque association and improves cognition in 3xTg-AD mice. J.
Neuroinﬂammation 12, 139 (2015).
52. Elmore, M. R. et al. Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor signaling is necessary
for microglia viability, unmasking a microglia progenitor cell in the adult
brain. Neuron 82, 380–397 (2014).
53. Acharya, M. M. et al. Elimination of microglia improves cognitive function
following cranial irradiation. Sci. Rep. 6, 31545 (2016).
54. Hilla, A. M., Diekmann, H. & Fischer, D. Microglia are irrelevant for neuronal
degeneration and axon regeneration after acute injury. J. Neurosci. 37,
6113–6124 (2017).
55. Liddelow, S. A. et al. Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated
microglia. Nature 541, 481–487 (2017).
56. Parkhurst, C. N. et al. Microglia promote learning-dependent synapse
formation through brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Cell 155, 1596–1609
(2013).
57. Fu, H., et al. Depletion of microglia exacerbates injury and impairs function
recovery after spinal cord injury in mice. Cell Death Dis. 11, 528 (2020).
58. Freria, C. M. et al. Serial systemic injections of endotoxin (LPS) elicit
neuroprotective spinal cord microglia through IL-1-dependent cross talk with
endothelial cells. J. Neurosci.: Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 40, 9103–9120 (2020).
59. Li, Y. et al. Delayed microglial depletion after spinal cord injury reduces
chronic inﬂammation and neurodegeneration in the brain and improves
neurological recovery in male mice. Theranostics 10, 11376–11403 (2020).
60. Gerber, Y. N. et al. CSF1R inhibition reduces microglia proliferation,
promotes tissue preservation and improves motor recovery after spinal cord
injury. Front Cell Neurosci. 12, 368 (2018).
61. Donnelly, D. J. & Popovich, P. G. Inﬂammation and its role in
neuroprotection, axonal regeneration and functional recovery after spinal cord
injury. Exp. Neurol. 209, 378–388 (2008).
62. Milich, L.M., et al. Single-cell analysis of the cellular heterogeneity and
interactions in the injured mouse spinal cord. J. Exp. Med. 218, e20210040
(2021).
63. Hakim, R. et al. Spinal cord injury induces permanent reprogramming of
microglia into a disease-associated state which contributes to functional
recovery. J. Neurosci.: Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 41, 8441–8459 (2021).
64. Wells, J. E. et al. An adverse role for matrix metalloproteinase 12 after spinal
cord injury in mice. J. Neurosci.: Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 23, 10107–10115 (2003).
65. Yang, X. et al. Apolipoprotein E deﬁciency exacerbates spinal cord injury in
mice: inﬂammatory response and oxidative stress mediated by NF-κB
signaling pathway. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 12, 1–16 (2018).
66. Anderson, M. A. et al. Required growth facilitators propel axon regeneration
across complete spinal cord injury. Nature 561, 396–400 (2018).
67. Stewart, A. N. et al. Considerations for studying sex as a biological variable in
spinal cord injury. Front Neurol. 11, 802 (2020).
68. Lenz, K. M. & McCarthy, M. M. A starring role for microglia in brain sex
differences. Neuroscientist 21, 306–321 (2015).
69. O’Neil, S. M., Witcher, K. G., McKim, D. B. & Godbout, J. P. Forced turnover
of aged microglia induces an intermediate phenotype but does not rebalance
CNS environmental cues driving priming to immune challenge. Acta
Neuropathol. Commun. 6, 129 (2018).
70. Jain, N. B. et al. Traumatic spinal cord injury in the United States, 1993–2012.
JAMA 313, 2236–2243 (2015).
71. Lei, F. et al. CSF1R inhibition by a small-molecule inhibitor is not microglia
speciﬁc; affecting hematopoiesis and the function of macrophages. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 117, 23336–23338 (2020).
72. Chen, Z. et al. Microglial displacement of inhibitory synapses provides
neuroprotection in the adult brain. Nat. Commun. 5, 4486 (2014).
73. Chen, Z. et al. Lipopolysaccharide-induced microglial activation and
neuroprotection against experimental brain injury is independent of
hematogenous TLR4. J. Neurosci.: Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 32, 11706–11715 (2012).
74. Carpenter, R. S. et al. Spinal cord injury causes chronic bone marrow failure.
Nat. Commun. 11, 3702 (2020).
75. Scheff, S. W., Rabchevsky, A. G., Fugaccia, I., Main, J. A. & Lumpp, J. E. Jr
Experimental modeling of spinal cord injury: characterization of a force-
deﬁned injury device. J. Neurotrauma 20, 179–193 (2003).
76. Herrmann, J. E. et al. STAT3 is a critical regulator of astrogliosis and scar
formation after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 28, 7231–7243 (2008).
77. Basso, D. M. et al. Basso Mouse Scale for locomotion detects differences in
recovery after spinal cord injury in ﬁve common mouse strains. J.
Neurotrauma 23, 635–659 (2006).
78. Cummings, B. J., Engesser-Cesar, C., Cadena, G. & Anderson, A. J. Adaptation
of a ladder beam walking task to assess locomotor recovery in mice following
spinal cord injury. Behav. Brain Res 177, 232–241 (2007).
79. Mifﬂin, K. A. et al. Voluntary wheel running reveals sex-speciﬁc nociceptive
factors in murine experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Pain 160,
870–881 (2019).
80. Faw, T. D. et al. Unique sensory and motor behavior in Thy1-GFP-M mice
before and after spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 35, 2167–2182 (2018).
81. McTigue, D. M., Wei, P. & Stokes, B. T. Proliferation of NG2-positive cells
and altered oligodendrocyte numbers in the contused rat spinal cord. J.
Neurosci. 21, 3392–3400 (2001).
82. Zhou, G. et al. NetworkAnalyst 3.0: a visual analytics platform for
comprehensive gene expression proﬁling and meta-analysis. Nucleic Acids Res.
47, W234–W241 (2019).
83. Witcher, K. G. et al. Traumatic brain injury causes chronic cortical
inﬂammation and neuronal dysfunction mediated by microglia. J. Neurosci.:
Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 41, 1597–1616 (2021).
84. Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell 177,
1888–1902 e1821 (2019).
85. Kenkhuis, B. et al. Co-expression patterns of microglia markers Iba1,
TMEM119 and P2RY12 in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 167, 105684
(2022).
86. Konishi, H. et al. Siglec-H is a microglia-speciﬁc marker that discriminates
microglia from CNS-associated macrophages and CNS-inﬁltrating monocytes.
Glia 65, 1927–1943 (2017).
87. Van Hove, H. et al. A single-cell atlas of mouse brain macrophages reveals
unique transcriptional identities shaped by ontogeny and tissue environment.
Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1021–1035 (2019).
88. Matson, K. J. E. et al. A single-cell atlas of spared tissue below a spinal cord
injury reveals cellular mechanisms of repair. BioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/
2021.1104.1128.441862 (2021).
89. Keren-Shaul, H. et al. A unique microglia type associated with restricting
development of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 169, 1276–1290 e1217 (2017).
90. Hamel, R., et al. Time-resolved single-cell RNAseq proﬁling identiﬁes a novel
Fabp5-expressing subpopulation of inﬂammatory myeloid cells in chronic
spinal cord injury. bioRxiv, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.1110.1121.346635
(2020).
91. Trapnell, C. et al. The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are
revealed by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32,
381–386 (2014).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
19

Acknowledgements
The laboratory of PGP is supported by the National Institutes of Health (R01NS099532,
R01NS083942, R35NS111582), and the Ray W. Poppleton Endowment (PGP). FHB is
supported by the Craig H. Neilsen Foundation (457267) and the Wings for Life Spinal
Research Foundation. Yi L. is supported by grants from the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (92168105). Work in the OSU SCI core lab is supported by
P30NS104177. The authors thank Andrey Reymar (Plexxikon, Inc.) for providing vehicle
and PLX5622 diets. The authors thank Wenmin Lai, Lori Hudson, Randall S. Carpenter,
and Matthew T. Goodus for superb technical assistance, and members of the PGP lab for
blinding and thoughtful discussions. Schematics were created with BioRender.com.
Author contributions
F.H.B. and P.G.P. conceived the study and designed experiments. F.H.B. performed
experiments and data analysis. Yi. L. helped to perform bulk RNA sequencing experi-
ments. Yi. L. and A.M. helped analyze bulk RNA sequencing data. N.P. and K.G.W.
helped perform single-cell RNA sequencing experiments and Yang L., C.W., Q.G., N.P.,
W.A.C., K.G.W., A.J.F., and Q.M. helped analyze and interpret single-cell RNA
sequencing data for Figs. 4–8 and Sup. Figs. 7–15. Z.G., K.A.K., and J.C.E.H. helped
perform experiments in Figs. 1–3 and Sup. Figs. 1–6. J.P.G., A.J.F., D.M.M., Z.H., and
Q.M. contributed intellectually to the study. F.H.B. and P.G.P. wrote, edited, and revised
the manuscript. All authors provided feedback on the manuscript and approved the
ﬁnal paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Phillip G. Popovich.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Aaron Gitler and the other,
anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer
reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0
20
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:4096 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31797-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

===== Bunina2020_CellSyst_SOX2+ESCtoNeuron =====
Article
Genomic Rewiring of SOX2 Chromatin Interaction
Network during Differentiation of ESCs to
Postmitotic Neurons
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Complex interplay of RNA, protein, and chromatin during
neuronal differentiation
d Multi-omic proﬁling reveals divergent roles of SOX2 in stem
cells and neurons
d SOX2 on-chromatin interaction network changes from
pluripotent to neuronal factors
d ATRX interacts with SOX2 in neurons and co-binds highly
expressed neuronal genes
Authors
Daria Bunina, Nade Abazova,
Nichole Diaz, Kyung-Min Noh,
Jeroen Krijgsveld, Judith B. Zaugg
Correspondence
noh@embl.de (K.-M.N.),
j.krijgsveld@dkfz.de (J.K.),
zaugg@embl.de (J.B.Z.)
In Brief
In this work, Bunina et al. proﬁled
transcriptome, proteome, and chromatin
accessibility dynamics during
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem
cells to postmitotic neurons. They
revealed extensive associations between
molecular layers within and across
differentiation time points and uncovered
an unexpected interaction of two
chromatin-bound proteins, SOX2 and
ATRX, in neurons. Their role in regulating
neuronal genes was validated by
CRISPR. The study highlights the
signiﬁcance of multi-omic approaches
followed by speciﬁc functional
experiments in understanding gene
regulation in complex systems.
Bunina et al., 2020, Cell Systems 10, 480–494
June 24, 2020 ª 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2020.05.003
ll

Article
Genomic Rewiring of SOX2 Chromatin
Interaction Network during Differentiation
of ESCs to Postmitotic Neurons
Daria Bunina,1,2,6 Nade Abazova,2,3,5,6 Nichole Diaz,2 Kyung-Min Noh,2,* Jeroen Krijgsveld,3,4,* and Judith B. Zaugg1,7,*
1Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1 Heidelberg 69117, Germany
2Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1 Heidelberg 69117, Germany
3Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg 69120, Germany
4Heidelberg University, Medical Faculty Heidelberg University, Faculty of Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany
5Collaboration for joint PhD degree between the European Molecular Biology Laboratory and Heidelberg University, Faculty of Biosciences,
Heidelberg, Germany
6These authors contributed equally
7Lead Contact
*Correspondence: noh@embl.de (K.-M.N.), j.krijgsveld@dkfz.de (J.K.), zaugg@embl.de (J.B.Z.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2020.05.003
SUMMARY
Cellular differentiation requires dramatic changes in chromatin organization, transcriptional regulation, and
protein production. To understand the regulatory connections between these processes, we generated pro-
teomic, transcriptomic, and chromatin accessibility data during differentiation of mouse embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) into postmitotic neurons and found extensive associations between different molecular layers
within and across differentiation time points. We observed that SOX2, as a regulator of pluripotency and
neuronal genes, redistributes from pluripotency enhancers to neuronal promoters during differentiation,
likely driven by changes in its protein interaction network. We identiﬁed ATRX as a major SOX2 partner in neu-
rons, whose co-localization correlated with an increase in active enhancer marks and increased expression
of nearby genes, which we experimentally conﬁrmed for three loci. Collectively, our data provide key insights
into the regulatory transformation of SOX2 during neuronal differentiation, and we highlight the signiﬁcance
of multi-omic approaches in understanding gene regulation in complex systems.
INTRODUCTION
Cellular plasticity is a fundamental property of cells to dynami-
cally respond to changes in their environment, which is apparent
in its most dramatic form during development and differentiation.
At the molecular level, differentiation is driven by an intricate pro-
cess involving multiple regulatory steps to eventually establish a
gene and protein expression program that supports the function
of the target cell type. Cell-type-speciﬁc gene expression is
controlled by transcription factors (TFs) through gene regulatory
networks (Deplancke, 2009). TFs themselves are typically regu-
lated as downstream effectors of cell signaling pathways,
through post-translational modiﬁcations, or through induction
of their own expression. In addition, their binding to DNA can
be regulated by chromatin accessibility (Kaplan et al., 2011;
Klemm et al., 2019; Pique-Regi et al., 2011), histone tail modiﬁ-
cations (Mikkelsen et al., 2007), and the availability of their inter-
action partners (Adams and Workman, 1995; Deplancke, 2009),
often in a gene or locus-speciﬁc manner. These cell-state-spe-
ciﬁc properties together with TF recognition motifs ultimately
determine the TFs target regions and thus their function. There-
fore, to understand differentiation at the molecular level, we not
only need to understand all levels of TF regulation but also their
interactions and mutual interplay.
In vitro neuronal differentiation from pluripotent stem cells (Bi-
bel et al., 2007; Germain et al., 2010; Lian et al., 2013) is a para-
digm system to study cellular state transitions and their key mo-
lecular events and is often used for disease modeling and drug
screens (Brennand et al., 2011; Ogawa et al., 2017; Richard
and Maragakis, 2015). Different studies have proﬁled many of
the individual molecular layers, such as DNA methylation, his-
tone modiﬁcations, chromatin accessibility, gene expression,
and proteomics, and have shown that each is essential for un-
derstanding the process of differentiation (Frese et al., 2017; Go-
lebiewska et al., 2009; Lomvardas and Maniatis, 2016; Mayran
et al., 2019; Tyssowski et al., 2014; Wapinski et al., 2017; Wu
et al., 2010; Ziller et al., 2015). However, although these and
other studies have provided valuable insights into molecular
events during neurogenesis, most of them have focused on
one or two regulatory layers. For instance, neural differentiation
has been investigated by RNA expression, either alone (Wu
et al., 2010) or in combination with chromatin accessibility
480
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020 ª 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
ll
OPEN ACCESS

(Mayran et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2018), as well as by proteomics
(Chaerkady et al., 2009; Song et al., 2019), thereby each
providing a partial view of the process and limiting the ability to
correlate regulatory principles across multiple levels of regula-
tion. Similarly, an association of proteins with chromatin, as in
chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq), is usu-
ally determined for a limited number of factors, disregarding po-
tential interaction partners that modulate TF activity. Although
various protein interactomes of pluripotency TFs have been
characterized (e.g., for OCT4 [van den Berg et al., 2010; Pardo
et al., 2010], SOX2 [Lai et al., 2012; Mallanna et al., 2010], and
NANOG [Gagliardi et al., 2013] and reviewed in [Huang and
Wang, 2014]), they provided no direct evidence that these TFs
functionally interact on chromatin.
Here, we applied a hypothesis-free, multi-omic approach to
uncover general principles of regulatory rewiring on several mo-
lecular levels during differentiation. To this end, we proﬁled pro-
teome, transcriptome, and chromatin accessibility at 4–6 time
points during differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) to postmitotic glutamatergic neurons. Data integration
revealed the pluripotency TF SOX2 as a major regulator of
neuronal genes, and we conﬁrmed its abundance in postmitotic
neurons. Follow-up ChIP-seq and ChIP-SICAP experiments (se-
lective isolation of chromatin-associated proteins [Raﬁee et al.,
2016]) revealed extensive genomic redistribution of SOX2 in neu-
rons versus ESCs, which coincided with a drastic change in its
chromatin-bound protein interactome. In ESCs, we recover the
known pluripotency interactors of SOX2, while in neurons, we
identify the chromatin remodeler ATRX as a major SOX2 interac-
tor. ATRX-SOX2 co-localization correlated with an increase in
SOX2 binding, enhancer activity, and expression of nearby
genes, which we validated at three genomic loci using CRISPR.
RESULTS
Multi-omics Factor Analysis (MOFA) Reveals Three
Latent Factors Underlying Differentiation Heterogeneity
To gain a comprehensive and unbiased overview of the molecu-
lar events during neuronal differentiation, we used a differentia-
tion protocol of mouse ESCs to postmitotic neurons (Bibel
et al., 2007) that yields about 84%–88% neurons on day 10 (Fig-
ure S1A) and performed ATAC-seq, RNA-seq, and MS-based
proteomics at several time points (Figure 1A and Table S1). To
ensure a pure population of glutamatergic neurons, we veriﬁed
the absence of expression of marker genes for common contam-
inant cells in our neuronal cultures (Figures S1A and S1B; STAR
Methods). Data were collected for ESCs (day 0), exit from plurip-
otency after LiF removal (day 2–4), neural progenitors after stim-
ulation with retinoic acid (day 6–8), and mature neurons (day 10–
12). Overall, we quantiﬁed 117.852 ATAC-seq peaks, 16.940 of
which were mapped to a gene promoter (1.5 kb from transcrip-
tion start site [TSS]), 18.877 gene transcripts, and 4.992 proteins
(Figure 1B). Promoter ATAC-seq peaks are more accessible yet
less dynamic than distal peaks (Figures S1C and S1G). As ex-
pected, the detected proteins represent genes that are relatively
highly expressed on RNA level.
We next applied multi-omics factor analysis (MOFA), which in-
fers a low-dimensional representation of multi-omics data in
form of latent factors (LFs) (Argelaguet et al., 2018). MOFA iden-
tiﬁed three LFs that explained a major part of the variance in at
least one dataset. LF1 explained the majority of variance in all
three layers whereas LF2 and LF3 speciﬁcally explain RNA and
ATAC-seq data, respectively (Figure 1C). The common factor
(LF1) separated early (days 0 and 4) from late (days 8 and 10/
12) differentiation, suggesting that drastic changes in cellular
processes after neural induction strongly involve all three regula-
tory layers (Figure 1D). Genes and peaks underlying LF1 were
mostly related to general and neuronal morphological transitions
(Figure 1D; Table S2). The RNA factor (LF2) captured changes
between neuronal progenitors (day 8) and neurons (days 10/
12), which were related to neuronal function (synapse and action
potential) and to their postmitotic nature (cell cycle). The ATAC
factor (LF3) captured changes in early differentiation (days 0 to
4) and was not enriched in any functional terms, likely reﬂecting
the cellular heterogeneity of embryoid bodies. In agreement with
this, promoter peaks became generally decompacted at day 4
(Figure S1G).
RNA and Protein, but Not Chromatin, Show Concerted
Changes during Neuronal Differentiation
Next, we investigated the dynamic changes of the individual mo-
lecular layers and their relationships. Differential analysis for
ATAC-seq and RNA-seq revealed that almost all peaks and
genes were differentially accessible and transcribed in at least
one comparison (FDR < 5%; 111.200 of 117.852 peaks, and
15.645 of 18.877 genes), thus reﬂecting the vast epigenetic
and transcriptomic changes happening during differentiation.
Notably, we only identiﬁed 440 differentially expressed proteins
(<10% of all detected proteins), 406 of which are also differen-
tially transcribed.
To understand the apparent discrepancy between protein and
RNA, we grouped the differentially transcribed genes (that were
detected in the proteome) into seven clusters by performing un-
supervised clustering (k-means) using log2 fold changes of RNA
and protein relative to day 0 (= ESCs; n = 4.515; see STAR
Methods). Most clusters showed concerted changes between
proteins and RNA over time (Figure 1E; clusters 1–5) despite
the lack of statistical signiﬁcance in differential protein expres-
sion. The exceptions are genes in clusters 6 and 7, which may
be due to post-transcriptional regulation, such as variation in
translation rates (Schwanh€ausser et al., 2011), or in RNA and
protein stability. The latter was corroborated by analyzing pro-
tein half-lives from primary mouse neurons (Mathieson et al.,
2018), which revealed signiﬁcantly longer and shorter half-lives
of proteins in cluster 6 and 7, respectively (p value = 2.8 3
103 and 2 3 10⁴, Figures 1E and S1D).
In contrast to the generally concerted behavior of RNA and
proteins, promoter accessibility dynamics seems independent
of the genes’ expression pattern. This is particularly evident for
genes that are upregulated during differentiation and whose pro-
moters are accessible long before they are expressed (clusters
1–2 on Figures 1E and S1G). An exception to this independence
is cluster 5, which shows more compaction of promoters at later
stages of differentiation in line with decreasing gene expression.
Notably, while promoter accessibility was relatively stable, intra-
genic regulatory elements were highly dynamic during differenti-
ation. Despite the fact that we cannot directly assign function-
ality to these intragenic accessible regions, these observations
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020
481

suggest that alterations in accessibility of enhancers may play a
role in driving gene expression changes during differentiation,
while promoter activity may depend on factors beyond accessi-
bility, such as chromatin modiﬁcations and TF binding.
Gene ontology (GO) analysis revealed very distinct functions
for each cluster, which allowed us to deﬁne a ‘‘neuronal cluster’’
(cluster 1) and a ‘‘cell proliferation cluster’’ (cluster 5, Figure S1E).
Unexpectedly, one of the most enriched motifs in the neuronal
cluster was SOX2, a well-known pluripotency and early neurode-
velopment TF (Figure S1F). The proliferation cluster was mainly
enriched for motifs of the pluripotency regulator MYC. Notably,
even for cluster 6 and cluster 3, which share the downregulation
of RNA but show diverging trends on the protein level and differ
in their functional enrichment (Figure S1E), we found distinct TF
motifs enriched i.e., GABPA/ELK1 for cluster 3 and NRF1 for
cluster 6.
In summary, our results show strong correlation between RNA
and protein expression dynamics during neuronal differentiation,
0
1
2
3
−log10(FDR)
ATAC
RNA
A
B
C
D
-LiF
+RA
day 0 (mESCs)
day 4 (embryoid 
bodies)
day 8 (NPCs)
day 10/12 (neurons)
Transcriptome profiling 
(RNA-seq)
High-resolution proteome profiling 
(TMT-labelling LC-MS)
Chromatin structure profiling 
(ATAC-seq)
Integration with public datasets 
(TF binding motifs, histone marks)
ChIP-SICAP (chromatin- 
associated interactors)
ATAC RNA Proteins
Promoter 
signal
(TSS±1.5kb)
Distal
nATAC=5493
n=11512
n=219
n=103121
n=1652
LF1
LF2
LF3
RNA
ATAC
proteins
Latent factor
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
R2
Variance explained per factor
LF1
LF2
−4
−2
0
2
4
−4
0
4
LF3 (ATAC)
d0
d4
d8
d12
−4
−2
0
2
−4
0
4
LF1
(ATAC,RNA,protein)
LF2 (RNA)
E
~
~
~
~
Feature 
intensity
at day12,log2
Clusters
NGene=929,
NATAC=2985
NGene=567,
NATAC=1576
NGene=916,
NATAC=2541
NGene=517,
NATAC=1177
NGene=523,
NATAC=1945
NGene=557,
NATAC=3474
NGene=646,
NATAC=2096
RNA
day12
day12
day12
day0
day0
day0
z-score
proteins
day10
day0
Promoter Intragenic
ATAC signal
0.25
0.57
0.57
0.24
0.06
0.08
0.11
0.09
0.02
MEMBRANE_DEPOLARIZATION_DURING_ACTION_POTENTIAL
VOCALIZATION_BEHAVIOR
GABA_ERGIC_SYNAPSE
REICHERT_MITOSIS_LIN9_TARGETS
EGUCHI_CELL_CYCLE_RB1_TARGETS
SPECIFICATION_OF_ANIMAL_ORGAN_IDENTITY
COCHLEA_MORPHOGENESIS
SEGMENT_SPECIFICATION
EMBRYONIC_CRANIAL_SKELETON_MORPHOGENESIS
DORSAL_SPINAL_CORD_DEVELOPMENT
CRANIAL_NERVE_MORPHOGENESIS
NEURON_RECOGNITION
SYNAPTIC_MEMBRANE_ADHESION
n=348
d0
d4
d8
d12
LF1
(ATAC,RNA,protein)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Neuronal
Proliferation
−3
−2
0
2
nGENE=4320
TF motifs
SOX2, SOX5
YY1, GABPA
YY1, GABPA,
ELK1
ELF1
MYC
NRF1
EBF1
Figure 1. Changes in Proteome, Transcriptome, and Chromatin during Neuronal Differentiation
(A) Scheme of neuronal differentiation protocol and experimental set-up (LiF, leukemia inhibitory factor; RA, retinoic acid).
(B) Overview of ATAC-seq, RNA-seq, and proteomics data. All except distal ATAC-peaks are aligned by genes. Distal ATAC-peaks are only partially shown due to
the high number. n, number of ATAC-seq peaks (or genes if no ATAC-peak is present).
(C) Variance explained by latend factors (LFs) identiﬁed with MOFA is shown for each dataset.
(D) Top: scatterplots of samples projected to LF1 versus LF2 (left), and LF1 versus LF3 (right) are shown. Bottom: a subset of the most enriched GO terms per LF
and data type are shown as bar graphs.
(E) RNA, protein, and chromatin accessibility data are shown as a heatmap for genes grouped by k-means clustering of log2 foldchanges of RNA and protein.
Accessibility is shown separately for promoters (1.5 kb from TSS; ‘‘Promoter ATAC signal’’) and gene body (‘‘Intragenic ATAC signal’’). Numbers indicate unique
gene IDs (NGene) and intragenic ATAC-seq peaks (NATAC). Top enriched motifs in gene promoters are shown in each cluster (right; full list in Figure S1F). (B and E):
genes with multiple promoters and or gene body peaks are shown multiple times.
See also Figure S1.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
482
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020

which allow clustering of genes into functionally distinct groups,
whereas promoter accessibility is generally uncorrelated with
gene expression.
Molecular Layers Show Long-Lasting Interactions
across Time Points
When assessing each time point individually, we observed an
intriguing bias of chromatin changes occurring early in differen-
tiation, whereas transcriptome and proteome changes seemed
to increase toward the ﬁnal differentiation step from neuronal
precursors to neurons (day 8 and day 10/12; Figure 2A). There-
fore, we next investigated the relationship between regulatory
layers across time points. To this end, we tested for pair-wise as-
sociation of directionalities between RNA and protein and be-
tween chromatin and RNA (both up, both down, up-down, and
down-up) at the same and subsequent time points using Fisher’s
exact test (see schematic in Figure 2B).
Speciﬁcally, for RNA and protein, we tested whether genes
for which the RNA is upregulated at day X are also upregulated
on the protein level at day Y. We then repeated this test for any
combination of up and downregulation on RNA and protein
level and any day X and Y. As expected, the major associations
between RNA and protein expression occur within the same
time points (Figure 2B). The only exception to this are tran-
scripts that are downregulated at day 4 with no corresponding
downregulation of the proteins, which may suggest that RNA
and protein expression during exit of pluripotency is mainly
coupled for genes that get induced. Notably, we also observed
signiﬁcant associations between RNA at exit of pluripotency
(day 4) and protein at neuronal induction (day 8), both for up-
and downregulated genes, and also between RNA at neuronal
induction (day 8) and protein in postmitotic neurons (day 10) for
upregulated genes. One interpretation of this is that certain
RNA patterns established upon the exit from pluripotency and
after neuronal induction are coupled to protein expression at
the following differentiation state, possibly reﬂecting a long-
lasting effect of RNA expression in neuronal progenitors and
postmitotic neurons or a continuous up- or downregulation of
the same genes on RNA level. Indeed, we found the same
genes being up- or downregulated on RNA level at the
Figure 2. Associations Between Differential Features Across Molecular Layers and Time Points
(A) Numbers of differential RNAs, proteins, and ATAC-seq peaks between adjacent time points (day 0 versus 4, 8 versus 4, and 12 versus 8; FDR < 5%.)
are shown.
(B and C) Associations between differential features across time points are shown as log2 ORs according to the schematic in (B) (top). (B): differential RNA and
differential proteins, (C): differential promoter ATAC-seq peaks and differential RNA. Adj.p < 0.05 are bold; Fishers’ test; arrows indicate up- or down- regulation at
each time point; enrichments contradicting the central dogma of molecular biology (ATAC/RNA, RNA/protein) were not considered (gray boxes).
(D) GO terms enriched among genes downregulated at day 12, whose promoters were decompacted already at day 4 (related to the C). Expressed genes with
promoter ATAC-seq peak were used as background.
(E) Promoter ATAC-seq signal (top) and RNA expression (bottom) dynamics are shown for the genes deﬁned in (D).
See also Figure S2.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020
483

subsequent time points (log2 odds ratio (OR) between 1.1–2.0,
adjusted p value [adj.p] <0.05).
To analyze the associations between chromatin and RNA, we
grouped ATAC-seq peaks into promoters (1.5 kb around a gene
TSS) and distal elements (all others), and linked them to their
closest gene. Similar to the RNA-protein trends, the major asso-
ciations between chromatin accessibility and RNA occur within
the same time points, both for promoters and distal elements,
followed by the association between accessibility at day 4 and
RNA at day 8 (Figures 2C and S2A). The latter can be interpreted
to mean that chromatin changes at the exit of pluripotency are
4vs0
8vs0
12vs0
TF 
activity
TF 
expression
4vs0
8vs0
12vs0
SOX2, OCT4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
4 8 12
−10
0
10
−10
0
10
−10
0
10
−10
0
10
−10
0
10
−10
0
10
−10
0
10
−10
0
10
day
Log2 fold change over day0
TF activity
TF expression
n=39
n=59
n=33
n=5
n=67
n=34
n=34
n=25
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
A
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
−100
−50
0
50
100
Distance from the BS center (bp)
Average Tn5 insertions 
OCT4:SOX2
SOX2_only
0
5
10
day0
day4
day8day10
Protein level
OCT4
SOX2
−10
−5
0
5
10
Log2 fold change 
over day0
C
Number of TFs 
per group:
B
TF 
protein
day0
day10
Protein
abundance,log2
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 3. Transcription Factor Binding Sites
Undergo
Major
Changes
in
Chromatin
Accessibility during Differentiation
(A) K-means clustering of RNA expression and ac-
tivity of TFs at days 4, 8, and 12 versus day 0 (log2
fold changes) are represented as a heatmap (left)
and lineplot (right). Protein abundance (log2) is
shown for comparison (gray, not detected). Thick
lines represent LOESS (local polynomial regression)
ﬁt.
(B) ATAC signal footprints of the combined OCT4-
SOX2 and SOX2-only motif (± 100 bp) at day 0.
(C) Protein expression levels (log2) of SOX2 and
OCT4 during differentiation.
See also Figure S3 and Table S3.
coupled to gene expression at a later stage
in neuronal progenitors. For promoters, we
found a seemingly contradictory long-term
relationship between increase in accessi-
bility at day 4 and decrease in gene
expression at day 12 (log2OR = 0.69,
adj.p < 0.05). These genes were enriched
for ribosome biogenesis, translation, and
RNA metabolism, all processes that get re-
structured at exit of pluripotency and again
during the transition to the postmitotic
state in neurons (Figure 2D). Investigating
their RNA expression proﬁles revealed
that they ﬂuctuate across the differentia-
tion, possibly reﬂecting the metabolic
changes at each stage, until they are all
downregulated
in postmitotic
neurons,
when also chromatin at their promoter
compacts (Figure 2E). Yet, how these mo-
lecular events, which are so distant in time,
are functionally related, remains open.
TF Binding Sites Undergo Major
Changes in Accessibility during
Neuronal Differentiation
To understand the driving forces of the
observed
molecular
patterns,
we
next
investigated the role of TFs in shaping the
genome-wide changes in our system. Since
not many TFs were quantiﬁed using prote-
omics (43 out 352), we employed our
recently developed tool (diffTF) to estimate
differential TF activity based on aggregate
changes in chromatin accessibility at their binding sites (Berest
et al., 2019), see STAR Methods. Overall, we found 296 TFs that
signiﬁcantly changed in activity (Cohens’D > 1) during the differen-
tiation time course (Figure 3A and Table S3).
We clustered the TFs based on their differential activity and
change in expression relative to day 0 into 8 major TF groups
(Figure 3A; STAR Methods). Among them, we identiﬁed a group
of ‘‘neuronal TFs’’ (group 1) that strongly increased in activity and
expression during differentiation and a group of ‘‘pluripotency
TFs’’ that strongly decreased with time (group 4). Notably, for
the majority of TFs that were downregulated over time on the
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
484
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020

RNA level (groups 5–7), we observed a decrease in TF activity.
Two TF groups showed strong anticorrelation of TF activity
and RNA expression (TF group 7 and 8), which indicates that
they act as repressors and compact chromatin when expressed
(Berest et al., 2019). Among them are known repressors such as
Zeb1 and Msx1.
Among the TFs whose motifs were enriched in the seven gene
clusters (Figure 1E), eight were signiﬁcantly differentially active
during neuronal differentiation and appear as transcriptional ac-
tivators of either developmental genes (in the case of SOX5 and
EBF1, groups 1 and 2 in Figure 3A) or pluripotency genes (in the
case of MYC and NRF1, group 5 in Figure 3A). A notable excep-
tion is SOX2 (group 4), whose motif was enriched in promoters of
genes in the neuronal cluster (Figure 1E), yet based on diffTF it
showed a decrease in TF activity and RNA expression upon dif-
ferentiation (Figure 3A, TF group 4). Decreased TF activity and
expression of SOX2 is consistent with its role in maintaining plu-
ripotency of the stem cells together with its pluripotency interac-
tors NANOG and OCT4 (group 4 in Figures 3A and S3B). This is
further corroborated by the fact that the footprint of SOX2 alone
in ESCs shows much weaker signal than the footprint of the
OCT4:SOX2 joint motif (Figure 3B). However, while the OCT4
protein disappeared immediately upon exit from pluripotency,
SOX2 remained highly expressed at the protein level even in
postmitotic neurons (Figure 3C), which we conﬁrmed using im-
munostaining (Figure S3A).
SOX2 Relocates from ESC Enhancers to Neuronal
Promoters upon Differentiation
To further understand the cell-state speciﬁc role of SOX2, we
examined its binding sites in neurons compared to ESCs. To
do so, we performed ChIP-seq experiments at days 0 and 10,
corresponding to ESCs and postmitotic neurons, respectively,
and, to increase power, combined the data with two of the exist-
ing datasets in ESCs (Lodato et al., 2013; Whyte et al., 2013) (Fig-
ure 4A; Table S4). We identiﬁed 14.362 conﬁdent SOX2 peaks in
the two cell types, most of which overlapped with accessible
chromatin regions (11.451 peaks, 81%; see STAR Methods).
To characterize the regulatory elements bound by SOX2, we
combined our data with publicly available data on active and
inactive
histone
marks
(H3K4me1,
H3K4me3,
H3K27ac,
H3K36me3 and H3K27me3, and H3K9me3) from mouse ESCs
and forebrain (Shen et al., 2012). Unsupervised clustering of his-
tone marks, ATAC-seq, and SOX2 peaks revealed seven distinct
SOX2-bound regulatory groups (Figures 4A and S4A): neuron-
speciﬁc enhancers (regulatory groups 1 and 3, marked by
H3K4me1 and/or H3K27ac), neuron-speciﬁc promoters (regula-
tory group 2, marked by H3K4me3), ESC-speciﬁc enhancers
(regulatory groups 5, 6, 8), ESC-speciﬁc promoters (regulatory
group 4), ESC-speciﬁc poised regions (regulatory group 7,
marked by H3K27me3), and inactive chromatin (regulatory group
9, marked by H3K9me3). Regardless of the regulatory element
type, SOX2 binding in neurons always occurred at regions that
were already accessible in ESCs (groups 1–3), whereas regions
that lost SOX2 binding also lost their accessibility upon differen-
tiation (groups 4–9). We interpret this as evidence for SOX2 not
acting as a pioneer factor in neurons, but instead binding to re-
gions that are already accessible through other chromatin bind-
ing proteins in ESCs.
Differential binding analysis between ESCs and neurons (Fig-
ure 4B) revealed 1.969 and 862 ESCs- and neuron-speciﬁc
peaks, respectively. In both sets, we found the SOX2/SOX3 motif
enriched (Figure 4C); while the ESC-speciﬁc peaks were also en-
riched for the combined OCT4:SOX2 motif, consistent with its
role in pluripotency (Aksoy et al., 2013; Merino et al., 2014).
Neuronal SOX2 peaks, in contrast, showed an enrichment for
the homeodomain HOX motif, found in developmental TFs, and
ARID3B motif, an AT-rich interaction domain factor overex-
pressed in neuroblastomas and interacting with SOX2 in brain
tumors (Cox et al., 2013). Genes near neuronal SOX2 peaks
were enriched for the GO terms ‘‘neuron fate commitment’’
and ‘‘forebrain development’’ biological processes, whereas
genes near ESC-speciﬁc SOX2 peaks were enriched for
‘‘response to leukemia inhibitory factor’’ and ‘‘histone modiﬁca-
tion,’’ consistent with a dual role of SOX2 (Figure S4B).
TFs are often bound to distal regulatory elements acting as tis-
sue-speciﬁc enhancers. Using published data of mouse ESCs
and brain enhancers (Shen et al., 2012), we observed a higher
proportion of ESCs SOX2 peaks overlap ESCs-speciﬁc than
brain-speciﬁc enhancers and vice versa for neuronal SOX2
peaks (Figure 4D). Yet overall, SOX2 peaks in neurons were
strongly enriched at gene promoters, whereas in ESCs SOX2
binding was enriched at distal intergenic elements and introns
(Figure 4E).
Chromatin-Associated SOX2 Protein Interaction
Network Undergoes Stem Cell- to Neuronal Transition
during Differentiation of ESCs
Given the differentiation-induced redistribution of SOX2 from
distal, OCT4-co-bound sites to neuronal promoters, we hypoth-
esized that SOX2 may be partnering with a different set of TFs
when OCT4 disappears. Therefore, to compare the SOX2 inter-
action network between ESCs and neurons, we performed ChIP-
SICAP (selective isolation of chromatin-associated proteins [Ra-
ﬁee et al., 2016]) on SOX2, which speciﬁcally identiﬁes proteins
that interact with DNA-bound SOX2.
In all samples and replicates, SOX2 was among the most
highly enriched proteins when ranking them based on their p-
rotein iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantiﬁcation) intensity,
indicating a high speciﬁcity of the ChIP pull-down (Figure 5A).
There were only a few proteins with higher intensity than
SOX2, most notably histones, which is expected given their
high abundance in chromatin (Figure 5A). To avoid contamina-
tion by ubiquitous proteins, only proteins that were either exclu-
sively present in the SOX2 pull downs or displayed at least 4-
fold enrichment over the negative IgG control in both biological
replicates were included for further analysis.
We identiﬁed 92 and 105 proteins that co-localize with SOX2
on DNA in ESC and neurons respectively, of which 57 were
found in both (Figure 5B). More than 95% of all identiﬁed pro-
teins are nuclear (Table S5), corroborating the high speciﬁcity
of the method. We found TFs and TF cofactors (CoTFs, as
deﬁned in Schmeier et al., 2017) signiﬁcantly enriched among
SOX2 interactors compared to all mouse-protein-coding genes
(p = 3.1 3 10⁻⁴, OR = 1.4 for TFs; p = 3.6 3 10⁻11, OR = 7.6 for
coTFs; Fisher’s exact test), underlining the regulatory essence
of the SOX2-centered network (Figure 5C). Another large part
of the SOX2 interactors are involved in epigenetic remodeling
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020
485

(e.g., MTA2, HELLS, DNMT1, EHMT1, ATRX, and HMGB; Fig-
ure 5D). The high representation of epigenetic factors (20 in
ESCs and 19 in neurons) may reﬂect that the ESC-to-neurons
transition is associated with dramatic chromatin and DNA
methylation reorganization.
Overall, we observed a marked transition for the pluripotency-
related proteins, yet many of the neuronal TFs seem to be already
interacting with SOX2 in ESCs (Figure 5C). As expected, OCT4
was among the strongest interactors exclusively interacting
with SOX2 in ESCs, along with other stem cell factors SALL4
(known SOX2 interactor) and RIF1 (Figure 5D). The proteins iden-
tiﬁed as SOX2 interactors in neurons include FABP7, which has
been shown to play an essential role for neurogenesis in vivo (Wa-
tanabe et al., 2007), the topoisomerase TOP2B, which plays a
critical role in forebrain development and neuronal migration
(Yang et al., 2000), and the CoTF CTBP2, which is a co-activator
of retinoic acid signaling (Bajpe et al., 2013) that is essential for
neuronal differentiation. The majority of the proteins identiﬁed in
neurons have not been previously described as SOX2 interac-
tors, possibly owing to the fact that none of the interactome
studies focused on differentiated neurons.
Among the SOX2 interactors shared in ESCs and neurons,
we determined the preference of the respective interactor in
either cell type (Figure 5E; see STAR Methods). We observed
a stem cell to neuronal factor transition: the pluripotency-
related protein. TRIM28, preferentially bound to SOX2 in
Figure 4. Redistribution of SOX2 Binding Sites during Neuronal Differentiation
(A) Regulatory regions occupied by SOX2 (n = 14.362) are clustered into regulatory groups based on k-means clustering of SOX2 binding, ATAC-seq, and ChIP-
seq of different histone marks in ESCs and neurons. H3K4me3-marked groups are labeled as promotors (P).
(B) Overlap of SOX2 peaks identiﬁed in ESCs and neurons displayed as Venn diagram (left). Fold changes of SOX2 binding versus signal intensity are visualized as
MA plot. Pink represents differentially bound peaks (FDR < 5%).
(C) Top enriched motifs (HOMER tools) are shown for the differential SOX2-peaks in ESCs and neurons.
(D) Fractions of SOX2 peaks overlapping known cell-type-speciﬁc enhancers are shown (mouse ESCs and E14.5 brain data from Shen et al., 2012).
(E) The fractions of ESCs or neuronal SOX2 peaks in different genomic regions are shown.
See also Figure S4 and Table S4.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
486
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020

ESCs, whereas the neuronal factors ADNP and MYEF2 prefer-
entially bound to SOX2 in neurons. Overall, for most SOX2-in-
teractors, the change in SOX2 association reﬂects their
change in protein expression between neurons and ESCs
(Figure 5F; Pearson correlation R = 0.7). There are some ex-
ceptions to this (e.g., TRIM24, ADNP, DDX5, or MYEF2), for
which the association rate changes much more dramatically
than their protein expression level potentially reﬂecting regu-
lated recruitment to chromatin.
Distinct Interacting Proteins Co-occupy Genomic
Regions with SOX2 in ESCs and Neurons
To investigate how the change of its interaction partners may
regulate the genomic redistribution of SOX2 throughout differen-
tiation, we next assessed the genomic localization of the SOX2
partners identiﬁed above. To do so, we obtained publicly avail-
able ChIP-seq proﬁles (Oki et al., 2018) for mouse ESCs and
neurons (or brain). We included both chromatin-associated
and nucleoplasmic SOX2 interactors (identiﬁed by ChIP-SICAP
and ChIP-MS, respectively) in our list to also cover SOX2 com-
plexes that only transiently bind to chromatin. Of the 140 SOX2
interactors, ChIP-seq data were available for 38 and 13 in
ESCs and neurons, respectively (Figure 6A).
To assess cell-type-speciﬁc co-occupancy, we overlapped
the differentially bound genomic locations of SOX2 in ESCs
and neurons (1.969 and 862 peaks, respectively), using all avail-
able ChIP-seq data in the respective cell type. This revealed that
the majority of SOX2 peaks in ESCs were co-occupied with
another TF (Figures 6B and S5A; STAR Methods). The major
ESC co-localizing factors include not only the known SOX2 part-
ners OCT4 (98%), SALL4 (59%), CHD4 (30%), and HDAC1 (49%)
but also KDM1A (79%), SMAD2 (68%), SMC1A (57%), and
A
B
D
C
E
F
Figure 5. Rearrangement of Chromatin-Bound SOX2 Protein Interaction Network during Neuronal Differentiation
(A) Protein enrichment ranking of all SOX2-associated proteins pulled down by ChIP-SICAP. x axis: protein rank, corresponding to the total number of proteins. y
axis: iBAQ intensities, log10.
(B) Number and overlap between the SOX2-associated proteins in ESCs and neurons.
(C) Percentage of different functional groups of SOX2-associated proteins in ESCs and neurons.
(D) Selected stem cell, neuronal, and epigenetic factors present in ESCs and neurons alone or in both.
(E) Relative SOX2-association rate of overlapping proteins between neurons and ESCs, log2. For details on (C–E) see STAR Methods and Table S5.
(F) Scatter plot of the SOX2 association scores from (E) and corresponding protein log2 fold changes in neurons versus ESCs. SOX2 interactors with publicly
available ChIP-seq data are marked in red.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020
487

TRIM28 (37%,). In neurons, we found only ATRX (49%) and
KDM1A (46%) substantially overlapping with SOX2 (Figure 6B).
Of these, only ATRX interacts with SOX2 on chromatin in neurons
based on our ChIP-SICAP data, thus making ATRX the major
direct chromatin-associated SOX2-interactor in neurons for
which ChIP-seq data were available.
ATRX Co-occupancy with SOX2 Is Associated with
Active Chromatin Marks and High Gene Expression in
Neurons
With clear patterns of a genomic distribution deﬁned, a key ques-
tion remains to elucidate the function of SOX2 and ATRX interac-
tions in neurons. To address this, we divided the occupied
genomic regions into three groups (SOX2-ATRX co-bound,
ATRX alone, and SOX2 alone) using the ChIP-seq signals in neu-
rons or brain (see STAR Methods). We compared the levels of
histone modiﬁcations, marking the activity status of the regulato-
day2
day10
day4
day12
*
*
Known 
interactors:
log2 fold 
change
to day0
***
*
A
Proteins
RNA
B
% of overlaps 
with SOX2 
peaks
ChIP-Atlas data overview
from total 197 
proteins in 
mouse ESCs
from total 87 
proteins in
mouse neuronal 
cells/tissues/NPCs
SOX2 interactors in our 
ChIP-SICAP/ChIP-MS
ChIP-SICAP/MS
Interactions 
with SOX2 in:
ESCs
neurons
SICAP
SICAP
ChIP-MS
ChIP-MS
yes
no
30
5
8
*
no data
ESCs-specific
SOX2 interactors
ESCs/neurons 
common
SOX2 interactors
Neuron-specific
SOX2 interactors
ESC
neuronal
SOX2 peaks
overlapping 
ChIP-Atlas data:
80
60
40
20
0
2
0
-2
-4
-6
59.4
98.1
49.0
0.8
79.3
67.8
18.1
0.1
29.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.9
2.8
6.9
2.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
37.2
8.2
54.6
30.3
4.2
0.1
0.1
8.6
0.1
0.1
0.1
1.8
1.6
45.7
0.7
0.3
6.0
0.6
0.2
49.4
14.6
15.3
11.5
0.6
0.6
0.6
SALL4
OCT4
HDAC1
SIN3A
KDM1A
SMAD2
UTF1
PAF1
CDK9
CBX5
DNMT3B
SMARCAD1
TCEA1
ZFP57
JARID2
BTAF1
DPPA2
RYBP
NACC1
NUP153
LDB1
PARP1
DNMT1
WDR5
ATRX
TRIM28
TRIM24
SMC1a
CHD4
SMARCA5
SUMO2
CDC73
CBX3
HCFC1
NAP1L1
NONO
HNRNPL
SMC3
NCAPD3
TOP2B
Figure 6. Genomic Co-occupancy of SOX2
and Its Identiﬁed Interactors
(A) Overlap of SOX2 interactors in ESCs and
neurons (based on our SOX2 ChIP-SICAP and
ChIP-MS data) with publicly available ChIP-seq
data (from ChIP-Atlas) are shown as Venn dia-
gram.
(B) SOX2 interactors identiﬁed by SICAP or ChIP-
MS in ESCs and neurons are shown (left) along
with their RNA and protein expression in neural
differentiation (middle; log2 fold change to day 0)
and the fraction of SOX2 peaks that overlap with
their binding sites (right). Gray boxes indicate no
ChIP-seq data in the corresponding cell type in the
ChIP-Atlas database. Stars mark known SOX2
interactors (STRING database (Szklarczyk et al.,
2019), experimentally conﬁrmed interactors).
ry regions (enhancer mark H3K4me1 and
active mark H3K27ac) available in the
ENCODE data from ESCs and mouse
frontal
cortex.
Both
H3K27ac
and
H3K4me1
signals
derived
from
the
mouse frontal cortex were signiﬁcantly
increased in the SOX2-ATRX co-bound
regions, compared to the SOX2-only re-
gions, while the same groups in ESCs
showed only modest (H3K27ac) or non-
signiﬁcant differences (H3K4me1; Fig-
ure 7B). This let us hypothesize that
SOX2 and ATRX interactions in neurons
can function as active enhancers.
To test this, we sought to investigate
whether
the
increased
levels
of
H3K27ac and H3K4me1 would affect
the expression of nearby genes. Using
ChIA-PET data (Bertolini et al., 2019),
we assigned the closest TSS to each
SOX2 and ATRX peak and compared
the expression levels of the genes prox-
imal to SOX2-ATRX co-bound peaks
versus SOX2-only peaks. Indeed, the
genes proximal to SOX2-ATRX co-bound
peaks showed signiﬁcantly higher expression compared to
SOX2-only peaks (Figure 7C). Furthermore, the genes proximal
to SOX2-ATRX peaks were enriched in the neuronal gene cluster
from Figure 1E (OR = 2.1, p = 1.6e-3, Fisher’s test), which was
not observed for SOX2-only peaks (OR = 1.3, p = 0.26). A
possible mechanism for the SOX2-ATRX interaction would be
ATRX-mediated stabilization of SOX2 binding. In favor of such
a mechanism, we observed higher SOX2 occupancy levels at
SOX2-ATRX co-bound regions (Figure 7D).
To validate the function of SOX2-ATRX co-bound sites as
neuronal enhancers, we used CRISPR-Cas9 and deleted the re-
gions in the introns of ﬁve neuronal genes: Slc1a3, Sobp, Npas3,
Elavl4, and Cdh11, all of which are maximally expressed at day
12 (Figure S5B). Deleting the SOX2-ATRX co-bound region
caused a decrease in expression in three out of the ﬁve tested
genes at day 12 of neuronal differentiation (Figure 7E, p value <
0.05 for two out of three genes, each deletion has two
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
488
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020

Figure 7. SOX2-ATRX Co-binding Coincides with Increased Enhancer Activity and Is Required for Proper Expression Some Neuronal Genes
(A) Intersections of neuronal SOX2 peaks with binding sites of its neuronal interactors are shown as an upset plot. Venn diagram (top left) shows the intersection
between the top interactors KDM1A and ATRX binding sites.
(B and C) H3K27ac and H3K4me1 occupancy in ESC and brain (B, left and right) and RNA expression in neurons (normalized counts; C) are shown for genomic
regions bound by ATRX alone, SOX2 alone, or co-bound by SOX2-ATRX.
(D) SOX2 binding strength in neurons for peaks bound by SOX2-only or co-bound by SOX2-ATRX.
(E) Expression (qRT-PCR) of 5 neuronal genes on day 12 is shown for 5 lines, in which a SOX2-ATRX co-bound enhancer in the respective genes was removed
(blue) normalized to CRISPR control cell lines (red). Each box summarizes at least 2 biological and 3 technical replicates.
(F) RNA expression of Slc1a3 gene (qRT-PCR) is shown for lines in which the indicated regions are removed by CRISPR.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020
489

independent cell lines) in comparison with CRISPR control that
was treated with CRISPR-Cas9 but did not yield any deletion.
Deleting the SOX2 or ATRX alone-bound region in one of the
tested genes (Slc1a3, see Figure S5C) was unable to change
the Slc1a3 expression (Figure 7F). Notably, deleting a SOX2-
ATRX co-bound region in highly expressed genes (Cdh11 and
Elavl4, ca. 5-fold higher expression than of Slc1a3 and Sobp,
Figure S5B) did not reduce their gene expression (Figure 7E).
In accordance with this, reanalysis of the RNA-seq data revealed
that for highly expressed genes, ATRX-SOX2 co-bound sites
were neither correlated with increased gene expression, nor
with H3K27ac level (Figures S5D and S5E), while SOX2 occu-
pancy was still increased when co-bound with ATRX (Fig-
ure S5F), which is consistent with a stabilizing role of ATRX on
SOX2 binding.
Unlike the effect of removal of the SOX2-ATRX co-bound sites
in neurons, removal of the SOX2-OCT4 co-bound regions from
the introns of Slc1a3 and other neuronal or developmental
genes, such as Ncoa1 and Elavl4, did not yield any signiﬁcant
changes in their expression in ESCs (Figure S5G). This differs
from the conclusion of a previous study, which reported a
repressive role of SOX2-OCT4 co-bound regions of develop-
mental genes in ESCs, conﬁrmed in two speciﬁc genes (Meis1
and Mapk4; (Cinghu et al., 2017). Thus, it remains an open ques-
tion, to what extent SOX2-OCT4 co-bound sites have a function
in developmental genes.
Based on these data, we propose a model of SOX2 genomic
redistribution and interactome rewiring during neuronal differen-
tiation (Figure 7G). In ESCs, SOX2 mainly exists in a complex
with OCT4, NANOG, SALL4, and other pluripotency factors
and is targeted to regions associated with pluripotency mainte-
nance. In neurons, the SOX2 interactors associated with plurip-
otency are either not expressed or signiﬁcantly downregulated,
thereby releasing SOX2 from the complexes, enabling it to
engage in other interactions, which leads to its recruitment to
different genomic regions, such as promoters and enhancers
of neuronal genes. SOX2-ATRX co-bound enhancer regions
ﬁne-tune the expression of neuronal genes, possibly due to the
stabilization of SOX2 binding. This model is supported by our
chromatin accessibility data, where neuronal SOX2 binding sites
are already accessible in ESCs (Figure 4A, regulatory groups 1,
2, and 3), but not yet occupied with SOX2, which may be ex-
plained by SOX2 being trapped in pluripotency protein com-
plexes. The redistribution of SOX2 binding after perturbation of
SOX2 interaction with OCT4 and other pluripotency factors
(either by introducing an OCT4 mutant incapable of binding to
SOX2 or by ectopic expression of another interaction partner
BRN2) has been previously reported in reprogramming and dif-
ferentiation systems (Lodato et al., 2013; Malik et al., 2019).
DISCUSSION
One of the big challenges in developmental systems biology is to
understand how gene regulatory networks switch during the
cellular transition from pluripotency to differentiated state, and
how this transition is coordinated across molecular levels. In
this study, we generated high-resolution transcriptomic, protein
expression, chromatin accessibility and chromatin-mediated
protein interaction data to create a comprehensive view of the
regulatory processes underlying neuronal differentiation of
pluripotent stem cells. We note that all our assays were per-
formed on bulk cell populations, and some of our observations
might be blurred by averaging across several co-existing cell
states, especially in such heterogeneous stages as embryoid
bodies on day 4.
Our integrative analyses highlight the multi-level effect of reti-
noic acid induction (day 8 versus 4) on neuronal differentiation,
exerted by driving major changes in RNA and protein expression,
as well as chromatin accessibility. This is the only stage of the
differentiation process at which we observed major involvement
of all three molecular layers. In contrast, the exit from pluripo-
tency (day 4 versus 0) seems driven by chromatin remodeling
that is still unspeciﬁc to any particular lineage, while the transition
between neuronal progenitors and neurons (day 12 versus 8)
seems driven by transcription of genes related to neuronal func-
tion. The temporal resolution in our dataset enabled us to
observe the long-lasting effects of both chromatin on RNA
expression and RNA on protein expression. While associations
between different molecular levels (e.g., RNA on protein expres-
sion, chromatin accessibility on RNA expression) were generally
strongest at the same time point, we identiﬁed long-lasting ef-
fects across and within regulatory layers, which seem to prepare
the cell for differentiation processes already at the exit from plu-
ripotency. It further revealed that chromatin accessibility at gene
promoters is necessary but not sufﬁcient for productive gene
expression, which has been reported in other systems such as
response to BMP4 signaling in cancer (Ampuja et al., 2017).
This could indicate that developmental gene promoters are
already primed by pluripotency factors before developmental
TFs bind them.
In addition to previously reported differentiation-driving TFs,
such as HOX and LIM homeobox (Lhx) family members (Hobert
and Westphal, 2000; Pearson et al., 2005), our data identify
SOX2 as a potential regulator in neurons, which was unexpected
since SOX2 is primarily known for its role as core pluripotency
factor and in neuronal progenitor cells (Favaro et al., 2009;
Miyagi et al., 2008). The fact that we did not observe BRN2, a
previously reported SOX2 interactor in neuronal progenitors (Lo-
dato et al., 2013), among the SOX2 interactors in neurons,
corroborated by the very small (19%) overlap between SOX2
ChIP-seq peaks in neuronal progenitors and postmitotic neu-
rons, provides strong evidence for a distinct role of SOX2 in neu-
rons in addition to the described function of SOX2 in neuronal
progenitors (Bergsland et al., 2011; Zhang and Cui, 2014).
In ESCs, SOX2 forms a complex with OCT4 to activate genes
involved in pluripotency (Ambrosetti et al., 2000; Boyer et al.,
2005; Nishimoto et al., 1999; Yuan et al., 1995), which we reca-
pitulate in our SICAP data. In addition to their involvement in
(G) Proposed model of SOX2 interaction dynamics during the transition from ESCs to neurons and its possible role in regulating the expression of neuronal genes.
All panels: p values are obtained with the Student’s t-test (except for C - Wilcoxon rank-sum test).
See also Figure S5 and Table S6.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
490
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020

maintaining pluripotency, a previous study has reported a mutu-
ally suppressive role of SOX2 and OCT4 in cell-fate choice,
through a mechanism that involves differential regulation of
SOX2 and OCT4 by external cues (Thomson et al., 2011).
Thus, one potential mechanism of how SOX2 identiﬁes its target
sites in neurons may involve a change in its interaction partners,
which is consistent with our observation that the SOX2 interac-
tion network gets substantially rewired between ESCs and
neurons.
We identiﬁed ATRX as the most prominent SOX2 interaction
partner in neurons. ATRX is a chromatin remodeling factor,
which mostly localizes to inactive chromatin regions such as
pericentromeric heterochromatin (McDowell et al., 1999) and
telomeres (Law et al., 2010). Our observations suggest an addi-
tional role for ATRX in neurons where its partnering with SOX2
coincided
with
increased
enhancer
activity
(H3K7ac
and
H3K4me1) and expression of nearby genes. While it seems un-
usual that interaction of SOX2 with the heterochromatin-associ-
ated remodeler ATRX led to increased gene activation, there
have been several recent reports suggesting a role of ATRX in
gene activation (Law et al., 2010; Levy et al., 2008, 2015). A re-
maining question is what keeps those SOX2-ATRX bound pro-
moters and enhancers of neuronal genes accessible in ESCs
since neither SOX2 nor ATRX were bound to them in ESCs.
Taken together, our study highlights the importance of multi-
omic approaches for an in-depth understanding of complex bio-
logical systems and provides key insights into the regulatory
transformations and dynamic interactome in the transition from
pluripotent stem cells to neurons, which would not be apparent
from looking at any one molecular layer alone.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
B Lead Contact
B Materials Availability
B Data and Code Availability
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Cell Lines Used in This Study
d METHOD DETAILS
B Replicates
B Data Exclusion
B Randomization
B Sample Sizes
B Proteomic Sample Preparation with SP3
B TMT Labeling
B Peptide Fractionation
B Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry
B Proteomics Data Analysis
B RNA Extraction and Library Preparation
B RNA-seq Data Analysis
B Gene Ontology (GO) Enrichment Analyses
B Motif Enrichment Analysis
B ATAC-seq Experiment
B ATAC-seq Data Analysis
B diffTF Analysis
B Immunoﬂuorescence
B Multi-Omic Factor Analysis (MOFA)
B ATAC-seq, RNA-seq and Proteomics Integration
B Fisher’s Exact Test Associations
B SOX2 ChIP-seq Experiment
B SOX2 ChIP-seq Data Analysis
B Clustering Analyses
B Public Data Sets
B ChIP-SICAP
B ChIP-Atlas Data Integration
B CRISPR Experiments
B Quantitative RT-PCR Experiments
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cels.2020.05.003.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank EMBL Genomics Core Facility, EMBL Flow Cytometry
Core, and EMBL Advanced Light Microscopy Facility for help with experi-
ments. We would also like to thank Maja Gehre for performing RNA-seq exper-
iments, Ivan Berest and Christian Arnold for help with ATAC-seq processing
and diffTF software, and Bernd Klaus for proteomics data processing. D.B.
was supported by a fellowship from the EMBL Interdisciplinary Postdoc (EI3-
POD) program under Marie Sk1odowska-Curie Actions COFUND (grant num-
ber 664726). This work is supported by the DFG fund (SPP 1738 to K.M.N.).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
N.A., D.B., J.K., K.-M.N., and J.B.Z. conceived the study; J.B.Z., K.-M.N., and
J.K. jointly supervised the study; D.B. performed ATAC-seq, CRISPR, qRT-
PCR, and IF experiments with the help from N.D. and under the supervision
of K.-M.N.; N.A. performed the proteomic, ChIP, and ChIP-SICAP experiments
and analyzed the proteomic and ChIP-SICAP data under the supervision of
J.K.; D.B. analyzed, integrated, interpreted, and visualized the multi-omics
data under the supervision of J.B.Z. and with advice from K.-M.N.; D.B.,
J.B.Z., K.-M.N., and N.A. wrote the original manuscript draft with input from
J.K.; D.B., J.B.Z., and K.-M.N. wrote the revised manuscript with input from
N.A. and J.K.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: July 25, 2019
Revised: March 19, 2020
Accepted: May 15, 2020
Published: June 17, 2020
REFERENCES
Adams, C.C., and Workman, J.L. (1995). Binding of disparate transcriptional
activators to nucleosomal DNA is inherently cooperative. Mol. Cell. Biol. 15,
1405–1421.
Aksoy, I., Jauch, R., Chen, J., Dyla, M., Divakar, U., Bogu, G.K., Teo, R., Leng
Ng, C.K., Herath, W., Lili, S., et al. (2013). Oct4 switches partnering from Sox2
to Sox17 to reinterpret the enhancer code and specify endoderm. EMBO J. 32,
938–953.
Ambrosetti, D.C., Scho¨ ler, H.R., Dailey, L., and Basilico, C. (2000). Modulation
of the activity of multiple transcriptional activation domains by the DNA binding
domains mediates the synergistic action of Sox2 and Oct-3 on the ﬁbroblast
growth factor-4 enhancer. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 23387–23397.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020
491

Ampuja, M., Rantapero, T., Rodriguez-Martinez, A., Palmroth, M., Alarmo,
E.L., Nykter, M., and Kallioniemi, A. (2017). Integrated RNA-seq and DNase-
seq analyses identify phenotype-speciﬁc BMP4 signaling in breast cancer.
BMC Genomics 18, 68.
Andrews, S. (2010). FastQC: a quality control tool for high throughput
sequence data. http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc.
Argelaguet, R., Velten, B., Arnol, D., Dietrich, S., Zenz, T., Marioni, J.C.,
Buettner, F., Huber, W., and Stegle, O. (2018). Multi-omics factor analysis-a
framework for unsupervised integration of multi-omics data sets. Mol. Syst.
Biol. 14, e8124.
Bajpe, P.K., Heynen, G.J.J.E., Mittempergher, L., Grernrum, W., de Rink, I.A.,
Nijkamp, W., Beijersbergen, R.L., Bernards, R., and Huang, S. (2013). The
corepressor CTBP2 is a coactivator of retinoic acid receptor/retinoid X recep-
tor in retinoic acid signaling. Mol. Cell. Biol. 33, 3343–3353.
Berest, I., Arnold, C., Reyes-Palomares, A., Palla, G., Rasmussen, K.D., Giles,
H., Bruch, P.M., Huber, W., Dietrich, S., Helin, K., and Zaugg, J.B. (2019).
Quantiﬁcation of differential transcription factor activity and multiomics-based
classiﬁcation into activators and repressors: diffTF. Cell Rep. 29, 3147–
3159.e12.
Bergsland, M., Ramsko¨ ld, D., Zaouter, C., Klum, S., Sandberg, R., and Muhr,
J. (2011). Sequentially acting Sox transcription factors in neural lineage devel-
opment. Genes Dev. 25, 2453–2464.
Bertolini, J.A., Favaro, R., Zhu, Y., Pagin, M., Ngan, C.Y., Wong, C.H., Tjong,
H., Vermunt, M.W., Martynoga, B., Barone, C., et al. (2019). Mapping the global
chromatin connectivity network for sox2 function in neural stem cell mainte-
nance. Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476.e6.
Bibel, M., Richter, J., Lacroix, E., and Barde, Y.A. (2007). Generation of a
deﬁned and uniform population of CNS progenitors and neurons from mouse
embryonic stem cells. Nat. Protoc. 2, 1034–1043.
Bolger, A.M., Lohse, M., and Usadel, B. (2014). Trimmomatic: a ﬂexible
trimmer for illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics 30, 2114–2120.
Boyer, L.A., Lee, T.I., Cole, M.F., Johnstone, S.E., Levine, S.S., Zucker, J.P.,
Guenther, M.G., Kumar, R.M., Murray, H.L., Jenner, R.G., et al. (2005). Core
transcriptional regulatory circuitry in human embryonic stem cells. Cell 122,
947–956.
Brennand, K.J., Simone, A., Jou, J., Gelboin-Burkhart, C., Tran, N., Sangar, S.,
Li, Y., Mu, Y., Chen, G., Yu, D., et al. (2011). Modelling schizophrenia using hu-
man induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature 473, 221–225.
Buenrostro, J.D., Giresi, P.G., Zaba, L.C., Chang, H.Y., and Greenleaf, W.J.
(2013). Transposition of native chromatin for fast and sensitive epigenomic
proﬁling of open chromatin, DNA-binding proteins and nucleosome position.
Nat. Methods 10, 1213–1218.
Buenrostro, J.D., Wu, B., Chang, H.Y., and Greenleaf, W.J. (2015). ATAC-seq:
A method for assaying chromatin accessibility genome-wide. Curr. Protoc.
Mol. Biol. 109, 21.29.1–21.29.9.
Chaerkady, R., Kerr, C.L., Marimuthu, A., Kelkar, D.S., Kashyap, M.K., Gucek,
M., Gearhart, J.D., and Pandey, A. (2009). Temporal analysis of neural differen-
tiation using quantitative proteomics. J. Proteome Res. 8, 1315–1326.
Cinghu, S., Yang, P., Kosak, J.P., Conway, A.E., Kumar, D., Oldﬁeld, A.J.,
Adelman, K., and Jothi, R. (2017). Intragenic enhancers attenuate host gene
expression. Mol. Cell 68, 104–117.e6.
Cox, J.L., Wilder, P.J., Gilmore, J.M., Wuebben, E.L., Washburn, M.P., and
Rizzino, A. (2013). The SOX2-interactome in brain cancer cells identiﬁes the
requirement of MSI2 and USP9X for the growth of brain tumor cells. PLoS
ONE 8, e62857.
Deplancke, B. (2009). Experimental advances in the characterization of meta-
zoan gene regulatory networks. Brief. Funct. Genomic Proteomics 8, 12–27.
Favaro, R., Valotta, M., Ferri, A.L.M., Latorre, E., Mariani, J., Giachino, C.,
Lancini, C., Tosetti, V., Ottolenghi, S., Taylor, V., and Nicolis, S.K. (2009).
Hippocampal development and neural stem cell maintenance require Sox2-
dependent regulation of Shh. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1248–1256.
Frese, C.K., Mikhaylova, M., Stucchi, R., Gautier, V., Liu, Q., Mohammed, S.,
Heck, A.J.R., Altelaar, A.F.M., and Hoogenraad, C.C. (2017). Quantitative map
of
proteome
dynamics
during
neuronal
differentiation.
Cell
Rep.
18,
1527–1542.
Gagliardi, A., Mullin, N.P., Ying Tan, Z., Colby, D., Kousa, A.I., Halbritter, F.,
Weiss, J.T., Felker, A., Bezstarosti, K., Favaro, R., et al. (2013). A direct phys-
ical interaction between Nanog and Sox2 regulates embryonic stem cell self-
renewal. EMBO J. 32, 2231–2247.
Gehre, M., Buccitelli, C., Diaz, N., Korbel, J., and Noh, K.-M. (2019). Efﬁcient
strategies to detect genome editing and integrity in CRISPR-Cas9 engineered
ESCs. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/635151.
Gehre, M., Bunina, D., Sidoli, S., L€ubke, M.J., Diaz, N., Trovato, M., Garcia,
B.A., Zaugg, J.B., and Noh, K.-M. (2020). Lysine 4 of histone H3.3 is required
for embryonic stem cell differentiation, histone enrichment at regulatory re-
gions and transcription accuracy. Nat Genet. 52, 273–282.
Germain, N., Banda, E., and Grabel, L. (2010). Embryonic stem cell neurogen-
esis and neural speciﬁcation. J. Cell. Biochem. 111, 535–542.
Golebiewska, A., Atkinson, S.P., Lako, M., and Armstrong, L. (2009).
Epigenetic landscaping during hESC differentiation to neural cells. Stem
Cells 27, 1298–1308.
Heinz, S., Benner, C., Spann, N., Bertolino, E., Lin, Y.C., Laslo, P., Cheng, J.X.,
Murre, C., Singh, H., and Glass, C.K. (2010). Simple combinations of lineage-
determining transcription factors prime cis-regulatory elements required for
macrophage and B cell identities. Mol. Cell 38, 576–589.
Hobert, O., and Westphal, H. (2000). Functions of LIM-homeobox genes.
Trends Genet. 16, 75–83.
Huang, X., and Wang, J. (2014). The extended pluripotency protein interac-
tome and its links to reprogramming. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 28, 16–24.
Huber, W., Carey, V.J., Gentleman, R., Anders, S., Carlson, M., Carvalho, B.S.,
Bravo, H.C., Davis, S., Gatto, L., Girke, T., et al. (2015). Orchestrating high-
throughput genomic analysis with Bioconductor. Nat. Methods 12, 115–121.
Hughes, C.S., Foehr, S., Garﬁeld, D.A., Furlong, E.E., Steinmetz, L.M., and
Krijgsveld, J. (2014). Ultrasensitive proteome analysis using paramagnetic
bead technology. Mol. Syst. Biol. 10, 757.
Kaplan, T., Li, X.Y., Sabo, P.J., Thomas, S., Stamatoyannopoulos, J.A., Biggin,
M.D., and Eisen, M.B. (2011). Quantitative models of the mechanisms that
control genome-wide patterns of transcription factor binding during early
Drosophila development. PLoS Genet. 7, e1001290.
Khan, A., Fornes, O., Stigliani, A., Gheorghe, M., Castro-Mondragon, J.A., van
der Lee, R., Bessy, A., Che` neby, J., Kulkarni, S.R., Tan, G., et al. (2018).
JASPAR 2018: update of the open-access database of transcription factor
binding proﬁles and its web framework. Nucleic Acids Res. 46, D260–D266.
Kim, D., Pertea, G., Trapnell, C., Pimentel, H., Kelley, R., and Salzberg, S.L.
(2013). TopHat2: accurate alignment of transcriptomes in the presence of in-
sertions, deletions and gene fusions. Genome Biol. 14, R36.
Klemm, S.L., Shipony, Z., and Greenleaf, W.J. (2019). Chromatin accessibility
and the regulatory epigenome. Nat. Rev. Genet. 20, 207–220.
Ko¨ ster, J., and Rahmann, S. (2012). Snakemake–a scalable bioinformatics
workﬂow engine. Bioinformatics 28, 2520–2522.
Lai, Y.S., Chang, C.W., Pawlik, K.M., Zhou, D., Renfrow, M.B., and Townes,
T.M. (2012). SRY (sex determining region Y)-box2 (Sox2)/poly ADP-ribose po-
lymerase 1 (Parp1) complexes regulate pluripotency. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 109, 3772–3777.
Langmead, B., and Salzberg, S.L. (2012). Fast gapped-read alignment with
Bowtie 2. Nat. Methods 9, 357–359.
Law, M.J., Lower, K.M., Voon, H.P.J., Hughes, J.R., Garrick, D., Viprakasit, V.,
Mitson, M., De Gobbi, M., Marra, M., Morris, A., et al. (2010). ATR-X syndrome
protein targets tandem repeats and inﬂuences allele-speciﬁc expression in a
size-dependent manner. Cell 143, 367–378.
Lawrence, M., Huber, W., Page` s, H., Aboyoun, P., Carlson, M., Gentleman, R.,
Morgan, M.T., and Carey, V.J. (2013). Software for computing and annotating
genomic ranges. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9, e1003118.
Levy, M.A., Fernandes, A.D., Tremblay, D.C., Seah, C., and Be´ rube´ , N.G.
(2008). The SWI/SNF protein ATRX co-regulates pseudoautosomal genes
that have translocated to autosomes in the mouse genome. BMC Genomics
9, 468.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
492
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020

Levy, M.A., Kernohan, K.D., Jiang, Y., and Be´ rube´ , N.G. (2015). ATRX pro-
motes gene expression by facilitating transcriptional elongation through gua-
nine-rich coding regions. Hum. Mol. Genet. 24, 1824–1835.
Lian, X., Zhang, J., Azarin, S.M., Zhu, K., Hazeltine, L.B., Bao, X., Hsiao, C.,
Kamp, T.J., and Palecek, S.P. (2013). Directed cardiomyocyte differentiation
from human pluripotent stem cells by modulating Wnt/b-catenin signaling un-
der fully deﬁned conditions. Nat. Protoc. 8, 162–175.
Li, H., Handsaker, B., Wysoker, A., Fennell, T., Ruan, J., Homer, N., Marth, G.,
Abecasis, G., and Durbin, R.; 1000 Genome Project Data Processing
Subgroup (2009). The sequence alignment/Map format and SAMtools.
Bioinformatics 25, 2078–2079.
Lodato, M.A., Ng, C.W., Wamstad, J.A., Cheng, A.W., Thai, K.K., Fraenkel, E.,
Jaenisch, R., and Boyer, L.A. (2013). SOX2 co-occupies distal enhancer ele-
ments with distinct POU factors in ESCs and NPCs to specify cell state.
PLoS Genet. 9, e1003288.
Lomvardas, S., and Maniatis, T. (2016). Histone and DNA modiﬁcations as reg-
ulators of neuronal development and function. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect.
Biol. 8, a024208.
Love, M.I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550.
Malik, V., Glaser, L.V., Zimmer, D., Velychko, S., Weng, M., Holzner, M., Arend,
M., Chen, Y., Srivastava, Y., Veerapandian, V., et al. (2019). Pluripotency re-
programming by competent and incompetent POU factors uncovers temporal
dependency for Oct4 and Sox2. Nat. Commun. 10, 3477.
Mallanna, S.K., Ormsbee, B.D., Iacovino, M., Gilmore, J.M., Cox, J.L., Kyba,
M., Washburn, M.P., and Rizzino, A. (2010). Proteomic analysis of Sox2-asso-
ciated proteins during early stages of mouse embryonic stem cell differentia-
tion identiﬁes Sox21 as a novel regulator of stem cell fate. Stem Cells 28,
1715–1727.
Mathieson, T., Franken, H., Kosinski, J., Kurzawa, N., Zinn, N., Sweetman, G.,
Poeckel, D., Ratnu, V.S., Schramm, M., Becher, I., et al. (2018). Systematic
analysis of protein turnover in primary cells. Nat. Commun. 9, 689.
Mayran, A., Sochodolsky, K., Khetchoumian, K., Harris, J., Gauthier, Y.,
Bemmo, A., Balsalobre, A., and Drouin, J. (2019). Pioneer and nonpioneer fac-
tor cooperation drives lineage speciﬁc chromatin opening. Nat. Commun.
10, 3807.
McDowell, T.L., Gibbons, R.J., Sutherland, H., O’Rourke, D.M., Bickmore,
W.A., Pombo, A., Turley, H., Gatter, K., Picketts, D.J., Buckle, V.J., et al.
(1999). Localization of a putative transcriptional regulator (ATRX) at pericentro-
meric heterochromatin and the short arms of acrocentric chromosomes. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 13983–13988.
Merino, F., Ng, C.K.L., Veerapandian, V., Scho¨ ler, H.R., Jauch, R., and
Cojocaru, V. (2014). Structural basis for the SOX-dependent genomic redistri-
bution of OCT4 in stem cell differentiation. Structure 22, 1274–1286.
Mikkelsen, T.S., Ku, M., Jaffe, D.B., Issac, B., Lieberman, E., Giannoukos, G.,
Alvarez, P., Brockman, W., Kim, T.K., Koche, R.P., et al. (2007). Genome-wide
maps of chromatin state in pluripotent and lineage-committed cells. Nature
448, 553–560.
Miyagi, S., Masui, S., Niwa, H., Saito, T., Shimazaki, T., Okano, H., Nishimoto,
M., Muramatsu, M., Iwama, A., and Okuda, A. (2008). Consequence of the loss
of Sox2 in the developing brain of the mouse. FEBS Lett. 582, 2811–2815.
Nishimoto, M., Fukushima, A., Okuda, A., and Muramatsu, M. (1999). The gene
for the embryonic stem cell coactivator UTF1 carries a regulatory element
which selectively interacts with a complex composed of Oct-3/4 and Sox-2.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 19, 5453–5465.
Ogawa, Y., Kaizu, K., Yanagi, Y., Takada, S., Sakuraba, H., and Oishi, K.
(2017). Abnormal differentiation of Sandhoff disease model mouse-derived
multipotent stem cells toward a neural lineage. PLoS One 12, e0178978.
Oki, S., Ohta, T., Shioi, G., Hatanaka, H., Ogasawara, O., Okuda, Y., Kawaji, H.,
Nakaki, R., Sese, J., and Meno, C. (2018). ChIP-atlas: a data-mining suite pow-
ered by full integration of public ChIP-seq data. EMBO Rep. 19, e46255.
Pardo, M., Lang, B., Yu, L., Prosser, H., Bradley, A., Babu, M.M., and
Choudhary, J. (2010). An expanded Oct4 interaction network: implications
for stem cell biology, development, and disease. Cell Stem Cell 6, 382–395.
Pearson, J.C., Lemons, D., and McGinnis, W. (2005). Modulating Hox gene
functions during animal body patterning. Nat. Rev. Genet. 6, 893–904.
Pique-Regi, R., Degner, J.F., Pai, A.A., Gaffney, D.J., Gilad, Y., and Pritchard,
J.K. (2011). Accurate inference of transcription factor binding from DNA
sequence and chromatin accessibility data. Genome Res. 21, 447–455.
Raﬁee, M.R., Girardot, C., Sigismondo, G., and Krijgsveld, J. (2016).
Expanding the circuitry of pluripotency by selective isolation of chromatin-
associated proteins. Mol. Cell 64, 624–635.
Ramı´rez, F., D€undar, F., Diehl, S., Gr€uning, B.A., and Manke, T. (2014).
deepTools: a ﬂexible platform for exploring deep-sequencing data. Nucleic
Acids Res. 42, W187–W191.
Richard, J.P., and Maragakis, N.J. (2015). Induced pluripotent stem cells from
ALS patients for disease modeling. Brain Res. 1607, 15–25.
Ross-Innes, C.S., Stark, R., Teschendorff, A.E., Holmes, K.A., Ali, H.R.,
Dunning, M.J., Brown, G.D., Gojis, O., Ellis, I.O., Green, A.R., et al. (2012).
Differential oestrogen receptor binding is associated with clinical outcome in
breast cancer. Nature 481, 389–393.
Schmeier, S., Alam, T., Essack, M., and Bajic, V.B. (2017). TcoF-DB v2: update
of the database of human and mouse transcription co-factors and transcrip-
tion factor interactions. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, D145–D150.
Schwanh€ausser, B., Busse, D., Li, N., Dittmar, G., Schuchhardt, J., Wolf, J.,
Chen, W., and Selbach, M. (2011). Global quantiﬁcation of mammalian gene
expression control. Nature 473, 337–342.
Shen, Y., Yue, F., McCleary, D.F., Ye, Z., Edsall, L., Kuan, S., Wagner, U.,
Dixon, J., Lee, L., Lobanenkov, V.V., and Ren, B.V. (2012). A map of the cis-
regulatory sequences in the mouse genome. Nature 488, 116–120.
Song, Y., Subramanian, K., Berberich, M.J., Rodriguez, S., Latorre, I.J., Luria,
C.M., Everley, R., Albers, M.W., Mitchison, T.J., and Sorger, P.K. (2019). A dy-
namic view of the proteomic landscape during differentiation of ReNcell VM
cells, an immortalized human neural progenitor line. Sci. Data 6, 190016.
Subramanian, A., Tamayo, P., Mootha, V.K., Mukherjee, S., Ebert, B.L.,
Gillette, M.A., Paulovich, A., Pomeroy, S.L., Golub, T.R., Lander, E.S., and
Mesirov, J.P. (2005). Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based
approach for interpreting genome-wide expression proﬁles. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 102, 15545–15550.
Szklarczyk, D., Gable, A.L., Lyon, D., Junge, A., Wyder, S., Huerta-Cepas, J.,
Simonovic, M., Doncheva, N.T., Morris, J.H., Bork, P., et al. (2019). STRING
v11: protein-protein association networks with increased coverage, support-
ing functional discovery in genome-wide experimental datasets. Nucleic
Acids Res. 47, D607–D613.
Thomson, M., Liu, S.J., Zou, L.N., Smith, Z., Meissner, A., and Ramanathan, S.
(2011). Pluripotency factors in embryonic stem cells regulate differentiation
into germ layers. Cell 145, 875–889.
Tyssowski, K., Kishi, Y., and Gotoh, Y. (2014). Chromatin regulators of neural
development. Neuroscience 264, 4–16.
UniProt Consortium. (2019). UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge.
Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D506–D515.
van den Berg, D.L.C., Snoek, T., Mullin, N.P., Yates, A., Bezstarosti, K.,
Demmers, J., Chambers, I., and Poot, R.A. (2010). An Oct4-centered protein
interaction network in embryonic stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 6, 369–381.
Wapinski, O.L., Lee, Q.Y., Chen, A.C., Li, R., Corces, M.R., Ang, C.E.,
Treutlein, B., Xiang, C., Baubet, V., Suchy, F.P., et al. (2017). Rapid chromatin
switch in the direct reprogramming of ﬁbroblasts to neurons. Cell Rep. 20,
3236–3247.
Watanabe, A., Toyota, T., Owada, Y., Hayashi, T., Iwayama, Y., Matsumata,
M., Ishitsuka, Y., Nakaya, A., Maekawa, M., Ohnishi, T., et al. (2007). Fabp7
maps to a quantitative trait locus for a schizophrenia endophenotype. PLoS
Biol. 5, e297.
Whyte, W.A., Orlando, D.A., Hnisz, D., Abraham, B.J., Lin, C.Y., Kagey, M.H.,
Rahl, P.B., Lee, T.I., and Young, R.A. (2013). Master transcription factors and
mediator establish super-enhancers at key cell identity genes. Cell 153,
307–319.
Wu, J.Q., Habegger, L., Noisa, P., Szekely, A., Qiu, C., Hutchison, S., Raha, D.,
Egholm, M., Lin, H., Weissman, S., et al. (2010). Dynamic transcriptomes
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020
493

during neural differentiation of human embryonic stem cells revealed by short,
long, and paired-end sequencing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 5254–5259.
Yang, X., Li, W., Prescott, E.D., Burden, S.J., and Wang, J.C. (2000). DNA
topoisomerase IIbeta and neural development. Science 287, 131–134.
Yu, G., Wang, L.G., Han, Y., and He, Q.Y. (2012). clusterProﬁler: an R package
for comparing biological themes among gene clusters. Omics 16, 284–287.
Yu, G., Wang, L.G., and He, Q.Y. (2015). ChIPseeker: an R/Bioconductor pack-
age for ChIP peak annotation, comparison and visualization. Bioinformatics
31, 2382–2383.
Yuan, H., Corbi, N., Basilico, C., and Dailey, L. (1995). Developmental-speciﬁc
activity of the FGF-4 enhancer requires the synergistic action of Sox2 and Oct-
3. Genes Dev. 9, 2635–2645.
Zhang, S., and Cui, W. (2014). Sox2, a key factor in the regulation of pluripo-
tency and neural differentiation. World J. Stem Cells 6, 305–311.
Zhang, S., Moy, W., Zhang, H., Leites, C., McGowan, H., Shi, J., Sanders, A.R.,
Pang, Z.P., Gejman, P.V., and Duan, J. (2018). Open chromatin dynamics re-
veals stage-speciﬁc transcriptional networks in hiPSC-based neurodevelop-
mental model. Stem Cell Res. 29, 88–98.
Zhang, Y., Liu, T., Meyer, C.A., Eeckhoute, J., Johnson, D.S., Bernstein, B.E.,
Nusbaum, C., Myers, R.M., Brown, M., Li, W., and Liu, X.S. (2008). Model-
based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biol. 9, R137.
Ziller, M.J., Edri, R., Yaffe, Y., Donaghey, J., Pop, R., Mallard, W., Issner, R.,
Gifford, C.A., Goren, A., Xing, J., et al. (2015). Dissecting neural differentiation
regulatory networks through epigenetic footprinting. Nature 518, 355–359.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
494
Cell Systems 10, 480–494, June 24, 2020

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Rabbit polyclonal anti-Sox2 for
immunoﬂuorescence
Merck-Millipore
Cat#AB5603; RRID: AB_2286686
Goat polyclonal anti-Sox2 for ChIP-seq/
ChIP-SICAP
R&D Systems
Cat#AF2018; RRID: AB_355110
Mouse monoclonal anti-ßTubulin III
Abcam
Cat#AB78078; RRID: AB_2256751
Goat polyclonal anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 594
Thermo Fisher
Cat#A11005; RRID: AB_141372
Goat polyclonal anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488
Thermo Fisher
Cat#A11008; RRID: AB_143165
Critical Commercial Assays
Nextera DNA Library Prep Kit
Illumina
Cat# FC-121-1030
NEBNext High-Fidelity 23 PCR Master Mix
New England Biolabs
Cat# M0541
NEBNext Ultra II RNA Library Prep Kit for
Illumina
New England Biolabs
Cat#E7770L
NEBNext Ultra II DNA Library Prep Kit for
Illumina
New England Biolabs
Cat#E7645L
Deposited Data
Raw and processed ATAC-seq data
This study
ArrayExpress: E-MTAB-8194
Raw and processed RNA-seq data
This study
ArrayExpress: E-MTAB-8197
Raw proteomics data
This study
Proteomexchange: PXD016080
Raw and processed Sox2 ChIP-seq data
This study
ArrayExpress: E-MTAB-8196
Mouse ESCs, H3K4me1 ChIPseq
ENCODE Project
GSM1000121; https://www.encodeproject.
org/experiments/ENCSR000CGN/
Mouse ESCs, H3K9me3 ChIPseq
ENCODE Project
GSM1003751; https://www.encodeproject.
org/experiments/ENCSR000ADM/
Mouse ESCs, H3K4me3 ChIPseq
ENCODE Project
GSM1003756; https://www.encodeproject.
org/experiments/ENCSR000ADL/
Mouse ESCs, H3K36me3 ChIPseq
ENCODE Project
GSM1000125; https://www.encodeproject.
org/experiments/ENCSR000CGR/
Mouse ESCs, H3K27ac ChIPseq
ENCODE Project
GSM1000126; https://www.encodeproject.
org/experiments/ENCSR000CGQ/
Mouse ESCs, H3K27me3 ChIPseq
ENCODE Project
GSM1000089; https://www.encodeproject.
org/experiments/ENCSR000CFN/
Mouse cortex, H3K27ac ChIPseq
ENCODE Project
GSM1000100; https://www.encodeproject.
org/experiments/ENCSR000CDD/
Mouse forebrain E16.5, H3K9me3 ChIPseq
ENCODE Project
GSE82631; https://
www.encodeproject.org/experiments/
ENCSR352NVU/
Mouse forebrain E16.5, H3K9ac ChIPseq
ENCODE Project
GSE82353; https://www.encodeproject.
org/experiments/ENCSR014TEJ/
Mouse forebrain E16.5, H3K27me3
ChIPseq
ENCODE Project
GSE82859; https://www.encodeproject.
org/experiments/ENCSR658BBG/
Mouse forebrain E16.5, H3K4me3 ChIPseq
ENCODE Project
GSE82453; https://www.encodeproject.
org/experiments/ENCSR129DIK/
Mouse forebrain E16.5, H3K4me1 ChIPseq
ENCODE Project
GSE82464; https://www.encodeproject.
org/experiments/ENCSR141ZQF/
Mouse forebrain E16.5, H3K36me3
ChIPseq
ENCODE Project
GSE82630; https://www.encodeproject.
org/experiments/ENCSR352AWJ/
(Continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 10, 480–494.e1–e8, June 24, 2020
e1

Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Gencode mouse genome annotation
version M7
ENCODE
https://www.encodeproject.org/ﬁles/
gencode.vM7.annotation/
Uniprot database release 2015
Uniprot
https://www.uniprot.org/
ChIP-Atlas database of public ChIP-
seq data
ChIP-Atlas
https://chip-atlas.org/
Jaspar CORE release 2018
https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/46/
D1/D260/4621338 (Khan et al., 2018)
http://jaspar.genereg.net/api/;
RRID:SCR_003030
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
Mouse embryonic stem cells 129XC57BL/
6J generated from male 129-B13
agouti mice
Laboratory of Kyung-Min Noh
(Gehre et al., 2020)
Oligonucleotides
See Table S6 for oligos used in CRISPR-
Cas9 cell lines generation and for RT-
qPCRs quantiﬁcations
N/A
Recombinant DNA
N/A
N/A
Addgene plasmid #48138
Software and Algorithms
Proteome Discoverer 1.4
Thermo Fisher
https://www.thermoﬁsher.com/de/de/
home/industrial/mass-spectrometry/liquid-
chromatography-mass-spectrometry-lc-
ms/lc-ms-software/multi-omics-data-
analysis/proteome-discoverer-
software.html
Mascot
MatrixScience
http://www.matrixscience.com/
TopHat2
https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.
com/articles/10.1186/gb-2013-14-4-r36
(Kim et al., 2013)
http://ccb.jhu.edu/software/tophat/
index.shtml
Bowtie2 2.3.2
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC3322381/ (Langmead and
Salzberg, 2012)
http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/
index.shtml
Trimmomatic 0.32
https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/
article/30/15/2114/2390096 (Bolger
et al., 2014)
http://www.usadellab.org/cms/index.php?
page=trimmomatic ; RRID:SCR_011848
Snakemake 5.0
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
bts480 (Ko¨ ster and Rahmann, 2012)
https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/;
RRID:SCR_003475
Deeptools 2.5.0
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku365
(Ramı´rez et al., 2014)
https://deeptools.readthedocs.io/en/
develop/; RRID:SCR_016366
Macs2 2.1.1
(Zhang et al., 2008)
https://github.com/taoliu/MACS;
RRID:SCR_013291
FastQC 0.11.5
(Andrews, 2010)
https://github.com/s-andrews/FastQC;
RRID:SCR_014583
Picard tools 2.9.0
Broad Institute
https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/;
RRID:SCR_006525
Samtools 1.3.1
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
btp352 (Li et al., 2009)
http://www.htslib.org/; RRID:SCR_002105
Homer 4.9.1
(Heinz et al., 2010)
http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/;
RRID:SCR_010881
R 3.5.1
https://cran.r-project.org/doc/FAQ/R-FAQ.
html#Citing-R
http://www.r-project.org/
RRID:SCR_001905
Bioconductor
https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.
3252 (Huber et al., 2015)
https://www.bioconductor.org/;
RRID:SCR_006442
MOFA 1.2
(Argelaguet et al., 2018)
https://bioconductor.org/packages/
release/bioc/html/MOFA.html
(Continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
e2
Cell Systems 10, 480–494.e1–e8, June 24, 2020

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead Contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact, Judith B.
Zaugg (zaugg@embl.de)
Materials Availability
Mouse embryonic stem cell lines generated in this study are available from the corresponding author on request.
Data and Code Availability
d The accession number for the ATAC-seq data reported in this paper is ArrayExpress:E-MTAB-8194. The accession number for
the RNA-seq data reported in this paper is ArrayExpress:E-MTAB-8197. The accession number for the proteomics data re-
ported in this paper is ProteomeXchange:PXD016080. The accession number for the SOX2 ChIP-seq data reported in this pa-
per is ArrayExpress:E-MTAB-8196.
d The code used in this study has not been deposited in a public repository because it was not used to generate new tools or
workﬂows and a combination of already available software was used only for data interpretation and visualization. This custom
code is available from the corresponding author on request.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Cell Lines Used in This Study
All experiments were performed using murine embryonic stem cells (ESCs) (129XC57BL/6J) generated from male 129-B13 agouti
mice. The differentiation protocol of mouse ESCs to glutamatergic neurons was performed as described in (Bibel et al., 2007). Brieﬂy,
ESCs were cultured on feeder-free gelatin-coated plates for 2 passages in ESC medium containing Knockout-DMEM (Thermo Fisher)
with 15% ES Cell Qualiﬁed EmbryoMax FBS (Millipore, ES-009-B) and 20 ng/ml LIF (EMBL protein expression facility, Heidelberg)
prior to experiments. Differentiation starts upon transfer of 4e6 cells/10 cm non-adhesive plates (Sigma, P9366 Sigma) and removal
of LIF from the medium, leading to the formation of embryoid bodies. On days 4 and 6, retinoic acid (Sigma, R2625) at a ﬁnal con-
centration of 5 mM was added to the medium. On day 8, the embryoid bodies were dissociated, brought in single-cell suspension,
plated on poly-D-lysine/laminin-coated plates and switched to N2 medium containing DMEM high glucose (Thermo Fisher, 11965-
092), 1xN2 supplement (Thermo Fisher, 17502048), 1x B27 supplement (Thermo Fisher, 17504044) and penicillin-streptomycin
(1:100, Thermo Fisher, 15140-122). The neurons were maintained till day 10 for proteomics/ChIP-seq/ChIP-SICAP experiments
and till day 12 for RNA-seq and ATAC-seq experiments. All cell cultures were maintained at 37
 C.
Authentication: genome integrity in mouse ESCs was conﬁrmed by RNA-Sequencing and DNA-Sequencing analysis and compar-
ison to the reference genome (mm10).
The purity of the neurons at day 12 of differentiation was assessed by immunoﬂuorescence using an antibody against neuronal
marker ß-tubulin III (Figure S1A). We also detected no expression of the marker genes of the common contaminant cell types (astro-
cytes, glial cells, and oligodendrocytes) in the RNA-seq data at day 12, and beside the expression of glutamatergic markers (Gria1-4)
we detected expression of Sst-positive inhibitory neuronal markers, conﬁrming that our neurons are mostly excitatory with a small
population of Sst-positive inhibitory neurons (Figure S1B).
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
DiffBind Bioconductor package 2.10
(Ross-Innes et al., 2012)
https://bioconductor.org/packages/
release/bioc/html/DiffBind.html;
RRID:SCR_012918
DESeq2 Bioconductor package 1.20
(Love et al., 2014)
https://bioconductor.org/packages/
release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html;
RRID:SCR_015687
GenomicAlignments Bioconductor
package 1.16
(Lawrence et al., 2013)
https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/
release/bioc/html/
GenomicAlignments.html
clusterProﬁler 3.10
(Yu et al., 2012)
https://bioconductor.org/packages/
release/bioc/html/clusterProﬁler.html
diffTF
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2211124719314391 (Berest
et al., 2019)
https://difftf.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 10, 480–494.e1–e8, June 24, 2020
e3

METHOD DETAILS
Replicates
Proteomics and ChIP-seq experiments were performed in two biological replicates. ATAC-seq experiments were performed in 4 bio-
logical replicates obtained from 2 independent rounds of differentiation. RNA-seq experiments were performed in 5 biological rep-
licates obtained from 2 independent rounds of differentiation.
Data Exclusion
Generated NGS data was subjected to preliminary quality assessments as recommended by the ENCODE consortium, for example
using FastQC v.0.11.5 (Andrews, 2010). No samples were excluded from the analyses and all biological replicates showed high
reproducibility by correlation of binned genomic coverage data and/or gene/feature counts and principal component analyses using
deeptools version 2.3.3 and Deseq2 version 1.20.0.
Randomization
No randomization was required for this cell-culture based in vitro study. All tested cell lines were generated from a common parental
mouse embryonic stem cell line.
Sample Sizes
Sample sizes of all experiments were chosen in agreement with guidelines for the analysis of next-generation sequencing data and to
fulﬁll the requirements of published bioinformatics tools used in this study (n>=2). The number of analyzed genomic features (n) used
to generate plots from the NGS data are depicted in the respective ﬁgure, or corresponding ﬁgure legend.
Proteomic Sample Preparation with SP3
Cells cultured in biological replicates were collected at two-day intervals from day 0 to day 10 and subjected to SP3 for proteome
isolation and sample preparation (Hughes et al., 2014) . Speciﬁcally, cell pellets of 1e6 cells from each condition and replicate
were reconstituted in 100 ml of lysis buffer (50mM Ambic, 1% SDS, 1X Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche; 05892791001), 10mM
TCEP and 40mM CAA) and sonicated for 12 cycles (30/30 seconds on/off) on a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode). They were heated up
at 95C for 5 min and cooled down for 5 min at room temperature. A 50/50% mixture of Sera-Mag Speed Beads A and B (Fisher
Scientiﬁc; CAT No. 24152105050250, CAT No. 44152105050250) was rinsed in water on a magnetic stand 2 times and taken up wa-
ter, in their original volume. 4ml of the bead mixture was added to the samples and immediately afterwards, 104 ml of acetonitrile (ACN)
were added. The samples were left for 10 minutes at room temperature, after which they were placed on a magnetic rack and left for
another 2 minutes to allow the magnetic beads to settle. The supernatant was removed, the beads were washed on the rack 2 times
with 1 ml 70% ethanol and once with 1 ml ACN. The supernatant was removed, the beads were air-dried for 1 minute and taken up in
20 ml TEAB with pH 8.5. Two mg of the proteolytic enzyme LysC were added and incubated for 16 hours at 37C.
TMT Labeling
Upon protein digestion via SP3, the peptide-containing supernatant was transferred to new tubes. 20 mg (in 1 ml) of TMT reagent was
added to each sample and left for 30 min at room temperature. The same amount was added again and left for 30 min at room tem-
perature. 1 ml of quench mix (50mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10mM Lysine) was added to each simple and incubated for 5 mi-
nutes. 2 ml of bead mix (see preparation above) was added to each sample and ACN was added up to a ﬁnal percentage of 95% and
incubated for 10 minutes. The beads were put on a magnetic rack for 2 minutes, the supernatant was removed and the beads were
washed with 100% ACN. The supernatant was removed and the beads were reconstituted in 4% DMSO in water and placed on mag-
netic rack. Finally the supernatant was taken in fresh tubes and formic acid was added to a ﬁnal percentage of 0.1%.
Peptide Fractionation
TMT-labeled peptide samples were fractionated with 1,200 Inﬁnity HPLC system (Agilent), using a Gemini C18 column (Phenom-
enex). A 60 minute gradient was used, which progresses linearly from 0 to 35% ACN in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH10. The
ﬂow rate was set at 100ml/minute. Peptide elution was detected via UV detector at 254 nm. 33 fractions were collected and pooled
into 11 fractions
(combination strategy: fraction 1, 12 and 23; 2, 13 and 24 etc.).
Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry
Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap-Fusion Quadrupole-Linear-Ion Trap-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo
Fisher) coupled to EASY-nLC system (Thermo Fisher). The samples were loaded onto a 100 mm x 2 cm Acclaim Pepmap RSLC trap
column (5mm particles, 100A˚ pores, C18) in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water, ULCMS Grade, Biosolve) and eluted onto a
75 mm x 50 cm (2mm particles, 100A˚ pores, C18) Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column by a gradient from 3% solvent B (0.1%
formic acid in 80% acetonitrile and 19.9% water, ULCMS Grade, Biosolve) to 50% solvent B in 86 minutes at a ﬂow rate of 300 nl/min.
Eluting peptides were analyzed by electrospray using a 10 mm Picotip coated fused silica emitter (New Objective) and a Nanospray-
Flex ion source (Thermo) connected to an Orbitrap-Fusion Quadrupole-Linear-Ion Trap-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
e4
Cell Systems 10, 480–494.e1–e8, June 24, 2020

===== Cadwell2017_BMCBiol_PATCH-seq+QnA =====
QUESTION AND ANSWER
Open Access
Q&A: using Patch-seq to profile single cells
Cathryn R. Cadwell1, Rickard Sandberg2,3, Xiaolong Jiang1,4 and Andreas S. Tolias1,5*
Abstract
Individual neurons vary widely in terms of their gene
expression, morphology, and electrophysiological
properties. While many techniques exist to study
single-cell variability along one or two of these
dimensions, very few techniques can assess all three
features for a single cell. We recently developed
Patch-seq, which combines whole-cell patch clamp
recording with single-cell RNA-sequencing and
immunohistochemistry to comprehensively profile the
transcriptomic, morphologic, and physiologic features
of individual neurons. Patch-seq can be broadly
applied to characterize cell types in complex tissues
such as the nervous system, and to study the
transcriptional signatures underlying the
multidimensional phenotypes of single cells.
What is Patch-seq?
The term ‘Patch-seq’ refers to the combined application
of whole-cell patch clamp recording and single-cell
RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) to individual cells. In par-
allel with another group led by Sten Linnarsson and
Tibor Harkany, we recently developed the Patch-seq
technique and applied it to study neurons in the mouse
cortex [1, 2]. While there are several differences between
the two protocols (see below), the basic approach is the
same: after a cell is patched and its intrinsic electro-
physiological properties are recorded, the intracellular
contents are aspirated into the patch pipette and used
for scRNA-seq (Fig. 1). In contrast to other scRNA-seq
methods, which utilize dissociated cells [3–5], Patch-seq
can be applied to study single cells in situ in live tissue
slices [1, 2] or even intact animals [1], making informa-
tion about the anatomical position, morphological struc-
ture, electrical properties, connectivity, and function of
* Correspondence: astolias@bcm.edu
1Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA
5Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University,
Houston, Texas, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
the cell within the local circuit simultaneously accessible.
The multimodal datasets generated using Patch-seq can
enable scientists to examine the relationship between
genome-wide expression patterns and phenotype with
unprecedented single-cell resolution.
What are the main applications of Patch-seq?
Patch-seq can be applied to answer a multitude of scien-
tific questions that require correlating gene expression
with physiology and/or morphology at the level of single
cells. For example, Patch-seq provides an unbiased strat-
egy to characterize and classify cell types by integrating
information about each cell’s morphology, physiology,
and
gene
expression
into
a
common
framework.
Patch-seq
can
also
be
used
as
a
complementary
method to ‘annotate’ cell type classification based pri-
marily on scRNA-seq of dissociated neurons; in other
words, to link molecular cell types with their corre-
sponding morphology and physiology. The generation
of a comprehensive cell type atlas with genome-wide
expression data may lay the foundation for a more
principled understanding of neuropsychiatric diseases
by identifying the specific functional cell types that
express disease-associated genes. In addition to cell
type
studies,
we
envision
that
Patch-seq
can
be
broadly applied, for example, to study the transcrip-
tional changes that occur within a single cell during
plasticity, or combined with transgenic, viral, and
optogenetic techniques to explore the transcriptional
signatures of neurons with a specific developmental
lineage, neurons that project to a particular brain re-
gion, or neurons that receive input from a common
brain region. By combining Patch-seq with multiple
simultaneous whole-cell recording techniques to study
connectivity [6] we may be able to decipher the mo-
lecular mechanisms that underlie cell type-specific
connectivity. Patch-seq could also be used to profile
cell types of other complex organs outside the ner-
vous system. In summary, we believe that Patch-seq
is a powerful tool that can enhance many research
programs and permit new avenues of investigation
into the molecular underpinnings of cellular diversity.
© Tolias et al. 2017 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Cadwell et al. BMC Biology  (2017) 15:58 
DOI 10.1186/s12915-017-0396-0

What differences are there between Patch-seq
protocols?
There are currently two published protocols for Patch-
seq, our own [1] and that of Fuzik et al. [2]. There are
several important modifications to the standard patch
clamp procedure (Table 1) that both protocols share, in-
cluding strict RNase-free preparation of solutions and
equipment used for collecting single-cell RNA samples,
the use of large patch pipette tip sizes (that produce
lower resistance than typically used for patching), use of
a small volume of internal solution in the patch pipette,
and the addition of ethylene glycol-bis (β-aminoethyl
ether)-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid (EGTA) to the internal
solution [7]. The major differences between the two pro-
tocols lie in the composition of the internal solution and
the sequencing method used. In addition to EGTA, our
internal solution also includes glycogen and RNase in-
hibitor. We included glycogen because of previous re-
ports suggesting that it improves RNA yield [8, 9] and
we found in pilot studies that the addition of RNase
inhibitor increased cDNA yield approximately three-
fold [1]. The protocol described by Fuzik et al. did
not include either glycogen or RNase inhibitor in the
internal solution, but did report the use of depolariz-
ing current steps prior to aspiration of the cell con-
tents to facilitate entry of RNA into the pipette.
While we have not observed an increase in cDNA
yield following depolarizing current injection, in our
experience this may help to diffuse biocytin through-
out the cell and improve morphological recovery (un-
published observations). Our cDNA amplification and
library construction protocol is based on the Smart-seq2
method for sequencing full-length cDNA [10–12], while
the protocol developed by Fuzik et al. uses a unique mo-
lecular identifier (UMI)-based single-cell tagged reverse
transcription (STRT) protocol to reduce PCR bias at
the cost of sequencing only the 5′ end of each cDNA
molecule [3, 13].
Fig. 1. Overview of Patch-seq technique. Access to the intracellular compartment of a single neuron is gained by whole-cell patch clamp (step 1)
and the electrical properties of the cell, such as its firing pattern in response to depolarizing current injection, are recorded (step 2). The intracellular
contents are aspirated into the patch pipette (step 3) and collected in a PCR tube (step 4) for downstream RNA-sequencing (step 5). The tissue slice,
which retains the collapsed cell body and fine processes of the cell (step 6), is subjected to immunohistochemical staining to visualize the complex
morphology of the cell (step 7). Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Biotechnology [1], copyright (2016)
Table 1 Modifications to standard patch-clamp procedure for Patch-seq
Modification
Standard patch clamp
Patch-seq [1]
Patch-seq [2]
Purpose
RNase-free precautions
−
✔
✔
Prevent sample degradation by
exogenous RNase
Large patch pipettes
−
✔
✔
Easier to aspirate cell contents
into pipette
Small volume of internal solution
−
✔
✔
Prevent interference with downstream
reactions and loss of sample RNA
EGTA in internal solution
−
✔
✔
Scavenge free calcium to reduce
activity of endogenous RNase
Glycogen in internal solution
−
✔
−
RNA carrier
RNase inhibitor in internal solution
−
✔
−
Reduce activity of endogenous RNase
Depolarizing current steps
+⁄−
+⁄−
✔
May facilitate diffusion of biocytin into
cell and RNA into pipette
Sequencing method
−
Smart-seq2-based
STRT-based
Full-length gene coverage [1] or reduce PCR bias [2]
Cadwell et al. BMC Biology  (2017) 15:58 
Page 2 of 7

Can morphology of sequenced cells be directly
assessed?
In our original Patch-seq protocol [1], morphology was
inferred based on the cell’s electrophysiological proper-
ties, but this approach may not be possible for cell types
that have very similar electrophysiological properties.
Thus, direct morphological recovery of cells following
Patch-seq is a critical technical advance that will likely
be necessary to capture the full diversity of cell types in
many brain regions. Patch-seq should be compatible
with direct morphological recovery since the axonal and
dendritic arbours, which comprise the majority of mor-
phological variability, remain physically embedded in the
tissue slice even if the cell body is distorted or damaged
during aspiration of cell contents into the patch pipette.
We have made two key modifications to our original in-
ternal solution recipe to enable direct morphological re-
covery of Patch-seq neurons. First, we added biocytin
into the internal solution, which is the standard dye used
in electrophysiology to fill cells and later visualize their
morphology. Second, we brought the osmolarity into a
more physiological range to allow longer recordings, giv-
ing sufficient time for biocytin to diffuse throughout the
fine cellular processes. Using this modified internal solu-
tion we have been able to recover morphology directly
from Patch-seq neurons (Fig. 2).
Your Patch-seq protocol is based on the Smart-
seq2 sequencing method. Can it be combined
with other sequencing methods?
Our basic protocol for isolating single-cell RNA could
potentially be combined with any plate-based library
preparation and sequencing method, but would not be
compatible
with
droplet-based
or
microfluidic
cell-
sorting sequencing technologies due to the need to
patch the cell in situ in order to collect meaningful
physiological measurements. As mentioned above, the
Smart-seq2 sequencing method that we based our proto-
col on has been demonstrated to have excellent sensitiv-
ity and full-length coverage in a wide range of cell types
and experimental settings [11, 14, 15]. However, sequen-
cing technology is continually evolving and it is inevit-
able that the Patch-seq protocol may need to be updated
to keep pace with these advancements. An important
consideration when choosing a sequencing method, par-
ticularly for Patch-seq studies that tend to have lower
throughput, is the importance of being able to compare
the results with the previous literature. Each sequencing
method can be prone to unique biases, making it diffi-
cult to compare results from one study to another sim-
ply because of differences in sequencing methods. An
added benefit of using Smart-seq2 has been that we can
compare our scRNA-seq data with reference databases
generated from the Allen Institute of Brain Science,
which is also using a Smart-seq2-based sequencing
approach to generate large data sets from dissociated
neurons [4].
How is Patch-seq different from previous techniques
that used qRT-PCR or microarray following
patch-clamp recording?
Many groups have attempted to combine whole-cell
patch clamp recording with analysis of single-cell gene
expression. Early studies performed RT-PCR of the
patch pipette contents following whole-cell recording
[7–9]. However, these techniques require the prior selec-
tion of a handful of genes (up to a few dozen [16, 17]),
providing only a small glimpse of the full complexity of
genes expressed by each cell and precluding the identifi-
cation of novel genes that may be important in deter-
mining cellular phenotype. Single-cell microarray has
also been used to assess a larger number of genes fol-
lowing patch clamp recording [18]; however, microarray
techniques have a limited dynamic range and poor
Fig. 2. Combined Patch-seq and morphological recovery. Immunohistochemical staining (left, scale bar 50 μm) and full-length amplified cDNA
Bioanalyzer profile (right) from a layer 2/3 pyramidal neuron. ERCC spike-in RNA was used as a positive control in this experiment and gives rise to
the distinct peaks at ~600 bp and ~1100 bp in the Bioanalyzer profile
Cadwell et al. BMC Biology  (2017) 15:58 
Page 3 of 7

sensitivity and specificity compared to sequencing-based
approaches [19, 20], and cannot detect novel transcripts
or splice variants. One previous attempt to perform
scRNA-seq on patched neurons yielded relatively poor
quality sequencing data (compared to scRNA-seq of dis-
sociated neurons): three neurons from acute brain slices
were sequenced with an average of <2000 genes detected
per cell and a mean correlation of ~0.25 across cells,
suggesting high technical variability between samples
[21]. In contrast, our protocol yields high quality
scRNA-seq data comparable to that obtained from disso-
ciated cells [3, 4], with a mean correlation of ~0.6 and
~7000 genes detected per cell [1]. Thus, our Patch-seq
technique represents a substantial advance in the ability
to profile genome-wide expression patterns of patch
clamp recorded neurons.
What are the most critical steps of the Patch-seq
protocol?
Strict RNase-free preparation of solutions and handling
of samples is absolutely critical to the success of the ex-
periment. RNase is ubiquitous in the environment [22, 23]
and a small amount of RNase contamination prior to re-
verse transcription can easily degrade all of the RNA con-
tained in a single cell (estimated to be ~10 pg). In addition
to RNase-free precautions, the quality of the tissue slice,
cell, and the patching steps themselves are all important
to be able to isolate high-quality RNA from single cells. If
the cell is unhealthy, it will be difficult to patch and the
RNA may be degraded already by the time it is collected.
Likewise, if the recording is unstable or there is significant
current leakage, RNases from the extracellular space may
enter the pipette and degrade the RNA. In our experi-
ence, the best cDNA yield comes from cells that are
healthy, were patched quickly, and had stable record-
ings requiring minimal holding currents. Under these
conditions the cell can typically tolerate a significant
amount of negative pressure to aspirate the cell cyto-
plasm and organelles into the patch pipette. The as-
piration process should be tailored to each individual
cell since cell size and shape, pipette tip size, angle of
approach, and many other factors can affect the aspir-
ation process. Since expertise in both molecular biol-
ogy
and
electrophysiology
are
equally
critical
to
success, Patch-seq experiments are well suited to col-
laborations between two or more individuals with
complementary skill sets.
Are there any special challenges to consider when
attempting Patch-seq in an intact animal?
Patching in vivo is generally more difficult than patching
in slices, and Patch-seq experiments are no exception. In
addition to the difficulty of patching itself, the pipette
has to travel a further distance through tissue to reach
the target cell and may pick up debris from the extracel-
lular space. It is therefore especially important to main-
tain
positive
pressure
while
advancing
the
pipette
through the tissue. The dura should be removed so that
it does not stick to the pipette. A fluorescent dye can be
used to visualize the pipette tip and surrounding cells
(which appear as shadows compared to the fluorescence
diffusing into the extracellular space) using two-photon
imaging, and to monitor the cell body of the patched
neuron during aspiration (Fig. 3) since differential inter-
ference contrast (DIC) microscopy is not an option
in vivo. The electrical properties of the cell, including its
firing pattern, may also be more difficult to quantify
in vivo due to more ongoing activity within the intact
circuit, and so the recording session should be thought-
fully designed to focus on high priority aspects of the
cell’s physiology during the recording session. While un-
doubtedly more challenging, in vivo Patch-seq experi-
ments have the potential to address important questions
that cannot be studied in slices, such as investigating the
relationship between the tuning properties of neurons
and their transcriptome. In addition, some cell types
have long-range axons and elaborate dendritic arbors
that may not survive the slicing procedure and therefore
need to be targeted in the intact animal.
Are there any physiologic signs I can look for to
determine whether the cell contents have entered
the pipette?
When studying a deep brain structure, one may not have
the luxury of visualizing the cell body during the
Fig. 3. Collapse of cell body during aspiration into patch pipette.
Two example neurons patched in vivo under two-photon guidance
using a green fluorescent dye in the patch pipette. In both cases, the
cell body was noted to decrease in size dramatically after aspirating
the cell contents into the pipette. Adapted by permission from
Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Biotechnology [1], copyright (2016)
Cadwell et al. BMC Biology  (2017) 15:58 
Page 4 of 7

experiment. In such cases, it may be possible to indir-
ectly assess whether cell contents have entered the pip-
ette by carefully monitoring the access resistance. We
often observe a steady increase in access resistance that
seems to correlate with entry of cell contents (especially
large organelles such as the nucleus) into the patch pip-
ette. When the organelles completely pass the tip of the
pipette there may be a steep decrease in resistance and
very little, if any, suction is needed to aspirate the
remaining cell cytoplasm. While we typically use visual
guidance to confirm that the cell body has collapsed, it
may be possible to use these electrophysiological signs
as a proxy for determining when the cell contents have
been successfully aspirated. As mentioned above, a fluor-
escent dye can also be added to the internal solution to
visualize cells up to several hundred microns deep using
multi-photon imaging in vivo.
What is the throughput of this technique, and
what are the limiting factors?
In our lab, with two to three people working together on
a single setup, we can collect 30–40 Patch-seq samples
per day. If morphological recovery is also required, then
only 10–15 samples are collected per day due to the lon-
ger recording time required to allow biocytin to diffuse
into the fine cellular processes. The main limiting factor
to maximizing throughput is the skill and speed of the
electrophysiologist(s). Patch clamp recording is a high-
level skill that can take years to master. Ultimately, auto-
mation of the patching procedure may further increase
throughput and reduce the intensive human effort re-
quired to collect Patch-seq samples [24]. Improvements
to the internal solution and/or staining procedures that
can reduce the recording time required for morpho-
logical recovery could also potentially increase the
throughput of combined sequencing and morphological
analysis of neurons.
What is the average cost per cell?
By using off-the-shelf and in-house-produced reagents
whenever possible we have reduced the cost of generat-
ing single-cell cDNA libraries to approximately $21/cell.
This excludes upfront capital expenditures for equip-
ment (electrophysiology rig, Agilent Bioanalyzer, and
basic lab supplies) as well as sequencing costs, which
vary widely depending on the sequencing depth and in-
stitutional core resources.
I am an electrophysiologist. How difficult would it
be to implement the Patch-seq technique in my lab?
An electrophysiologist would already have the vast ma-
jority of equipment and expertise needed to begin
Patch-seq experiments in his or her lab. A few additional
pieces of equipment may need to be purchased, such as
a biosafety cabinet, Bioanalyzer, and Qubit fluorometer.
The main challenges likely to be faced involve adopting
the RNase-free habits necessary for working with pico-
gram quantities of RNA including infallible sterile tech-
nique and a healthy degree of RNase paranoia, as these
skills are not typically required for electrophysiology ex-
periments. It could be beneficial, at least initially, to
work with a molecular biologist experienced in single-
cell RNA work until these habits become second nature.
I am a molecular biologist. How difficult would it
be to implement the Patch-seq technique in my lab?
Patch clamping requires specialized equipment and ex-
pertise that may be difficult to pick up quickly or
cheaply. In our experience, each step of the patching
process—the quality of the tissue slices, the efficiency of
patching a neuron, the stability of the recording, and the
interactive process of aspirating cell contents—is critical
to obtain high quality RNA from single cells. The ability
to quickly and intuitively understand how a cell ‘is doing’
typically emerges as a result of experience recording from
many neurons. It may not be time- or cost-effective for a
molecular biologist to embark on acquiring these skills
themselves if there is a potential collaborator available
who has already mastered the technique. This is not to say
it is impossible for a molecular biologist to do these exper-
iments on his or her own, only that he or she should be
prepared to devote sufficient time and resources to
achieve proficiency.
Why am I getting very little, if any, full-length
cDNA?
The problem can be localized to one (or both) of two ex-
perimental stages: sample processing or sample collec-
tion. To determine whether there is a problem during
sample processing, we recommend first optimizing the
entire protocol using a known total RNA spike-in of
~10 pg to ensure that if there is sample content present,
it is not being lost along the way due to RNase contam-
ination, inefficient reverse transcription, poor amplifica-
tion, and other steps. The positive control RNA spike-in
can either be purchased from commercial sources or iso-
lated from whole brain and diluted to approximate the
amount in a single neuron (~10–30 pg). If this small
quantity of known input RNA does not consistently yield
high quality full-length cDNA, there is no hope that a
patched neuron’s RNA will give any better results and
the protocol should be further optimized before attempt-
ing to amplify cDNA from patched neurons. Problems
during sample processing must be addressed before con-
sidering problems during sample collection.
If high-quality, full-length cDNA can routinely be gen-
erated from ~10 pg known RNA input, but not from
patched neurons, then the problem may be during
Cadwell et al. BMC Biology  (2017) 15:58 
Page 5 of 7

sample collection. The most common issues we have
come across during this phase of the experiment are: 1)
the sample is collected into too much internal solution,
which acts as a potent inhibitor of reverse transcription
[1]; 2) the internal solution is contaminated with RNase
and needs to be re-made; 3) the cell and/or tissue slice
was unhealthy, or the patch was poor quality, and the
RNA was already degraded by the time the sample was
collected; 4) insufficient suction was used to aspirate cell
contents into the patch pipette, which may be secondary
to the cell being unstable and unable to tolerate suction;
or 5) too much suction resulted in aspiration of extracel-
lular material including RNases into the patch pipette.
Even after the Patch-seq technique is well established
in the lab, it is critical to continue using appropriate
positive and negative controls for each experiment to de-
tect and localize problems (such as new contamination
of a solution with RNase or previously amplified cDNA)
as soon as they arise.
What alternative strategies exist to link
morphology, electrophysiology, and
transcriptome data?
An alternative approach to Patch-seq is to utilize high-
throughput scRNA-seq of dissociated neurons to identify
molecularly
specified
cell
types,
and
then
further
characterize the morphology and physiology of these
molecular cell types using transgenic mouse lines (for
example, Cre driver lines). By expressing a fluorescent
reporter in the cell type of interest, standard patch-
clamp or other techniques can be applied to characterize
the physiology and morphology of the targeted cell
population. In practice, this approach is often limited by
the availability and specificity of driver lines, which fre-
quently label multiple functionally distinct cell types [6].
In addition, this approach assumes transcriptomic and
phenotypic homogeneity within the target population
and forfeits the ability to resolve additional cell subtypes
by dissociating gene expression from phenotype at the
level of single cells. The continued development of inter-
sectional genetic tools may enable more specific target-
ing of molecular subtypes and expand the utility of
transgenic approaches to link transcriptomic cell types
with their corresponding morphological and electro-
physiological phenotypes.
Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Tolias, Jiang, and Sandberg labs for helpful
discussions on the Patch-seq technique and its potential applications. Our
work is supported by funding from the United States National Institutes of
Health, the Swedish Research Council, and the Swedish Foundation for
Strategic Research.
Authors’ contributions
All authors contributed to writing the manuscript and have read and agreed
to the content.
Competing interests
Authors of this study (RS) have developed and patented Smart-seq2 and
licensed that technology to Clontech, a Takara Bio Company. The other
authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Author details
1Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. 2Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research,
Stockholm, Sweden. 3Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska
Institutet, Nobels väg 3, 171 65 Solna, Stockholm, Sweden. 4Jan and Dan
Duncan Neurological Research Institute at Texas Children’s Hospital, 1250
Moursund Street, Suite 1025.18, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. 5Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA.
References
1.
Cadwell CR, Palasantza A, Jiang X, Berens P, Deng Q, Yilmaz M, et al.
Electrophysiological, transcriptomic and morphologic profiling of single
neurons using Patch-seq. Nat Biotechnol. 2016;34:199–203.
2.
Fuzik J, Zeisel A, Mate Z, Calvigioni D, Yanagawa Y, Szabo G, et al.
Integration of electrophysiological recordings with single-cell RNA-seq data
identifies neuronal subtypes. Nat Biotechnol. 2016;34:175–83.
3.
Zeisel A, Munoz-Manchado AB, Codeluppi S, Lonnerberg P, La Manno G,
Jureus A, et al. Brain structure. Cell types in the mouse cortex and
hippocampus revealed by single-cell RNA-seq. Science. 2015;347:1138–42.
4.
Tasic B, Menon V, Nguyen TN, Kim TK, Jarsky T, Yao Z, et al. Adult mouse
cortical cell taxonomy revealed by single cell transcriptomics. Nat Neurosci.
2016;19:335–46.
5.
Macosko EZ, Basu A, Satija R, Nemesh J, Shekhar K, Goldman M, et al. Highly
parallel genome-wide expression profiling of individual cells using nanoliter
droplets. Cell. 2015;161:1202–14.
6.
Jiang X, Shen S, Cadwell CR, Berens P, Sinz F, Ecker AS, et al. Principles of
connectivity among morphologically defined cell types in adult neocortex.
Science. 2015;350:aac9462.
7.
Eberwine J, Yeh H, Miyashiro K, Cao Y, Nair S, Finnell R, et al. Analysis of
gene expression in single live neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992;89:
3010–4.
8.
Sucher NJ, Deitcher DL. PCR and patch-clamp analysis of single neurons.
Neuron. 1995;14:1095–100.
9.
Sucher NJ, Deitcher DL, Baro DJ, Warrick RM, Guenther E. Genes and
channels: patch/voltage-clamp analysis and single-cell RT-PCR. Cell Tissue
Res. 2000;302:295–307.
10.
Picelli S, Bjorklund AK, Faridani OR, Sagasser S, Winberg G, Sandberg R.
Smart-seq2 for sensitive full-length transcriptome profiling in single cells.
Nat Methods. 2013;10:1096–8.
11.
Picelli S, Faridani OR, Bjorklund AK, Winberg G, Sagasser S, Sandberg R.
Full-length RNA-seq from single cells using Smart-seq2. Nat Protoc.
2014;9:171–81.
12.
Picelli S, Bjorklund AK, Reinius B, Sagasser S, Winberg G, Sandberg R. Tn5
transposase and tagmentation procedures for massively scaled sequencing
projects. Genome Res. 2014;24:2033–40.
13.
Islam S, Zeisel A, Joost S, La Manno G, Zajac P, Kasper M, et al. Quantitative
single-cell RNA-seq with unique molecular identifiers. Nat Methods.
2014;11:163–6.
14.
Deng Q, Ramskold D, Reinius B, Sandberg R. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals
dynamic, random monoallelic gene expression in mammalian cells. Science.
2014;343:193–6.
15.
Reinius B, Mold JE, Ramskold D, Deng Q, Johnsson P, Michaelsson J, et al.
Analysis of allelic expression patterns in clonal somatic cells by single-cell
RNA-seq. Nat Genet. 2016;48:1430–5.
16.
Toledo-Rodriguez M, Blumenfeld B, Wu C, Luo J, Attali B, Goodman P, et al.
Correlation maps allow neuronal electrical properties to be predicted from
single-cell gene expression profiles in rat neocortex. Cereb Cortex.
2004;14:1310–27.
Cadwell et al. BMC Biology  (2017) 15:58 
Page 6 of 7

17.
Toledo-Rodriguez M, Markram H. Single-cell RT-PCR, a technique to
decipher the electrical, anatomical, and genetic determinants of neuronal
diversity. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1183:143–58.
18.
Subkhankulova T, Yano K, Robinson HP, Livesey FJ. Grouping and classifying
electrophysiologically-defined classes of neocortical neurons by single cell,
whole-genome expression profiling. Front Mol Neurosci. 2010;3:10.
19.
Tang F, Barbacioru C, Wang Y, Nordman E, Lee C, Xu N, et al. mRNA-Seq
whole-transcriptome analysis of a single cell. Nat Methods. 2009;6:377–82.
20.
Tang F, Barbacioru C, Nordman E, Li B, Xu N, Bashkirov VI, et al. RNA-Seq
analysis to capture the transcriptome landscape of a single cell. Nat Protoc.
2010;5:516–35.
21.
Qiu S, Luo S, Evgrafov O, Li R, Schroth GP, Levitt P, et al. Single-neuron RNA-
Seq: technical feasibility and reproducibility. Front Genet. 2012;3:124.
22.
Simanski M, Köten B, Schröder JM, Gläser R, Harder J. Antimicrobial RNases
in Cutaneous Defense. J Innate Immunity. 2012;4:241–7.
23.
Eller CH, Lomax JE, Raines RT. Bovine brain ribonuclease is the functional
homolog of human ribonuclease 1. J Biol Chem. 2014;289:25996–6006.
24.
Kodandaramaiah SB, Franzesi GT, Chow BY, Boyden ES, Forest CR.
Automated whole-cell patch-clamp electrophysiology of neurons in vivo.
Nat Methods. 2012;9:585–7.
Cadwell et al. BMC Biology  (2017) 15:58 
Page 7 of 7

===== Carr2019_CellStemCell_PN-Blastema-MSC =====
Article
Mesenchymal Precursor Cells in Adult Nerves
Contribute to Mammalian Tissue Repair and
Regeneration
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Peripheral nerves contain four transcriptionally distinct
mesenchymal populations
d Endoneurial Pdgfra-positive cells have mesenchymal
precursor properties
d Nerve mesenchymal cells contribute to bone formation
during digit tip regeneration
d Transplanted and endogenous nerve mesenchymal cells
contribute to dermal repair
Authors
Matthew J. Carr, Jeremy S. Toma,
Adam P.W. Johnston, ...,
Paul W. Frankland, David R. Kaplan,
Freda D. Miller
Correspondence
fredam@sickkids.ca
In Brief
Carr et al. demonstrate that peripheral
nerves contain mesenchymal precursor-
like cells that participate in repair of
damaged mesenchymal tissues. Utilizing
scRNA-seq, lineage tracing, and
transplantation approaches, the authors
show that neural crest-derived
endoneurial mesenchymal precursor
cells generate bone and dermal cells
during digit tip regeneration and skin
wound healing.
Carr et al., 2019, Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256
February 7, 2019 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2018.10.024

Cell Stem Cell
Article
Mesenchymal Precursor Cells in Adult
Nerves Contribute to Mammalian
Tissue Repair and Regeneration
Matthew J. Carr,1,2 Jeremy S. Toma,1,6 Adam P.W. Johnston,1,6,7 Patrick E. Steadman,1,2 Scott A. Yuzwa,1
Neemat Mahmud,1,4 Paul W. Frankland,1,2,4,5 David R. Kaplan,1,2,3 and Freda D. Miller1,2,3,4,8,*
1Program in Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada
2Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1A8, Canada
3Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1A8, Canada
4Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1A8, Canada
5Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1A8, Canada
6These authors contributed equally
7Present address: Department of Applied Human Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown,
PEI C1A 4P3, Canada
8Lead Contact
*Correspondence: fredam@sickkids.ca
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2018.10.024
SUMMARY
Peripheral innervation plays an important role in regu-
lating tissue repair and regeneration. Here we provide
evidence that injured peripheral nerves provide a
reservoir of mesenchymal precursor cells that can
directly contribute to murine digit tip regeneration
and skin repair. In particular, using single-cell RNA
sequencing and lineage tracing, we identify tran-
scriptionally distinct mesenchymal cell populations
within the control and injured adult nerve, including
neural crest-derived cells in the endoneurium with
characteristics of mesenchymal precursor cells. Cul-
ture and transplantation studies show that these
nerve-derived mesenchymal cells have the potential
to differentiate into non-nerve lineages. Moreover,
following digit tip amputation, neural crest-derived
nerve mesenchymal cells contribute to the regenera-
tive blastema and, ultimately, to the regenerated
bone. Similarly, neural crest-derived nerve mesen-
chymal cells contribute to the dermis during skin
wound healing. These ﬁndings support a model
where peripheral nerves directly contribute mesen-
chymal precursor cells to promote repair and regen-
eration of injured mammalian tissues.
INTRODUCTION
Peripheral nerves are essential for regeneration in organisms like
amphibians (Kumar and Brockes, 2012), whereas in non-regen-
erative mammals, they promote repair of tissues like the heart
(Mahmoud et al., 2015) and bone (Apel et al., 2009; Johnston
et al., 2016). These pro-regenerative effects are in part due to
regulation of tissue-resident stem cells in two ways. First, termi-
nal axons secrete ligands that positively inﬂuence the local
microenvironment. Second, local nerve injury causes dedifferen-
tiation of nerve-associated Schwann cells, which then secrete
growth factors such as newt anterior gradient protein in
amphibian limbs (Kumar and Brockes, 2012) and platelet-
derived growth factor (PDGF)-AA and oncostatin M during mu-
rine digit tip regeneration (Johnston et al., 2016).
Previous studies have focused on neural components of
peripheral nerves, but nerves also contain mesenchymal cells
(Figure 1A). Peripheral nerves have an epineurial connective
tissue sheath, and within this sheath are nerve fascicles that
are each enclosed by a specialized mesenchymal perineurium.
Each fascicle also contains endoneurial mesenchymal cells
closely intermingled with axons and Schwann cells (Joseph
et al., 2004; Richard et al., 2014). Following nerve injury, these
mesenchymal cells collaborate with dedifferentiated Schwann
cells to repair nerve structure and provide a supportive axon
outgrowth environment (Cattin and Lloyd, 2016). The robust
regenerative capacity of the injured nerve is exempliﬁed by
studies showing that transplanted nerve grafts promote CNS
regeneration (Richardson et al., 1980).
Here we have examined nerve mesenchymal cells in the
context of tissue injury. Our data support a model where tissue
damage induces a local nerve injury response that results in
nerve mesenchymal precursor-like cells migrating into adjacent
damaged mesenchymal tissues, where they directly contribute
to tissue repair. These results explain, in part, the nerve depen-
dence of mammalian tissue repair and, because nerves inner-
vate virtually every tissue in the body, have broad implications.
RESULTS
The Peripheral Nerve Contains Pdgfra-Positive
Mesenchymal Cells that Increase in Number Following
Injury
To ﬁnd out more about peripheral nerve mesenchymal cells,
we characterized sciatic nerves of mice with an EGFP reporter
240
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc.

A
B
C
D
E
H
G
I
F
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
(legend on next page)
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019
241

knocked into the Pdgfra gene (PdgfraEGFP/+ mice) (Hamilton
et al., 2003) because PDGFRa marks diverse mesenchymal pre-
cursors (Farahani and Xaymardan, 2015). Many EGFP-positive
cells were found in the nerve endoneurium, and these expressed
immunodetectable PDGFRa protein (97.4% ± 0.5%, n = 3), the
nerve mesenchymal cell marker CD34 (Richard et al., 2014)
(98.7% ± 0.6%; n = 3), and Thy1, which is also found on axons
(Joseph et al., 2004; Figures 1A–1C, S1A, and S1B). The epineu-
rial and perineurial sheaths also contained Pdgfra-EGFP-posi-
tive mesenchymal cells (60.5% ± 6.0% of total positive cells,
n = 3) that were positive for PDGFRa protein (100.0% ± 0.0%,
n = 3) and CD34 (99.1% ± 0.6%, n = 3) (Figures 1A, 1B, and
S1C). All Pdgfra-EGFP-positive cells were negative for the
Schwann cell and axon markers S100b (Figure S1A) and p75.
To ﬁnd out whether Pdgfra-EGFP-positive cells were altered
by injury, we unilaterally resected the sciatic nerve and analyzed
distal nerve segments 9 days later. Pdgfra-EGFP-positive cells
were present in all injured nerve compartments and were posi-
tive for PDGFRa protein (endoneurium and epi-perineurium:
99.2% ± 0.3% and 100.0% ± 0.0%, respectively; n = 3), CD34
(endoneurium
and
epi-perineurium:
99.6%
±
0.2%
and
99.2% ± 0.8%, respectively; n = 3) and Thy1 but negative for
S100b (Figures 1D, 1E, S1D, and S1E). Intriguingly, following
injury, the density of Pdgfra-EGFP-positive endoneurial cells
was increased about 3-fold (Figures 1F, S1C, and S1F). There
were also many Pdgfra-EGFP-positive cells at the distal nerve
stump (Figure 1G) that likely correspond to previously described
bridge or repair ﬁbroblasts (Parrinello et al., 2010). We assessed
whether this expansion was due to injury-induced proliferation
by resecting sciatic nerves and injecting EdU 2 days post-injury.
Nine
days
post-injury,
Pdgfra-EGFP-positive,
5-ethynyl-20-
deoxyuridine (EdU)-positive cells comprised 13.3% ± 1.1%
and 12.6% ± 4.8% of total Pdgfra-EGFP-positive cells in the en-
doneurium and epi-perineurium, respectively (n = 5) (Figure 1H).
Most double-labeled cells were in the endoneurium (67.8% ±
4.4%, n = 5). By contrast, uninjured contralateral nerves con-
tained no Pdgfra-EGFP-positive, EdU-positive cells (n = 5).
Thus, Pdgfra-expressing nerve mesenchymal cells proliferate
and expand following injury.
Single-Cell Transcriptional Proﬁling Identiﬁes Multiple
Cell Types in the Injured Nerve
To characterize nerve mesenchymal cells, we performed high-
throughput, droplet-based single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-
seq). We resected adult sciatic nerves, isolated distal nerves
9 days later, and used Drop-seq to sequence 4,300 single-cell
transcriptomes to an average depth of more than 70,000 reads
per cell, as conﬁrmed by knee-plot histograms of the cumulative
fraction of total reads contributed by each cell. The average
numbers of genes and transcripts, respectively, were (± SD)
1,138 ± 968 and 2,526 ± 3,078 per cell.
We analyzed these single-cell transcriptomes using a pipeline
that incorporates extensive low-level data quality analysis with
visualization and clustering methods, as described previously
(Yuzwa et al., 2017). This resulted in 3,599 single-cell transcrip-
tomes for further analysis. We removed genes seen in 3 or fewer
cells, normalized the data, and, using genes with high variance,
computed principal components for projecting cells in two dimen-
sions using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE).
To identify distinct cell types, we performed clustering using the
shared nearest neighbors-cliq (SNN-cliq) varying resolution pa-
rameters until differentially expressed genes in each cluster
reached a lower limit of 10 (p < 0.01 FWER, family-wise error rate).
This analysis resulted in 32 cell clusters (Figure 1I). To deter-
mine their identities, we overlaid cells in the t-SNEs with well-
characterized marker genes, showing relative levels of expres-
sion as a color gradient. This approach (Figures 1I–1L and
S1G–S1O) identiﬁed endothelial cells expressing Pecam1/
Cd31, Plvap, and Esam (clusters 9, 11, 16, and 19); Schwann
lineage cells expressing Ngfr/p75 and Sox10 (clusters 8, 14,
15, and 24); mast cells expressing Mcpt1, Mcpt4, Kit, and
Itgb7 (cluster 32); B cells expressing Bank1, Cd19, and Ms4a1
(clusters 4, 13, and 27), T cells expressing Cd3e, Cd3g, Cxcr6,
and Trac (clusters 18 and 22), natural killer (NK) cells expressing
Ncr1, Nkg7, and Klrk1 (cluster 30); and macrophages or mono-
cytes expressing Aif1/Iba1, Cd68, and, for macrophages,
Emr1/F4-80 (clusters 2, 6, 23, and 31).
The remaining clusters included two groups of mesenchymal
cells (Figure 1I). One group (clusters 3 and 25) expressed Pdgfrb
Figure 1. Characterization of Pdgfra-Positive Mesenchymal Cells in the Injured Sciatic Nerve
(A) Schematic of a peripheral nerve. Not shown are unmyelinated axons in the endoneurium. Unless otherwise noted, all images are of sciatic nerves in this
longitudinal orientation.
(B–E) Uninjured (B and C) and 9-day post-axotomy (D and E) PdgfraEGFP/+ nerves, analyzed for EGFP (green) and PDGFRa (red, B and D) or CD34 (magenta, C and
E) immunoreactivity. Boxed areas are shown on the right.
(F) Scatterplot showing the density of Pdgfra-EGFP-positive endoneurial cells in uninjured versus injured nerves, indicating the mean ± SEM. **p < 0.01 (n = 3).
(G) 9-day post-axotomy PdgfraEGFP/+ nerve stump analyzed for EGFP (green). The inset shows the boxed region.
(H) 9-day post-axotomy nerve from a PdgfraEGFP/+ mouse injected with EdU 7 days earlier, analyzed for EGFP (green) and EdU (red). The inset shows the
boxed area.
(I–L) scRNA-seq analysis of 9-day post-axotomy distal nerves. (I) shows t-SNE visualizations of all cell clusters, identiﬁed by colors and associated numbers.
(J)–(L) show t-SNEs overlaid with the mesenchymal genes (J) Pdgfra, (K) Pdgfrb, and (L) Des. Cells are color-coded according to gene expression level, as in the
color keys.
(M) t-SNE of cell clusters generated by reanalysis of Pdgfra-positive mesenchymal cell clusters in (I), identiﬁed by colors and associated numbers. Predicted cell
types and relative proportions are shown.
(N) t-SNE showing the cell cycle status of the cells in (M), predicted by Cyclone (yellow, G1; green, S; purple, G2 and M).
(O) Dendrogram showing hierarchical clustering of the cell clusters in (M) based on the top 100 differentially regulated genes per cluster relative to all other clusters
(p < 0.01, FWER). Also shown are differentially expressed (DE) gene numbers per cluster.
(P) t-SNEs overlaid with genes enriched in clusters 2 and 5 (Sox9, Sox5, Alpl, Etv1, Col2a1, and Wif1), with expression levels coded as in color keys.
The low-magniﬁcation images in (B), (D), (G), and (H) are tiled and stitched. Images also show Hoechst 33258 counterstaining (blue), and arrowheads
denote double-labeled cells. Epi, epineurium; Peri, perineurium; Endo, endoneurium. Scale bars, 100 mm (B, D, G, and H) and 25 mm (C, E, and insets). See also
Figures S1 and S2.
242
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019

A
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
B
C
D
Figure 2. scRNA-Seq Analysis Identiﬁes Distinct Pdgfra-Positive Injured Nerve Mesenchymal Populations
(A–D) t-SNEs of Pdgfra-positive 9-day post-axotomy sciatic nerve mesenchymal cell clusters overlaid with genes enriched in (A) clusters 1 and 3 (Dlk1/Pref-1,
Tnc, and Plagl1), (B) cluster 8 (Slc2a1/Glut1, Itgb4, Msln, and Lmo7), and (C) both clusters 4 and 7 (Pcolce2 and Ly6c1) or (D) either clusters 4 or 7 (Comp, Inmt,
and Cxcl13). Color-coding denotes expression levels as in the color keys, with numbers as in Figure 1M.
(E–N) Analysis of 9-day post-axotomy (E–J) or uninjured (K–N) PdgfraEGFP/+ sciatic nerve sections.
(E and F) Injured nerve analyzed for EGFP (green) and immunostained for ALPL (white) and Sox9 (E, red) or Sox5 (F, red). Boxed regions are shown to the right.
(G) Confocal images of the injured endoneurium analyzed for EGFP (green) and hybridized to probes for Col2a1 (left) or Col9a2 (right) mRNAs (red dots).
(legend continued on next page)
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019
243

but not Pdgfra, as well as vasculature-associated smooth mus-
cle and pericyte markers such as Desmin, Mylk, Acta2, and Rgs5
(Figures 1J–1L and S1H). The second group (clusters 1, 5, 7, 10,
12, 17, 20, 21, 26, 28, and 29) included mesenchymal cells ex-
pressing Pdgfra and Pdgfrb and high levels of genes like
Col1a1 and Fn1 (Figures 1I–1K and S1G).
Analysis of Injured Nerve Pdgfra-Positive Cells
Identiﬁes Transcriptomically Distinct Mesenchymal Cell
Types, Including Precursors
To better characterize the injured nerve mesenchymal cells, we
extracted raw single-cell transcriptomes for cells in the Pdgfra-
positive clusters (1, 5, 7, 10, 12, 17, 20, 21, 26, 28, and 29;
1,227 cells in total) and reanalyzed them using the same
approach with a lower limit of 20 differentially expressed genes.
This resulted in 8 Pdgfra-positive cell clusters, all expressing the
mesenchymal genes Col1a1, Fn1, P4hb, Cd44, Sparc, Prrx2,
Cd34, and Thy1 (Figures 1M and S1P). Of these, cluster 6 was
comprised of proliferating cells, as predicted by Cyclone (Fig-
ure 1N; 55% in G2 and M or S phase; Scialdone et al., 2015)
and by expression of cell-cycle genes like Mki67 (67% of cells)
and Top2a (70%) (Figure S1Q).
We next performed differential gene expression analysis
comparing each individual cluster with the average of all other
clusters. Hierarchical clustering using the top 100 differentially
expressed genes per cluster (Figure 1O) identiﬁed two distinct
groups, one involving clusters 1, 3, and 6 and the other clusters
2 and 5. Clusters 4 and 7 comprised a third, more divergent
group, and cluster 8 was distinct from all of the others. To
understand these groups, we combined the differential gene
expression analysis (Figure S2A) with t-SNE overlays. This
analysis (Figures 1P and S2B) showed that clusters 2 and 5
expressed many genes associated with embryonic mesen-
chymal precursors, such as the transcription factors Sox5,
Sox6, Sox8, Foxc2, Etv1, Etv4, Meox1, Etv5, and Foxd2 (21%,
6%, 14%, 21%, 31%, 14%, 31%, 14%, and 17% of cells in
cluster 2). They also expressed Sox9 and Osr2 (57% and
52%), although these were more broadly expressed in other
clusters. Clusters 2 and 5 were also enriched for precursor
cell collagen genes like Col2a1, Col9a2, Col11a1, Col26a1,
and Col28a1 (27%, 14%, 66%, 82%, and 84% in cluster 2)
and genes associated with mesenchymal stem cells and/or
the osteo-chondrogenic lineage, such as Nt5e/CD73, Alpl,
Bmp7, A2m, Aldh1a2, Ccl9, Dusp6, Parm1, Spry4, Scube1,
and Wif1 (51%, 24%, 27%, 44%, 26%, 83%, 56%, 45%,
22%, 32%, and 89% of cells in cluster 2). Correlation analysis
conﬁrmed that clusters 2 and 5 were very similar (rho = 0.94).
A similar analysis showed that clusters 1 and 3 were enriched
for several genes associated with mesenchymal cell differentia-
tion (Figures 2A and S2C). These included genes important for
preadipocytes
and/or
osteochondroprogenitors,
including
Dlk1/Pref-1, Mest, Bmpr1b, Cilp, and the transcription factors
Plagl1 and Runx2 (52%, 92%, 11%, 74%, 67%, and 23% of
cluster 1 cells). Clusters 1 and 3 were also enriched for Tnc
and Ptn (70% and 75% in cluster 1), and some cells expressed
Sox9 and Osr2 (25% and 17%). All of these genes were
expressed in proliferative cluster 6 cells, consistent with the
hierarchical clustering (Figure 1O) and with correlation analyses
(rho R 0.94 for all comparisons between clusters 1, 3, and 6).
Thus, clusters 1, 3, and 6 are enriched for differentiating mesen-
chymal cell genes, whereas clusters 2 and 5 express genes char-
acteristic of earlier, less-differentiated mesenchymal precursors.
A similar analysis showed that the distinctive cells in cluster 8
were likely perineurial cells (Figures 2B and S2D). They ex-
pressed known perineurial genes like Slc2a1/Glut1, the tight
junction genes Tjp1/ZO-1 and Tjp2/ZO-2, the desmosome pro-
tein Perp, and integrins Itgb4 and Itga6 (68%, 48%, 28%,
42%, 57%, and 72% of cells). They also expressed other highly
speciﬁc genes, including the basement membrane genes Itga7,
Col4a3, Col4a4, and Lama5 (51%, 9%, 14%, and 22%) and
Ntng1, Casq2, Sfrp5, Krt19, Mpz12, Msln, and Lmo7 (42%,
49%, 98%, 45%, 49%, 54%, and 42%).
By contrast, clusters 4 and 7 were highly enriched for connec-
tive tissue-associated genes (Figures 2C, 2D, and S2E) such as
Gsn (95% and 100%), Ly6c1 (80% and 55%), Dpt (91% and
71%), and Pcolce2 (47% and 58%), suggesting that they might
be epineurial cells. However, these clusters were also somewhat
distinct, as shown by the hierarchical clustering (Figure 1O) and
correlation analysis (rho = 0.91). Cluster 7 was enriched for the
osteochondrogenesis genes Comp, Bmp4, and Gpnmb/osteoac-
tivin (51%, 18%, and 46%) and for the tissue ﬁbroblast genes
Inmt, Clec11a, Cfh, Ogn, Fbln7, Fmod, and Crispld2 (62%, 66%,
77%, 94%, 57%, 35%, and 54%). Cluster 4 was instead enriched
for stromal ﬁbroblast and proﬁbrotic genes like Cxcl13, Dpp4/
Cd26, Cd55, and Adamts5 (25%, 28%, 36%, and 58%).
We performed two analyses to ensure the validity of our
computational clustering. First, to validate each cell’s cluster
membership, we trained a random forest classiﬁcation model
using a subset of cells from the total injured nerve dataset (the
data in Figure 1I) and then predicted cluster membership for
the remaining cells. In this analysis, 80.9% ± 1.5% single-cell
transcriptomes
were
reclassiﬁed
to
their
original
cluster,
17.6% ± 1.5% to a neighboring cluster of the same cell type
(e.g., a Schwann cell reclassiﬁed into a neighboring Schwann
cell cluster), and only 1.5% ± 0.4% were reclassiﬁed to clusters
containing a different cell type. Thus, the vast majority (98.5%) of
cells were appropriately classiﬁed by our pipeline.
Second, we performed Drop-seq analysis of the 9-day injured
sciatic nerve using ﬂow cytometry instead of myelin beads to
remove debris. We combined the raw single-cell transcriptomes
of cells puriﬁed both ways and reanalyzed the mixed data. We
identiﬁed 23 clusters containing the same cell types as in our
original analysis (compare Figure S2F with Figure 1I). Impor-
tantly, cells from both preparations were closely mingled (Fig-
ure S2G), although immune cells were relatively reduced in the
ﬂow-sorted preparation. Thus, batch variation was low.
(H–J) Injured nerves analyzed for EGFP (green) and immunostained for ITGB4 (white, H), Dlk1 (red, I) or Ly6C (red, J). The low-magniﬁcation image in (I) is tiled and
stitched, and the inset shows the boxed region. The asterisks in (J) denote Ly6C-positive, EGFP-negative cells, likely immune cells.
(K–N) Uninjured nerves analyzed for EGFP (green) and immunostained for ITGB4 (K, white), Ly6C (L, red), Sox9 and ALPL (M; red and white, respectively), or
Dlk1/Pref-1 (N, white). Images also show Hoechst 33258 (blue), and arrowheads denote single-, double-, or triple-positive cells, as relevant.
Scale bars, 100 mm (E, F, and I), 25 mm (H and J–N, and high-magniﬁcation regions or insets), and 5 mm (G). See also Figure S2.
244
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019

A
B
C
D
E
F
H
G
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
(legend on next page)
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019
245

Mesenchymal Precursor-like Cells Are Located within
the Injured Nerve Endoneurium
We asked about the location of the clusters 2 and 5 mesenchymal
precursor-like cells by immunostaining 9 day post-axotomy
PdgfraEGFP/+ distal sciatic nerves for Sox5 and ALPL (alkaline
phosphatase, liver/bone/kidney isozyme), which were speciﬁc
to clusters 2 and 5, andforSox9, whichis somewhat more broadly
expressed (Figures 2E and 2F). Almost all Pdgfra-EGFP-positive
endoneurial cells were positive for nuclear Sox9 and cytoplasmic
ALPL (87.7% ± 1.8% and 91.3% ± 1.5%, respectively; n = 3).
Some EGFP-positive, ALPL-positive cells also expressed Sox5.
By contrast, very few Pdgfra-EGFP-positive epi-perineurial
cells expressed ALPL (2.1% ± 0.4%, n = 3), and only 13.5% ±
1.4% expressed Sox9 (n = 3). We also performed single-molecule
ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for two highly enriched
clusters 2 and 5 collagen mRNAs, Col2a1 and Col9a2, using
Sox9 mRNA as a positive control (Figures 2G, S2H, and S2I).
As predicted by the immunostaining, Pdgfra-EGFP-positive
endoneurial cells expressed Sox9 mRNA. A similar pattern of
positive cells was observed for Col2a1 and Col9a2 mRNAs but
not for negative control probes. Thus, clusters 2 and 5 cells are
Pdgfra-positive endoneurial mesenchymal cells.
We also localized the other nerve mesenchymal populations by
immunostaining 9-day post-axotomy PdgfraEGFP/+ distal sciatic
nerves for Slc2a1/Glut1 and ITGB4 (cluster 8), Dlk1/Pref-1 (clus-
ters 1, 3, and 6), and Ly6C (clusters 4 and 7). This analysis (Figures
2H–2J, S3A, and S3C) showed that Slc2a1/Glut1 and ITGB4 were
speciﬁcally localized to the perineurium, whereas immunodetect-
able Dlk1/Pref-1 was localized to Pdgfra-EGFP-positive, Sox9-
positive cells at the injured nerve stump and adjacent nerve
sheath. By contrast, Ly6C was detectable in the epineurial con-
nective tissue and in Pdgfra-EGFP-positive cells in that compart-
ment. As predicted by scRNA-seq (Figure S3D), Ly6C was also
detected in endothelial cells and in round Pdgfra-EGFP-negative
cells, presumably immune cells. Thus, the injured nerve contains
four Pdgfra-expressing mesenchymal populations, cluster 4/7
epineurial cells, cluster 8 perineurial cells, clusters 1 and 3 differ-
entiating nerve stump cells, as well as clusters 2 and 5 precursor-
like endoneurial cells (as in Figure 1M).
scRNA-Seq Characterization of the Uninjured
Sciatic Nerve
To determine whether the injured nerve mesenchymal cells
derive from resident cells in the uninjured nerve, we performed
Drop-seq on the control sciatic nerve. We prepared cells as for
the injured nerve and sequenced 2,000 cells to an average depth
of more than 70,000 reads per cell, obtaining 1,027 ± 588 and
2,257 ± 2,855 average detected genes and transcripts per cell,
respectively. We analyzed the data using the same parameters
as for the injured nerve and identiﬁed clusters containing
Pdgfra-positive mesenchymal cells. We then extracted the raw
single-cell transcriptomes for cells in the Pdgfra-positive clusters
(854 in total) and reanalyzed them with a lower limit of 10 differ-
entially expressed genes.
This analysis (Figure 3A) identiﬁed 5 clusters of uninjured nerve
Pdgfra-positive cells, all containing cells expressing Pdgfrb,
Col1a1, Fn1, Cd34, Thy1, P4hb, Cd44, and Prrx2 (Figures 3B
and S3E). Almost no cells were predicted to be dividing based
on expression of cell cycle genes like Top2a (Figure S3F), consis-
tent with the EdU analysis. To identify these cells, we performed
differential gene expression (Figure S3G) and t-SNE overlays.
This analysis showed that cluster 5 contained perineurial cells
expressing Slc2a1/Glut1, Msln, Itga7, Itga6, Itgb4, Casq2,
Col4a3, Krt19, Lmo7, Sfrp5, and Ntng1 (72%, 46%, 54%,
68%, 82%, 48%, 12%, 42%, 42%, 95%, and 68%) (Figures
3C and S3H). We conﬁrmed that these were perineurial cells
by immunostaining the uninjured PdgfraEGFP/+ sciatic nerve for
ITGB4 and Slc2a1/Glut1 (Figures 2K and S3B).
A similar analysis (Figures 3D and S3I) showed that the closely
grouped clusters 2 and 4 included epineurial cells. Both clusters
were highly enriched for Dpt, Pcolce2, and Ly6c1 (98%, 85%,
and 90% for cluster 4) but were somewhat distinct because clus-
ter 2 was speciﬁcally enriched in Comp, Bmp4, Gpnmb/osteoac-
tivin, Clec11a, Cfh, Ogn, Fbln7, Fmod, and Crispld2 (41%, 28%,
26%, 52%, 59%, 97%, 27%, 24%, and 52%), whereas cluster 4
was instead enriched for Cxcl13, Dpp4/Cd26, Cd55, Adamts5,
and Cd248 (42%, 63%, 53%, 67%, and 86%). Ly6C immuno-
staining conﬁrmed that these cells were located in the uninjured
epineurium (Figure 2L).
The remaining closely grouped clusters 1 and 3 included en-
doneurial cells (Figures 3E and S3J). As for the injured nerve,
clusters 1 and 3 cells expressed the precursor-associated tran-
scription factors Sox5, Sox6, Sox8, Foxc2, Etv1, Etv4, Meox1,
Osr2, and Sox9 (13%, 6%, 17%, 10%, 24%, 8%, 12%, 62%,
and 54% for cluster 1) and were enriched for Col2a1, Col9a2,
Col11a1, Col26a1, Col28a1 Nt5e/CD73, Alpl, Bmp7, A2m,
Ccl9, Dusp6, Parm1, and Spry4 (16%, 17%, 16%, 27%, 17%,
9%, 13%, 49%, 15%, 33%, 11%, and 22% for cluster 1).
Figure 3. scRNA-Seq Analysis of Pdgfra-Positive Mesenchymal Cells in the Control versus Injured Nerve
(A–E) scRNA-seq analysis was performed on uninjured adult sciatic nerves, and raw transcriptomes of Pdgfra-positive cluster cells were extracted and reanalyzed.
(A) t-SNE of resultant cell clusters, with colors and numbers denoting distinct clusters. Also shown are proportions of predicted cell types.
(B–E) t-SNEs overlaid for expression of (B) Pdgfra, Pdgfrb, and Col1a1; (C) the perineurial gene Itgb4; (D) the epineurial genes Pcolce2, Ly6c1, Comp, and Cxcl13;
and (E) the endoneurial genes Sox9, Etv1, Col26a1, and Osr2. Expression levels are indicated according to the color keys.
(F–O) Raw transcriptomes of Pdgfra-positive cluster cells from 9-day post-axotomy and control nerves (as in Figure 1M and A) were combined and reanalyzed.
(F and G) t-SNE of resultant cell clusters. In (F), colors and numbers represent transcriptionally distinct clusters, with cell types and proportions shown. In (G), cells
are color-coded to indicate their origin in control (pink) or injured (blue) nerves.
(H) Heatmap of the top ﬁve differentially upregulated genes (p < 0.01, FWER) per cluster relative to all other clusters. Also shown are the hierarchical clustering of
cell clusters (as labeled in F) and DE gene numbers.
(I) t-SNE showing the cell cycle status predicted by Cyclone (yellow, G1; green, S; purple, G2 and M).
(J–O) t-SNEs overlaid with (J) the perineurial genes Slc2a1/Glut1 and Itgb4; (K) the epineurial genes Pcolce2, Comp, and Cxcl13; (L) Dlk1/Pref-1 and Tnc; and
(M–O) the endoneurial genes enriched in (M) both datasets (Col2a1, Meox1, Dusp6, Sox5, A2m, and Parm1), and either (N) the injured endoneurial cells (Ccl9 and
Wif1) or (O) the uninjured endoneurial cells (Enpp2 and Myoc). Expression levels are indicated according to the color keys.
See also Figure S3.
246
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
(legend on next page)
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019
247

However, some injured nerve endoneurial cell genes like Wif1
were expressed in very few uninjured nerve cells (Figure S3J).
We conﬁrmed that these were endoneurial cells by immunostain-
ing control PdgfraEGFP/+ sciatic nerves for Sox9 and ALPL (Fig-
ure 2M). In total, 48.2% ± 9.3% and 35.3% ± 5.8% of Pdgfra-
EGFP endoneurial cells expressed detectable Sox9 and ALPL,
respectively (n = 3). By contrast, almost no epi-perineurial
Pdgfra-EGFP-positive cells expressed ALPL (0.5% ± 0.5%),
and only 9.6% ± 0.6% expressed Sox9 (n = 3). Intriguingly,
some endoneurial cells also expressed Dlk1/Pref-1 (Figure 2N),
which, in the injured nerve, was expressed in nerve stump cells.
We ensured the accuracy of the mesenchymal cell clustering
by training a random forest classiﬁcation model using a subset
of cells from the Pdgfra-positive cell dataset (the data in Fig-
ure 3A) and then predicting cluster membership for the remaining
cells. In total, 92.5% ± 1.8% of single-cell transcriptomes were
reclassiﬁed to their original cluster, 7.1% ± 1.8% to a neigh-
boring cluster of the same group (clusters 2 and 4, or clusters
1 and 3 were considered groups), and only 0.4% ± 0.4% were
reclassiﬁed to a different mesenchymal cell type cluster. Thus,
essentially all cells (99.6%) were appropriately classiﬁed.
Transcriptional Proﬁling Identiﬁes Similarities and
Differences between Control and Injured Nerve
Mesenchymal Cells
To ﬁnd out whether injury alters nerve mesenchymal cells, we
combined the raw single-cell transcriptomes from control and
injured nerve Pdgfra-positive clusters and reanalyzed them
together. This combined analysis (Figures 3F and 3G) identiﬁed
7 Pdgfra-positive cell clusters that expressed Col1a1, Fn1,
P4hb, and Sparc. Three clusters (3, 5, and 6) included closely
mingled control and injured nerve cells, one cluster (2) con-
tained only control nerve cells, and three (1, 4, and 7) con-
tained almost exclusively injured nerve cells.
Differential gene expression analysis (Figure 3H) together
with t-SNE overlays showed that mixed cluster 6 included con-
trol and injured perineurial cells expressing Casq2, Col4a3,
Col4a4, Itga6, Itga7, Itgb4, Krt19, Lama5, Lmo7, Lypd2,
Mpzl2, Msln, Ntng1, Perp, Sfrp5, Slc2a1, and Tjp1 (Figure 3J).
The other two mixed cell clusters (3 and 5) included the control
and injured epineurial cells expressing Dpt, Gsn, and Pcolce2,
with cluster 3 enriched for Comp, Bmp4, and Gpnmb/osteoac-
tivin and cluster 5 for Dpp4, Cd55, Adamts5, and Cxcl13 (Fig-
ure 3K). Correlation analyses conﬁrmed the similarities between
control and injured nerve perineurial and epineurial cells (rho R
0.95 in all cases).
The remaining injured nerve mesenchymal cells clustered
independently. Cluster 1 contained the injured nerve stump cells
and cluster 7 the related proliferative cells (Figure 3I) (clusters 1/3
and 6, respectively, in Figure 1M), identiﬁed by their expression
of Dlk1/Pref-1, Mest, Plagl1, Runx2, Bmpr1b, Cilp, Tnc, and
Ptn (Figure 3L). There was no similar cluster in the control nerve,
indicating that a transcriptionally distinct nerve stump mesen-
chymal population appears after injury.
The other injured nerve-only cluster (4) contained endoneurial
cells. These clustered away from the control nerve endoneurial
cells, which were found in cluster 2 (Figures 3F and 3G). Both
endoneurial clusters were highly enriched for genes like
Col2a1, Meox1, Dusp6, Sox5, A2m, and Parm1 (Figure 3M).
However, differential gene expression identiﬁed many genes
upregulated in the injured endoneurial cells, including Aldh1a2,
C3, Ccl2, Ccl9, Cfh, Col11a1, Col26a1, Col28a1, Cthrc1, Inhbb,
Kng2, and Wif1 (Figure 3N). Conversely, some connective tissue-
associated genes were downregulated by injury, including
Bmp4, Clec3b, Crispld2, Enpp2, and Myoc (Figure 3O).
We validated the differences between control and injured cells
using the mutual nearest neighbors batch effect correction
method (Haghverdi et al., 2018). In the corrected dataset (Fig-
ures S3K and S3L), control and injured nerve perineurial and
epineurial cells were co-clustered, whereas injured and control
endoneurial cells clustered away from each other. Thus, endo-
neurial cells are transcriptionally altered by nerve injury, perhaps
becoming more precursor-like.
Nerve Mesenchymal Cells Differentiate Down the
Osteogenic Lineage in Culture and In Vivo
We tested the idea that nerves contain mesenchymal precursor-
like cells by performing differentiation assays. We cultured and
expanded postnatal day 3 (P3)–P5 sciatic nerve cells and plated
them under osteogenic, adipogenic, or chondrogenic condi-
tions. After 14–21 days we stained them, as appropriate, with
alizarin red S, oil red O, or Alcian blue (Figures 4A–4C). This anal-
ysis identiﬁed many alizarin red-positive mineralized nodules
under osteogenic conditions, large cells with oil red O-positive
Figure 4. Pdgfra-Positive Nerve Mesenchymal Cells Can Differentiate into Non-nerve Mesenchymal Cells in Culture and In Vivo
(A–C) Differentiation assays with dissociated P3–P5 sciatic nerve cells cultured for 14 (C) or 21 (A and B) days under osteogenic (A), adipogenic (B), or
chondrogenic (C) conditions.
(A) Alizarin red S staining (red) with mineralized nodules circled (n = 5).
(B) Oil red O staining to mark lipid droplets (orange; the blue counterstain is hematoxylin; n = 3).
(C) Alcian blue staining of a chondrogenic micromass section (n = 3).
(D) P3–P5 PdgfraCreERT;R26-LSL-TdT nerve cells sorted for TdT and cultured under osteogenic conditions for 14 days, showing TdT-positive cells (top, red),
and alizarin red S staining of a mineralized nodule (bottom, red; the image is tiled and stitched) in the same culture.
(E–H) NOD-SCID mice received femur scratch injuries immediately before transplantation of PdgfraCreERT;R26-LSL-TdT (E–G) or PdgfraEGFP/+ (H) nerve seg-
ments at the injury sites and were analyzed 2 weeks later.
(E–G) Sections analyzed for PdgfraCreERT-TdT (red) and immunostained for Thy1 (white, E and F) and ALPL (green, E and F) or osteocalcin (white, G).
(H) Section analyzed for Pdgfra-EGFP (green) and osterix/Sp7 immunoreactivity (red).
(I) Endoneurium of a Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT 9-day post-axotomy nerve analyzed for TdT (red) and Sox9 immunoreactivity (green).
(J) Cells cultured from Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT 3-day post-axotomy nerves analyzed for TdT (red) and immunostained for a-SMA (white) and Sox9 (green).
The low-magniﬁcation image in (E) is tiled and stitched, and the boxed region is shown in (F). The boxed region in (H) is shown on the right. The images in (E)–(J)
show Hoechst 33258 (blue), and arrowheads denote double- or triple-labeled cells, as relevant. Scale bars, 100 mm (A, D, and E), 50 mm (B and C), and 25 mm (F–J
and insets). See also Figure S4.
248
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019

A
I
D
B
C
E
F
J
G
H
(legend on next page)
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019
249

droplets under adipogenic conditions, and very large Alcian
blue-positive masses under chondrogenic conditions (Figures
4A–4C). Under osteogenic conditions, extracellular nodules
and adjacent cells were immunoreactive for the extracellular
bone protein osteocalcin, and under chondrogenic conditions,
nodule cells were immunoreactive for cartilage-associated
type II collagen (Figures S4A and S4B). When osteogenic cul-
tures were prepared from PdgfraEGFP/+ nerve cells, 87.1% ±
1.8% of the cells were EGFP-positive (n = 3) (Figure S4C). We
obtained similar results with osteogenic adult nerve cell cultures
(Figure S4D).
We conﬁrmed the mesenchymal origin of cells in these assays
by isolating P3–P5 sciatic nerve cells from PdgfraCreERT;R26-
LSL-TdT mice (Kang et al., 2010) and adding 4-hydroxytamoxi-
fen to induce recombination and expression of TdT (TdTomato)
in Pdgfra-expressing mesenchymal cells. We sorted and
expanded the PdgfraCreERT-TdT-positive cells and plated
them under osteogenic conditions. 14 days later, cells were
TdT-positive, as predicted, and there were many alizarin red-
positive nodules (Figure 4D). Similar osteogenic differentiation
was not seen with the TdT-negative cells.
Based on these ﬁndings, we asked whether transplanted
nerves could contribute cells for bone repair. We treated 4- to
8-week-old PdgfraCreERT;R26-LSL-TdT mice with tamoxifen
for 4 days. 7 days later, we isolated genetically tagged sciatic
nerve segments and transplanted them into non-obese diabetic
(NOD)-severe combined immunodeﬁciency (SCID) mice next to
a fresh femur periosteal bone scratch injury (Zhang et al., 2018).
Analysis 2 weeks later identiﬁed the transplanted nerve, which
contained
many
PdgfraCreERT-TdT-positive,
Thy1-positive
cells adjacent to the osteogenic bone repair callus (Figure 4E).
This Thy1-negative repair callus contained newly generated
woven bone that was positive for osteocalcin and the osteogen-
esis marker protein ALPL (Figures 4E–4G). Importantly, the
repair callus contained nerve-derived PdgfraCreERT-TdT-posi-
tive, ALPL-positive, Thy1-negative cells mingled with and indis-
tinguishable from neighboring osteogenic cells (Figures 4E and
4F). Similar results were obtained with PdgfraEGFP/+ nerve trans-
plants (Figures 4H, S4E, and S4F). Pdgfra-EGFP-positive cells
were located within the osteocalcin-positive repair callus, and
these were positive for the osteoblast transcription factor
Sp7/osterix but not for p75. Thus, nerve mesenchymal cells
can differentiate down the osteogenic lineage in vivo.
Nerve-Derived Endoneurial Cells Originate from the
Neural Crest
To ﬁnd out whether nerve mesenchymal cells contribute to other
mesenchymal tissues, we took advantage of the ﬁnding that
many endoneurial mesenchymal cells are neural crest-derived
(Joseph et al., 2004), whereas other mesenchymal tissues
outside of the cranium are mesoderm-derived. We used
Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT mice (Danielian et al., 1998) to conﬁrm
the neural crest origin of endoneurial mesenchymal cells. In
these mice, Wnt1Cre is induced very early in the embryonic neu-
ral crest lineage, and, thus, most neural crest-derived progeny
are TdT-positive. Initially, we analyzed the 9-day post-axotomy
Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT distal sciatic nerve. Within the endoneu-
rium, but not in the epineurium or perineurium, 65% ± 3% (n = 3)
of Sox9-positive mesenchymal cells were Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive
and also expressed CD34 (Figures 4I and S4G). We also cultured
cells from injured adult Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT nerves. Four
days post-plating, many Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive cells had a
distinctive mesenchymal morphology and were positive for
Sox9, CD34, and/or alpha-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) (Fig-
ures 4J and S4H). Thus, as described previously (Joseph et al.,
2004), most endoneurial mesenchymal cells are neural crest-
derived.
Neural Crest-Derived Cells Contribute to Mesenchymal
Blastema Formation in the Regenerating Adult Digit Tip
To ﬁnd out whether neural crest-derived mesenchymal cells
contribute to tissue repair, we studied adult mouse distal digit
tip regeneration, a paradigm where the bone, dermis, and nail
bed mesenchyme regenerate in a nerve-dependent fashion
(Mohammad and Neufeld, 2000; Simkin et al., 2013; Rinkevich
et al., 2014; Johnston et al., 2016). We ﬁrst characterized
uninjured adult Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT digit tips, identifying
nerves by immunostaining for p75, which is present on Schwann
cells and axons. This analysis (Figures 5A, 5B, S5A, and S5B)
showed that 96.2% ± 1.3% (n = 3) of Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive digit
tip cells, including those in the bone marrow stroma, were asso-
ciated with p75-positive nerves and sensory end-organs. The
Figure 5. Neural Crest Mesenchymal Cells Contribute to Digit Tip Blastema Formation and Bone Regeneration
(A) Uninjured adult Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT digit tip analyzed for TdT (red) and p75 immunoreactivity (green). The inset shows the boxed region. Arrows and
arrowheads denote TdT-positive cells positive or negative for p75, respectively.
(B and C) Uninjured (B) or 14 DPA (C) Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT;PdgfraEGFP/+ digit tips analyzed for Pdgfra-EGFP (green), Wnt1Cre-TdT (red), and p75 immuno-
reactivity (white). Arrows and arrowheads denote TdT-positive cells expressing p75 or EGFP, respectively. The boxed region is shown on the right.
(D) Three-dimensional light-sheet projections of whole-mounted, CLARITY-cleared uninjured and 14 DPA Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT digits (red shows
Wnt1Cre-TdT).
(E) 14 DPA Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT digit tip analyzed for TdT (red) and immunostained for osteocalcin (white) and osterix/Sp7 (green). The boxed region is shown
on the right. Arrowheads denote TdT and Sp7/osterix double-positive cells.
(F–H) 28 DPA Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT digit tips analyzed for TdT (red) and immunostained for p75 (F and H, green), osteocalcin (G, white), or ALPL (H, white). The
boxed regions are shown on the right. Arrows and arrowheads denote TdT single- or double-positive cells, respectively. The epithelial and nail immunoreactivity in
(F) and (G) is background.
(I) Scatterplot showing the percentage of bone matrix lacunae occupied by Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive cells in uninjured versus 28 DPA digit tips. Shown are mean and
SEM. **p < 0.001 (n = 6 digits each).
(J) 84 DPA Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT digit tip, analyzed for TdT (red) and p75 immunoreactivity (green). The boxed region is shown on the right. Arrows and
arrowheads denote TdT-positive cells positive or negative for p75, respectively.
In all images, solid and dashed lines demarcate bone matrix and regenerated tissue exclusive of the epithelium, respectively. The low-magniﬁcation images in (A),
(C), (F), (G), and (J) are tiled and stitched. All images except in (D) show Hoechst 33258 (blue). Scale bars, 100 mm (A, C, D, F, G, and J) and 25 mm (B, E, H, and
insets). See also Figure S5 and Videos S1, S2, S3, and S4.
250
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019

K
A
B
C
D
G
H
F
E
I
J
Figure 6. Evidence that Neural Crest Blastema Mesenchymal Cells Derive from Nerves
(A) qRT-PCR analysis of Wnt1 mRNA in uninjured and 14 DPA digit tips. Embryonic day 12 (E12) murine brain and spine are positive controls. ***p < 0.0001
(n = 3–4). Error bars indicate SEM.
(B–F) Uninjured (B), 14 DPA (C and D), or 28 DPA (E and F) DhhCre;R26-LSL-TdT;PdgfraEGFP/+ digit tips analyzed for Pdgfra-EGFP (green) and DhhCre-TdT (red)
and immunostained for p75 (B, C, and E, white) or CD31 (D and F, white). The boxed regions are shown on the right. Arrows and arrowheads denote TdT-positive
cells expressing p75 or EGFP, respectively. The empty arrowhead in (F) denotes an EGFP-negative, CD31 and TdT double-positive endothelial cell.
(legend continued on next page)
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019
251

only non-nerve-associated TdT-positive cells were a small pop-
ulation (3.8% ± 1.3%, n = 3) in bone lacunae, likely osteocytes.
These were positive for Pdgfra-EGFP but negative for p75 or
S100b, as were neighboring TdT-negative osteocytes.
We asked about regeneration, amputating adult Wnt1Cre;
R26-LSL-TdT;PdgfraEGFP/+ digit tips. At 14 days post-amputa-
tion (DPA), the time of peak blastema activity (Simkin et al.,
2013), the regenerative blastema was predominantly comprised
of Pdgfra-EGFP-positive mesenchymal cells (Figure 5C), as pub-
lished previously (Johnston et al., 2016). There were two
Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive populations at this time: Schwann lineage
cells positive for TdT, p75, and S100b but negative for Pdgfra-
EGFP, and TdT-positive, Pdgfra-EGFP-positive, p75-negative
mesenchymal cells (Figures 5C and S5C). The latter expressed
stem cell antigen 1 (Sca-1), as did the other TdT-negative,
Pdgfra-EGFP-positive blastema cells (Figure S5D). No Wnt1Cre-
TdT-positive cells were associated with vasculature, which was
CD31-positive and Pdgfra-EGFP-negative (Figure S5E).
This neural crest blastema contribution was substantial
because 21% ± 2% (n = 3) of total Pdgfra-EGFP-positive blas-
tema cells were Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive. CLARITY-based three-
dimensional imaging conﬁrmed this conclusion (Figure 5D;
Videos S1, S2, S3, and S4). In uninjured digit tips, Wnt1Cre-
TdT-positive plantar digital nerves (branches of the sciatic
nerve) provided robust innervation to the nail bed mesen-
chyme, dermis, and bone marrow stroma as well as the digit
skin and foot pad. At 14 DPA, the pattern was similar proximal
to the amputation site, but distally, Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive cells
were found throughout the blastema, and these appeared
to be continuous with the axotomized plantar digital nerve
branches.
Neural Crest-Derived Mesenchymal Cells Contribute to
Digit Tip Bone Regeneration
We next asked whether the neural crest-derived blastema cells
contributed to bone regeneration. At 14 DPA, some Wnt1Cre-
TdT-positive cells expressed Sp7/osterix and were located at
the leading edge of the regenerating, osteocalcin-positive
bone (Figure 5E). By 28 DPA, when bone regeneration is largely
complete but remodeling is still ongoing, 59.5% ± 2.0% of
Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive cells were p75-negative mesenchymal
cells (versus 3.8% ± 1.3% in controls; n = 3 each) (Figure 5F).
Many of these were located in the osteocalcin-positive regener-
ated bone matrix, where they comprised 32% of cells in bone
lacunae (versus 5%–6% in uninjured digits; Figures 5G and 5I).
Others were ALPL-positive and were located adjacent to the re-
generated bone (Figure 5H). The Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive, p75 and
S100b-negative osteocytes were still present at 84 and 168 DPA
(Figures 5J and S5G).
DhhCre-Based Lineage Tracing Also Indicates that
Neural Crest Cells Contribute to Digit Tip Mesenchymal
Regeneration
We obtained four additional lines of evidence supporting the
conclusion that neural crest cells contribute to regeneration.
First, we asked whether the 3.8% of Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive oste-
ocytes in the adult digit tip might expand and account for the
21% of blastema cells that were TdT-positive. To do so, we in-
jected amputated mice with EdU at 13 DPA. One day later, we
analyzed the regenerating digits and, as controls, the contralat-
eral uninjured digits. We found no EdU-positive cells within unin-
jured or regenerating bone lacunae, even those immediately
adjacent to the proliferative, EdU-positive blastema (n = 3 per
group; Figure S5H). Second, we asked whether Wnt1 mRNA
was unexpectedly induced during regeneration. Wnt1 mRNA
was undetectable in control or regenerating adult digit tips by
qRT-PCR or FISH (Figures 6A and S6A). Third, we amputated
digit tips of inducible Wnt1CreERT2;R26-LSL-TdT mice (Zervas
et al., 2004) and injected them with tamoxifen from 10 to 14 DPA.
There were no Wnt1CreERT2-TdT-positive cells within the re-
generating 14 DPA digit tip (Figure S6B).
Fourth, we utilized another neural crest lineage tracing line,
DhhCre mice (Jaegle et al., 2003). When used with a ﬂoxed re-
porter gene, DhhCre labels neural crest-derived nerve cells,
including Schwann cells and endoneurial mesenchymal cells (Jo-
seph et al., 2004). DhhCre also labels some embryonic endothe-
lial cells, but these would not confound our lineage tracing
because endothelial cells do not contribute to digit tip mesen-
chymal regeneration (Rinkevich et al., 2011). Analysis of uninjured
adult DhhCre;R26-LSL-TdT;PdgfraEGFP/+ digit tips (Figures 6B,
S6C, and S6D) showed that almost all DhhCre-TdT-positive cells
were associated with p75 and S100b-positive nerves and sen-
sory end-organs. There were also a small number of DhhCre-
TdT-positive, Pdgfra-EGFP-positive, p75-negative cells in bone
lacunae (3% of total TdT-positive cells) and scattered TdT-pos-
itive, CD31-positive, Pdgfra-EGFP-negative endothelial cells.
By contrast, at 14 DPA, we observed many DhhCre-TdT-
positive, Pdgfra-EGFP-positive, p75-negative, CD31-negative
mesenchymal cells within the regenerative blastema (Figures
6C, 6D, and S6E). At 28 DPA, these DhhCre-TdT-positive
mesenchymal cells were still present in the regenerated mesen-
chyme and within bone lacunae (Figures 6E and 6F). Thus,
similar results were obtained with both the Wnt1Cre and DhhCre
mouse lines.
Neural Crest Blastema Mesenchymal Cells Do Not
Originate from the Adult Schwann Cell Lineage
The Schwann cell lineage is neural crest-derived and generates
cranial mesenchymal cells during development (Kaukua et al.,
(G and H) 14 DPA Sox2CreERT2;R26-LSL-TdT (G) or Sox10CreERT2;R26-LSL-TdT (H) digit tips analyzed for TdT (red) and p75 immunoreactivity (green). The
boxed regions are shown on the right, and arrows denote double-positive cells.
(I–K) Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT nerves were unilaterally resected 10 days prior to digit tip amputation, and at 28 DPA, denervated (J) versus contralateral innervated
(I) regenerated digit tips were analyzed for TdT (red) and p75 immunoreactivity (green). (K) shows the density of TdT-positive, p75-negative cells in regenerated
tissue exclusive of the epithelium (dashed lines), indicating mean and SEM. ***p < 0.0001 (n = 10 digits each). The boxed regions are shown on the right, and
arrows and arrowheads denote TdT-positive cells positive or negative for p75, respectively.
In all images, solid and hatched lines demarcate bone matrix and regenerating tissue exclusive of the epithelium. The low-magniﬁcation images in (B)–(E) and
(G)–(J) are tiled and stitched. All images show Hoechst 33258 counterstaining (blue). Scale bars, 100 mm (B–E and G–J) and 25 mm (F and insets). See also Figures
S6 and S7.
252
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
(legend on next page)
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019
253

2014). We therefore asked whether this lineage might generate
the neural crest blastema cells. To do this, we treated adult
Sox2CreERT2;R26-LSL-TdT mice (Arnold et al., 2011) with
tamoxifen several days before and after amputation because
Sox2 is rapidly induced in Schwann cells following nerve
injury (Johnston et al., 2016). Analysis at 14 DPA (Figure 6G)
identiﬁed many Sox2CreERT2-TdT-positive cells, but these
were all p75-positive, indicating that they had maintained a
Schwann cell phenotype. We then performed similar studies
with Sox10CreERT2;R26-LSL-TdT mice (McKenzie et al., 2014)
because Sox10 is expressed in Schwann but not mesenchymal
lineage adult nerve cells (Figure S1J). We treated mice with
tamoxifen and amputated digit tips 5 days later. In both uninjured
and 14 DPA digit tips, all Sox10CreERT2-TdT-positive digit tip
cells were positive for p75 and S100b (Figures 6H, S6F, and
S6G). Thus, the adult Schwann cell lineage does not generate
blastema mesenchymal cells.
Nerves Are Necessary for the Neural Crest
Mesenchymal Contribution to Digit Tip Regeneration
If neural crest blastema mesenchymal cells originate from
nerves, then this contribution should rely on intact innerva-
tion. To test this prediction, we unilaterally resected adult
Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT sciatic nerves and, 10 days later, ampu-
tated the denervated digit tips. As controls, we amputated
contralateral, normally innervated digits. In agreement with our
previous work (Johnston et al., 2016), we found that 28 DPA
denervated, regenerated digit tips were smaller and contained
very few Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive, p75-positive Schwann cells.
Importantly, the density of TdT-positive, p75-negative blastema
mesenchymal cells was also reduced about 3-fold (Figures
6I–6K, S7A, and S7B).
Nerve-Derived Cells Contribute to Digit Tip
Regeneration and Dermal Repair
To deﬁnitively establish that nerve mesenchymal cells contribute
to tissue repair, we examined two paradigms where nerves are
the only potential donors of neural crest cells. The ﬁrst was peri-
natal digit tip regeneration because, in P9 Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-
TdT;PdgfraEGFP/+ mice, all TdT-positive cells were associated
with nerves (100.0% ± 0.0%, n = 3), with no Wnt1Cre-TdT-
positive cells in bone lacunae (Figure 7A). We therefore ampu-
tated digit tips at P9 and, because regeneration is accelerated
in perinatal mice, analyzed them 14 days later at P23. In unin-
jured P23 digit tips, 100.0% ± 0.0% (n = 3) Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive
cells were associated with p75-positive nerves (Figure 7B). By
contrast, in P23 regenerating digit tips, we observed many
TdT-positive,
Pdgfra-EGFP-positive,
p75-negative
mesen-
chymal cells located within and immediately adjacent to the
regenerating bone (Figure 7C). These comprised 8.9% ± 1.1%
(n = 6) of total TdT-positive digit tip cells. We therefore
conclude that nerve-derived cells contribute to perinatal digit
tip regeneration.
The second paradigm we examined was adult dermal repair
because, in uninjured Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT; PdgfraEGFP/+
back skin, there were no Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive, Pdgfra-EGFP-
positive cells outside of p75-positive nerves (0.0% ± 0.0%,
n = 3; Figure 7D). We therefore performed full-thickness punch
wounds and examined the skin 9 days later, when the dermis
was healed (Johnston et al., 2013). In contrast to uninjured
skin, we observed many Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive, Pdgfra-EGFP-
positive, p75-negative mesenchymal cells (Figure 7E). These
were
intermingled
with
and
indistinguishable
from
other
Pdgfra-EGFP-positive, HSP47-positive dermal mesenchymal
cells (Figure 7F) and comprised 40.9% ± 3.7% of total TdT-
positive cells in the central portion of the healed dermis (n = 3).
We strengthened the conclusion that nerves can contribute
mesenchymal cells for dermal repair by performing transplant
studies. We treated 4- to 8-week-old PdgfraCreERT;R26-LSL-
TdT mice with tamoxifen and, 7 days later, transplanted a genet-
ically tagged sciatic nerve segment into NOD-SCID mice at the
margins of fresh back skin punch wounds. Analysis 15 days later
(Figures 7G, 7H, and S7C) identiﬁed the transplanted Pdgfra-
CreERT-TdT-positive nerves on the margins of the healed
dermis. Importantly, PdgfraCreERT-TdT-positive, p75-negative
cells were also observed in the middle of the healed dermis,
where they were intermingled with host dermal cells and, like
them, were positive for PDGFRa protein and HSP47. Thus,
nerves contain mesenchymal cells that contribute to bone
regeneration and dermal repair.
DISCUSSION
Peripheral nerves are thought to promote mammalian tissue
repair by secretion of paracrine mediators from axon terminals
and Schwann cells. Here we show that injured nerves also
contain resident mesenchymal precursor-like cells that directly
contribute to mesenchymal tissue repair and regeneration.
Based on our ﬁndings, we propose that local tissue and nerve
damage causes dedifferentiation of Schwann cells and expan-
sion of endoneurial precursor-like mesenchymal cells that then
migrate into adjacent injured tissues, where they promote repair
Figure 7. Nerve-Derived Mesenchymal Cells Contribute to Neonatal Digit Tip Regeneration and Dermal Repair
(A–C) Uninjured P9 (A), uninjured P23 (B), and 14 DPA P23 (C) Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT;PdgfraEGFP/+ digit tip sections analyzed for Pdgfra-EGFP (green), Wnt1Cre-
TdT (red), and p75 immunoreactivity (white). The boxed regions are shown on the right, and arrows and arrowheads denote TdT-positive cells expressing p75 or
EGFP, respectively. Solid and dashed lines outline the bone matrix and regenerated tissue exclusive of the epithelium.
(D–F) Uninjured (D) or 9-day post-injury (E and F) adult Wnt1Cre;R26-LSL-TdT;PdgfraEGFP/+ dorsal skin sections analyzed for Pdgfra-EGFP (green), Wnt1Cre-TdT
(red) and p75 (D and E, white) or HSP47 (F, white) immunoreactivity. The boxed regions are shown on the right. The arrows and arrowheads in (D and E) denote
TdT-positive cells expressing p75 or EGFP, respectively. The arrowheads in (F) denote triple-positive cells. The asterisk in (D) indicates a p75 and TdT double-
positive cell in the epithelium, likely a melanocyte.
(G and H) NOD-SCID dorsal skin 15 days following a punch wound and coincident transplantation of a PdgfraCreERT;R26-LSL-TdT sciatic nerve segment at the
wound margin, analyzed for TdT (red) and immunostained for PDGFRa (G, green) or HSP47 (H, green). The boxed region is shown on the right. Arrowheads denote
double-labeled TdT-positive donor nerve cells integrated into the neodermis.
The dashed lines in (D)–(G) represent the epithelial basement membrane. The low-magniﬁcation images in (A)–(E) and (G) are tiled and stitched. All images show
Hoechst 33258 counterstaining (blue). Scale bars, 100 mm (A–E and G) and 25 mm (F and H, insets). See also Figure S7.
254
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019

by
two
complementary
mechanisms;
the
dedifferentiated
Schwann cells secrete growth factors like PDGF-AA and oncos-
tatin M (Johnston et al., 2016), whereas nerve-derived mesen-
chymal cells differentiate into tissues like the dermis and bone
in response to local cues.
The robust pro-regenerative capacity of peripheral nerves is
best exempliﬁed by studies showing that nerve grafts promote
regeneration of CNS neurons, which normally never regenerate
(Richardson et al., 1980). This unique ability likely evolved in
response to peripheral nervous system biology. Peripheral
axons project long distances via nerves to innervate targets
like muscle and bone that are subject to ongoing remodeling
and injury. To ensure that peripheral neurons and their axons
are maintained for the mammalian lifespan, nerves have devel-
oped mechanisms for rapidly repairing physical interruptions
and for providing a positive axonal growth and survival environ-
ment (Cattin and Lloyd, 2016). We propose that the precursor-
like endoneurial cells we describe here play an important role
in creating this highly supportive and regenerative environment.
Our work has deﬁned four transcriptionally and anatomically
distinct nerve populations. Of these, perineurial sheath cells
are the best characterized, providing a protective junctional
barrier around the endoneurium (Peltonen et al., 2013). We iden-
tify a speciﬁc perineurial cell transcriptional signature, including
known (Slc2a1/Glut1) and unknown (Itgb4, Lmo7, and Msln)
marker genes. A second population, epineurial cells, share
many transcriptional similarities with other connective tissue
cells. A third population (clusters 1, 3, and 6 in Figure 1M) is spe-
ciﬁc to the injured nerve, shares transcriptional similarities with
mesenchymal progenitors like preadipocytes and osteochon-
droprogenitors, and is located at the injured nerve stump. These
are likely previously described bridge ﬁbroblasts that serve to
repair breaks in nerve structure (Parrinello et al., 2010).
The ﬁnal population includes endoneurial cells with a mesen-
chymal precursor and embryonic mesenchyme transcriptional
signature. Most of these cells are neural crest-derived (Joseph
et al., 2004; data presented here), and this distinct embryonic
origin might confer an enhanced regenerative capacity, as shown
for neural crest-derived cranial osteoblasts (Leucht et al., 2008).
This neural crest origin enabled us to trace endoneurial cells
and show that they contributed to bone regeneration and dermal
repair, ﬁndings strengthened by our transplant studies. These
ﬁndings are consistent with previous work showing that nerve
ossiﬁcation occurs in human peripheral nerve sheath tumors
and ancient Schwannomas (Machado et al., 2016) and that het-
erotopic ossiﬁcation involves an unidentiﬁed osteo-precursor
cell type from the nerve endoneurium (Davis et al., 2018).
Our results help explain why tissue repair is nerve-dependent
and provide one explanation for the decreased repair of dener-
vated mesenchymal tissues, such as the chronic skin wounds
in diabetic neuropathy (Malik, 2014). Because nerves innervate
virtually all mammalian tissue, a deeper understanding of signals
that regulate and recruit these nerve-derived mesenchymal
precursors will be of broad importance.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Mice
B Surgeries and nerve transplant studies
B Tamoxifen and EdU injections
B Nerve mesenchymal cell cultures
d METHOD DETAILS
B Single-cell isolation and Drop-seq
B Computational analysis of scRNA-seq data
B Tissue preparation and immunostaining
B Antibodies
B Fluorescence in situ hybridization
B CLARITY of regenerating digits
B qRT-PCR analysis
B EdU-labeling experiments
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
B Markers of Pdgfra-positive nerve cells
B Sox9 expression in neural crest-derived nerve cells
B Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive cells in digit tips
B Neural-crest derived blastema mesenchymal cells
B Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive cells in denervated digit tips
B Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive bone lacunae
B Wnt1Cre-TdT-positive cells in dorsal skin wounds
B Statistics
d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes seven ﬁgures and four videos and can be
found with this article online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2018.10.024.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by CIHR and CFREF grants (to F.D.M. and D.R.K.).
F.D.M. is a Canada Research Chair. M.J.C., P.E.S., and J.S.T. were funded
by CIHR awards and S.A.Y. by a Lap-Chee Tsui Restracomp fellowship. We
thank Michael Borrett and Mekayla Storer for valuable input and Sarah Burns,
Dennis Aquino, Rebecca Parsons, and Troy Ketela for technical assistance.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
M.J.C. conceptualized, performed, and analyzed most experiments and
co-wrote the paper. M.J.C., J.S.T., and S.A.Y. performed scRNA-seq
experiments and computational analyses. A.P.W.J. performed initial lineage
tracing experiments. P.E.S., in the lab of P.W.F., performed the CLARITY
imaging. N.M. performed osteocyte proliferation experiments. D.R.K.
conceptualized experiments and co-wrote the paper. F.D.M. conceptual-
ized experiments, analyzed data, and co-wrote the paper.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: April 27, 2018
Revised: September 11, 2018
Accepted: October 29, 2018
Published: November 29, 2018
REFERENCES
Apel, P.J., Crane, D., Northam, C.N., Callahan, M., Smith, T.L., and Teasdall,
R.D. (2009). Effect of selective sensory denervation on fracture-healing: an
experimental study of rats. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 91, 2886–2895.
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019
255

Arnold, K., Sarkar, A., Yram, M.A., Polo, J.M., Bronson, R., Sengupta, S.,
Seandel, M., Geijsen, N., and Hochedlinger, K. (2011). Sox2(+) adult stem
and progenitor cells are important for tissue regeneration and survival of
mice. Cell Stem Cell 9, 317–329.
Cattin, A.L., and Lloyd, A.C. (2016). The multicellular complexity of peripheral
nerve regeneration. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 39, 38–46.
Danielian, P.S., Muccino, D., Rowitch, D.H., Michael, S.K., and McMahon, A.P.
(1998). Modiﬁcation of gene activity in mouse embryos in utero by a tamoxifen-
inducible form of Cre recombinase. Curr. Biol. 8, 1323–1326.
Davis, E.L., Davis, A.R., Gugala, Z., and Olmsted-Davis, E.A. (2018). Is hetero-
topic ossiﬁcation getting nervous?: The role of the peripheral nervous system
in heterotopic ossiﬁcation. Bone 109, 22–27.
Epp, J.R., Niibori, Y., Liz Hsiang, H.L., Mercaldo, V., Deisseroth, K., Josselyn,
S.A., and Frankland, P.W. (2015). Optimization of CLARITY for clearing whole-
brain and other intact organs. eNeuro 2, 1–15.
Farahani, R.M., and Xaymardan, M. (2015). Platelet-derived growth factor
receptor alpha as a marker of mesenchymal stem cells in development and
stem cell biology. Stem Cells Int. 2015, 362753.
Haghverdi, L., Lun, A.T.L., Morgan, M.D., and Marioni, J.C. (2018). Batch
effects in single-cell RNA-sequencing data are corrected by matching mutual
nearest neighbors. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 421–427.
Hamilton, T.G., Klinghoffer, R.A., Corrin, P.D., and Soriano, P. (2003).
Evolutionary divergence of platelet-derived growth factor alpha receptor
signaling mechanisms. Mol. Cell. Biol. 23, 4013–4025.
Jaegle, M., Ghazvini, M., Mandemakers, W., Piirsoo, M., Driegen, S.,
Levavasseur, F., Raghoenath, S., Grosveld, F., and Meijer, D. (2003). The
POU proteins Brn-2 and Oct-6 share important functions in Schwann cell
development. Genes Dev. 17, 1380–1391.
Johnston, A.P.W., Naska, S., Jones, K., Jinno, H., Kaplan, D.R., and Miller,
F.D. (2013). Sox2-mediated regulation of adult neural crest precursors and
skin repair. Stem Cell Reports 1, 38–45.
Johnston, A.P.W., Yuzwa, S.A., Carr, M.J., Mahmud, N., Storer, M.A., Krause,
M.P., Jones, K., Paul, S., Kaplan, D.R., and Miller, F.D. (2016). Dedifferentiated
Schwann cell precursors secreting paracrine factors are required for regener-
ation of the mammalian digit tip. Cell Stem Cell 19, 433–448.
Joseph, N.M., Mukouyama, Y.-S., Mosher, J.T., Jaegle, M., Crone, S.A.,
Dormand, E.-L., Lee, K.-F., Meijer, D., Anderson, D.J., and Morrison, S.J.
(2004). Neural crest stem cells undergo multilineage differentiation in devel-
oping peripheral nerves to generate endoneurial ﬁbroblasts in addition to
Schwann cells. Development 131, 5599–5612.
Kang, S.H., Fukaya, M., Yang, J.K., Rothstein, J.D., and Bergles, D.E. (2010).
NG2+ CNS glial progenitors remain committed to the oligodendrocyte lineage
in postnatal life and following neurodegeneration. Neuron 68, 668–681.
Kaukua, N., Shahidi, M.K., Konstantinidou, C., Dyachuk, V., Kaucka, M.,
Furlan, A., An, Z., Wang, L., Hultman, I., Ahrlund-Richter, L., et al. (2014).
Glial origin of mesenchymal stem cells in a tooth model system. Nature 513,
551–554.
Kumar, A., and Brockes, J.P. (2012). Nerve dependence in tissue, organ, and
appendage regeneration. Trends Neurosci. 35, 691–699.
Leucht, P., Kim, J.B., Amasha, R., James, A.W., Girod, S., and Helms, J.A.
(2008). Embryonic origin and Hox status determine progenitor cell fate during
adult bone regeneration. Development 135, 2845–2854.
Machado, I., Arana, E., Cruz, J., Brotons, S., Vendrell, J., Escriba, I., Chust,
M.L., Martı´nez-Banaclocha, N., Lavernia, J., and Llombart-Bosch, A. (2016).
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor with osseous heterologous differen-
tiation in uncommon locations (heart and retropharynx). Int. J. Surg. Pathol. 24,
456–462.
Macosko, E.Z., Basu, A., Satija, R., Nemesh, J., Shekhar, K., Goldman, M.,
Tirosh, I., Bialas, A.R., Kamitaki, N., Martersteck, E.M., et al. (2015). Highly
parallel genome-wide expression proﬁling of individual cells using nanoliter
droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214.
Madisen, L., Zwingman, T.A., Sunkin, S.M., Oh, S.W., Zariwala, H.A., Gu, H.,
Ng, L.L., Palmiter, R.D., Hawrylycz, M.J., Jones, A.R., et al. (2010). A robust
and high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the whole
mouse brain. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 133–140.
Mahmoud, A.I., O’Meara, C.C., Gemberling, M., Zhao, L., Bryant, D.M., Zheng,
R., Gannon, J.B., Cai, L., Choi, W.-Y., Egnaczyk, G.F., et al. (2015). Nerves
regulate cardiomyocyte proliferation and heart regeneration. Dev. Cell 34,
387–399.
Malik, R.A. (2014). Pathology of human diabetic neuropathy. Handb. Clin.
Neurol. 126, 249–259.
McKenzie, I.A., Ohayon, D., Li, H., de Faria, J.P., Emery, B., Tohyama, K., and
Richardson, W.D. (2014). Motor skill learning requires active central myelina-
tion. Science 346, 318–322.
Mohammad, K.S., and Neufeld, D.A. (2000). Denervation retards but does not
prevent toetip regeneration. Wound Repair Regen. 8, 277–281.
Parrinello, S., Napoli, I., Ribeiro, S., Wingﬁeld Digby, P., Fedorova, M.,
Parkinson, D.B., Doddrell, R.D.S., Nakayama, M., Adams, R.H., and Lloyd,
A.C. (2010). EphB signaling directs peripheral nerve regeneration through
Sox2-dependent Schwann cell sorting. Cell 143, 145–155.
Peltonen, S., Alanne, M., and Peltonen, J. (2013). Barriers of the peripheral
nerve. Tissue Barriers 1, e24956.
Richard,
L.,
Ve´ drenne,
N.,
Vallat,
J.-M.,
and
Funalot,
B.
(2014).
Characterization of endoneurial ﬁbroblast-like cells from human and rat
peripheral nerves. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 62, 424–435.
Richardson, P.M., McGuinness, U.M., and Aguayo, A.J. (1980). Axons from
CNS neurons regenerate into PNS grafts. Nature 284, 264–265.
Rinkevich, Y., Lindau, P., Ueno, H., Longaker, M.T., and Weissman, I.L. (2011).
Germ-layer and lineage-restricted stem/progenitors regenerate the mouse
digit tip. Nature 476, 409–413.
Rinkevich, Y., Montoro, D.T., Muhonen, E., Walmsley, G.G., Lo, D., Hasegawa,
M., Januszyk, M., Connolly, A.J., Weissman, I.L., and Longaker, M.T. (2014).
Clonal analysis reveals nerve-dependent and independent roles on mamma-
lian hind limb tissue maintenance and regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 111, 9846–9851.
Scialdone, A., Natarajan, K.N., Saraiva, L.R., Proserpio, V., Teichmann, S.A.,
Stegle, O., Marioni, J.C., and Buettner, F. (2015). Computational assignment
of cell-cycle stage from single-cell transcriptome data. Methods 85, 54–61.
Simkin, J., Han, M., Yu, L., Yan, M., and Muneoka, K. (2013). The mouse digit
tip: from wound healing to regeneration. Methods Mol. Biol. 1037, 419–435.
Song, J., Baek, I.-J., Chun, C.-H., and Jin, E.-J. (2018). Dysregulation of the
NUDT7-PGAM1 axis is responsible for chondrocyte death during osteoar-
thritis pathogenesis. Nat. Commun. 9, 3427.
Yuzwa, S.A., Borrett, M.J., Innes, B.T., Voronova, A., Ketela, T., Kaplan, D.R.,
Bader, G.D., and Miller, F.D. (2017). Developmental emergence of adult neural
stem cells as revealed by single-cell transcriptional proﬁling. Cell Rep. 21,
3970–3986.
Zervas, M., Millet, S., Ahn, S., and Joyner, A.L. (2004). Cell behaviors and ge-
netic lineages of the mesencephalon and rhombomere 1. Neuron 43, 345–357.
Zhang, H., Shi, X., Wang, L., Li, X., Zheng, C., Gao, B., Xu, X., Lin, X., Wang, J.,
Lin, Y., et al. (2018). Intramembranous ossiﬁcation and endochondral ossiﬁca-
tion are impaired differently between glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis
and estrogen deﬁciency-induced osteoporosis. Sci. Rep. 8, 3867.
256
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256, February 7, 2019

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Goat anti-PDGFRa
R & D Systems
Cat# AF1062; RRID: AB_2236897
Rabbit anti-CD34
Abcam
Cat# AB198395
Mouse anti-a-SMA
Sigma
Cat# AF2547
Rabbit anti-S100b
Dako
Cat# Z0311; RRID: AB_10013383
Rat anti-Thy1
Abcam
Cat# AB3105; RRID: AB_2287350
Goat anti-ALPL
R & D Systems
Cat# AF2910; RRID: AB_664062
Rabbit anti-Sox9
EMD Millipore
Cat# AB5535; RRID: AB_2239761
Rabbit anti-Sox5
Abcam
Cat# AB94396; RRID: AB_10859923
Rabbit anti-Glut1
Abcam
Cat# AB652; RRID: AB_305540
Rat anti-ITGB4
Abcam
Cat# AB25254; RRID: AB_2129042
Goat anti-Dlk1/Pref-1
R & D Systems
Cat# AF8277
Rat anti-Ly6C
Abcam
Cat# AB15627; RRID: AB_302004
Goat anti-osteocalcin
Bio-Rad
Cat# 7060-1815; RRID: AB_2243524
Rabbit anti-p75NTR
Promega
Cat# G3231; RRID: AB_430853
Rabbit anti-Sca-1
EMD Millipore
Cat# AB4336; RRID: AB_10806892
Goat anti-CD31
R & D Systems
Cat# AF3628; RRID: AB_2161028
Rat anti-CD31
BioLegend
Cat# 102501; RRID: AB_312908
Rabbit anti-osterix/Sp7
Abcam
Cat# AB22552; RRID: AB_2194492
Rabbit anti-HSP47
Abcam
Cat# AB77609; RRID: AB_1951958
Biological Samples
Perinatal and adult sciatic nerves, digit tips, and dorsal skin
from wild-type or transgenic mice, as described below in
Experimental Model and Subject Details: Mice
This paper
N/A
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Tamoxifen
Sigma
Cat# T5648
(Z)-4-Hydroxytamoxifen
Sigma
Cat# H7904
Alizarin red S
Sigma
Cat# A5533
Alcian Blue 8GX
Sigma
Cat# A3157
Hoechst 33258
Sigma
Cat# 94403
5-Ethynyl-20-deoxyuridine (EdU)
Thermo Fisher
Cat# A10044
Critical Commercial Assays
StemPro Osteogenesis Differentiation Kit
Thermo Fisher
Cat# A1007201
StemPro Adipogenesis Differentiation Kit
Thermo Fisher
Cat# A1007001
StemPro Chondrogenesis Differentiation Kit
Thermo Fisher
Cat# A1007101
Oil Red O Stain Kit
Abcam
Cat# AB150678
Myelin Removal Beads II
Miltenyi Biotec
Cat# 130-096-733
MidiMACS Magnetic Separator with LS columns
Miltenyi Biotec
Cat# 130-042-302
Mouse on Mouse (MOM) Basic Kit
Vector Laboratories
Cat# BMK-2202
RNAscope Fluorescent Multiplex Detection Reagents
Advanced Cell Diagnostics
Cat# 320851
RNeasy Mini Kit
QIAGEN
Cat# 74104
QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit
QIAGEN
Cat# 205311
FastStart DNA Master SYBR Green I
Roche Molecular
Biochemicals
Cat# 03003230001
Click-iT Alexa Fluor 647 Imaging Kit
Thermo Fisher
Cat# C10340
(Continued on next page)
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256.e1–e9, February 7, 2019
e1

Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Deposited Data
scRNA-seq raw datasets: 9 day post-injury sciatic nerves
(myelin removal beads), 9 day post-injury sciatic nerves
(FACS sorted), and Pdgfra-positive mesenchymal clusters
from uninjured sciatic nerves (myelin removal beads)
This paper
GEO: GSE120678
R packages containing scRNA-seq nerve datasets processed
using the analysis pipeline
This paper
http://lab.research.sickkids.ca/
miller-kaplan/our-data/
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
CD1
Charles River Laboratories
Strain code: 022
C57BL/6
Charles River Laboratories
Strain code: 027
NOD-SCID
Charles River Laboratories
Strain code: 394
PdgfraEGFP/+ (B6.129S4-Pdgfratm11(EGFP)Sor/J)
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX stock #007669; RRID: IMSR_
JAX:007669
Wnt1Cre (Tg(Wnt1Cre)11Rth Tg(Wnt1-GAL4)11Rth/J
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX stock #003829; RRID: ISMR_
JAX:003829
R26-LSL-TdT (B6.Cg-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm9(CAG-TdT)Hze/J
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX stock #007909; RRID: ISMR_
JAX:007909
DhhCre (FVB(Cg)-Tg(DhhCre)1Mejr/J
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX stock #012929; RRID: ISMR_
JAX:012929
Sox2CreERT2 (B6;129S-Sox2tm1(cre/ERT2)Hoch/J
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX stock #017593; RRID: ISMR_
JAX:017593
Sox10CreERT2 (CBA;B6-Tg(Sox10-icre/ERT2)388Wdr/J
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX stock #027651; RRID: ISMR_
JAX:027651
Wnt1CreERT2 (Tg(Wnt1Cre/ERT)1Alj/J
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX stock #008851; RRID: ISMR_
JAX:008851
PdgfraCreERT (B6N.Cg-Tg(Pdgfra-cre/ERT)467Dbe/J
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX stock #018280; RRID: ISMR_
JAX:018280
Oligonucleotides
qRT-PCR mouse Wnt1-speciﬁc primer sequence, forward:
GGTTTCTACTACGTTGCTACTGG
Primer Bank
Primer Bank ID# 145386529c1
qRT-PCR mouse Wnt1-speciﬁc primer sequence, reverse:
GGAATCCGTCAACAGGTTCGT
Primer Bank
Primer Bank ID# 145386529c1
qRT-PCR mouse 18S RNA-speciﬁc primer sequence, forward:
CTGAGAAACGGCTACCACATC
Song et al., 2018
N/A
qRT-PCR mouse 18S RNA-speciﬁc primer sequence, reverse:
GCCTCGAAAGAGTCCTGTATTG
Song et al., 2018
N/A
Software and Algorithms
R Project for Statistical Computing
R Foundation
RRID: SCR_001905
Seurat Package (v. 1.4.0.16)
Satija Lab
RRID: SCR_016341
Cyclone Cell-Cycle Analysis Algorithm
Scialdone et al., 2015
N/A
Mutual Nearest Neighbors Batch-Effect Correction Algorithm
Haghverdi et al., 2018
N/A
ZEN Image Acquisition Software
Zeiss Microscope
RRID: SCR_013672
Volocity Image Acquisition Software
Improvision
RRID: SCR_002668
Imaris x64 (v9.0.0 build 43738)
Bitplane
RRID: SCR_007370
Prism 5
GraphPad
RRID: SCR_002798
Fiji
ImageJ
RRID: SCR_002285
Adobe Photoshop CC
Adobe Systems
RRID: SCR_014199
Adobe Illustrator CC
Adobe Systems
RRID: SCR_010279
Other
FISH probe: mouse Col2a1 (GenBank: NM_001113515.2), channel 2
Advanced Cell Diagnostics
Cat# 407221-C2
FISH probe: mouse Col9a2 (GenBank: NM_007741.2), channel 2
Advanced Cell Diagnostics
Cat# 530631-C2
(Continued on next page)
e2
Cell Stem Cell 24, 240–256.e1–e9, February 7, 2019

===== Cavone2021_DevCell_scTx+SCI+Macrophage+Zebrafish =====
Article
A unique macrophage subpopulation signals directly
to progenitor cells to promote regenerative
neurogenesis in the zebraﬁsh spinal cord
Graphical abstract
Highlights
d A direct signaling axis from injury to regenerated neurons is
established
d scRNA-seq reveals a pro-regenerative macrophage
d Spinal progenitors directly react to human TNF with
enhanced neurogenesis
d hdac1 in spinal progenitors promotes regenerative
neurogenesis in vivo
Authors
Leonardo Cavone, Tess McCann,
Louisa K. Drake, ..., Neil C. Henderson,
Thomas Becker, Catherina G. Becker
Correspondence
thomas.becker@ed.ac.uk (T.B.),
catherina.becker@ed.ac.uk (C.G.B.)
In brief
Cavone et al. show that after a spinal
injury, neural progenitor cells read TNF, a
cytokine derived from speciﬁc inﬁltrating
macrophages, to promote regeneration
of destroyed neurons in larval zebraﬁsh.
This mechanism of regenerative
neurogenesis, not seen in spinal
development, could provide therapeutic
targets for non-regenerating vertebrates.
Cavone et al., 2021, Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630
June 7, 2021 ª 2021 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2021.04.031
ll

Article
A unique macrophage subpopulation signals directly
to progenitor cells to promote regenerative
neurogenesis in the zebraﬁsh spinal cord
Leonardo Cavone,1,7 Tess McCann,1,7 Louisa K. Drake,1,7 Erika A. Aguzzi,1 Ana-Maria Opris¸oreanu,1 Elisa Pedersen,1
Soe Sandi,1 Jathurshan Selvarajah,1 Themistoklis M. Tsarouchas,1 Daniel Wehner,1,5,6 Marcus Keatinge,1
Karolina S. Mysiak,1 Beth E.P. Henderson,2 Ross Dobie,2 Neil C. Henderson,2,3 Thomas Becker,1,8,*
and Catherina G. Becker1,4,*
1Centre for Discovery Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, The Chancellor’s Building, 49 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4SB, UK
2Centre for Inﬂammation Research, The Queen’s Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
3MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
4Euan MacDonald Centre for Motor Neurone Disease Research University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
5Max Planck Institute for the Science of Light, Staudtstraße 2, Erlangen 91058, Germany
6Max-Planck-Zentrum f€ur Physik und Medizin, Staudtstraße 2, Erlangen 91058, Germany
7These authors contributed equally
8Lead contact
*Correspondence: thomas.becker@ed.ac.uk (T.B.), catherina.becker@ed.ac.uk (C.G.B.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2021.04.031
SUMMARY
Central nervous system injury re-initiates neurogenesis in anamniotes (amphibians and ﬁshes), but not in
mammals. Activation of the innate immune system promotes regenerative neurogenesis, but it is fundamen-
tally unknown whether this is indirect through the activation of known developmental signaling pathways or
whether immune cells directly signal to progenitor cells using mechanisms that are unique to regeneration.
Using single-cell RNA-seq of progenitor cells and macrophages, as well as cell-type-speciﬁc manipulations,
we provide evidence for a direct signaling axis from speciﬁc lesion-activated macrophages to spinal progen-
itor cells to promote regenerative neurogenesis in zebraﬁsh. Mechanistically, TNFa from pro-regenerative
macrophages induces Tnfrsf1a-mediated AP-1 activity in progenitors to increase regeneration-promoting
expression of hdac1 and neurogenesis. This establishes the principle that macrophages directly communi-
cate to spinal progenitor cells via non-developmental signals after injury, providing potential targets for future
interventions in the regeneration-deﬁcient spinal cord of mammals.
INTRODUCTION
Tissue damage to the spinal cord after injury severs long axonal
connections of surviving neurons and leads to extensive local
loss of neurons. To repair these distinct types of damage,
different types of cells need to react to injury; surviving neurons
need to re-initiate axon growth and local progenitor cells need to
re-initiate neurogenesis. Anamniotes, in contrast to mammals,
are capable of axon regrowth and re-initiate neurogenesis from
progenitor cells after injury of the spinal cord (Becker and
Becker, 2015; Stenudd et al., 2015). Here, we focus on the mech-
anisms of neuronal replacement from spinal progenitor cells in
zebraﬁsh, to address the fundamental question whether regen-
erative neurogenesis recapitulates developmental neurogenesis
or is driven by regeneration-speciﬁc signals (Becker and Becker,
2015; Hunyara and Kolodkin, 2020). Answering this question
may have important implications for interventions in mammals
using transplantation of neural stem cells for repair (Lu et al.,
2014) and those trying to restore neurogenic function of
endogenous progenitor cells in the spinal cord. Endogenous spi-
nal progenitors in mammals have stem cell potential (Shihabud-
din et al., 2000) and are induced to proliferate after injury but pro-
duce mainly scar-related astrocytes (Meletis et al., 2008).
However, spinal progenitor cells in mice can be re-programmed
to produce substantial numbers of oligodendrocytes in vivo
following injury, but neurogenesis has not been achieved. There
is evidence to suggest presence of spinal progenitor cells also in
humans (Becker et al., 2018).
The immune response after injury is an obvious source for non-
developmental signals and positive effects of macrophages
have been demonstrated during regenerative neurogenesis in
zebraﬁsh (Hui et al., 2017; Kyritsis et al., 2012; Ohnmacht
et al., 2016). However, determining whether and how macro-
phages act on progenitor cells to allow them to revert to neuro-
genesis has been hampered by the fact that immune cells
interact with themselves and other cell types via the same
signaling molecules, e.g., cytokines and chemokines (Becker
and Becker, 2020; Greenhalgh et al., 2020). Hence, macrophage
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021 ª 2021 Elsevier Inc.
1617
ll

effects could be indirect by inducing the re-expression of devel-
opmental signals from the environment. Indeed, developmental
signals, such as Wnt, Fgf, Shh, and dopamine are re-expressed
after spinal injury in zebraﬁsh and promote regenerative neuro-
genesis from ependymo-radial glia (ERG) progenitor cells
(Briona et al., 2015; Goldshmit et al., 2018; Reimer et al., 2009,
2013). Macrophages initially drive inﬂammation and may have
a more reparative phenotype later on, but the identity of pro-
regenerative macrophages after spinal injury is unknown. Sub-
types of macrophages with different, so-called M1 and M2 polar-
ization states may be present that produce different signals
(Wentzel et al., 2020). Here, we test the hypothesis that speciﬁc
pro-regenerative macrophages signal directly to progenitor
cells, leading to re-initiation of neurogenesis by non-develop-
mental pathways.
The cytokine tumor necrosis factor (Tnf; also known as Tnf-a)
is a candidate for a regeneration-speciﬁc signal that could
directly regulate gene activity in spinal ERGs, as tnfa, the major
ortholog of the TNF gene in zebraﬁsh, is mainly expressed by
macrophages in the spinal injury site in larval zebraﬁsh (Tsarou-
chas et al., 2018). We have previously shown that Tnf signaling in
zebraﬁsh promotes regrowth of axons from pre-existing injured
neurons, but a potential role in regenerative neurogenesis from
spinal ERG progenitors is unknown (Tsarouchas et al., 2018).
The role of TNF signaling may be highly context dependent, as
positive (Bernardino et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2017; Nelson
et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2012) and negative (Johansson et al.,
2008; Lan et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2018) functions for neurogen-
esis have been reported. After spinal injury, Tnf signaling may
exacerbate overall outcome in mammals (Esposito and Cuzzoc-
rea, 2011; Ferguson et al., 2008; Kroner et al., 2014), but speciﬁc
actions on spinal progenitor cells are not known.
After spinal injury in larval and adult zebraﬁsh, spinal ERG pro-
genitor cells switch from their late developmental role in gener-
ating oligodendrocytes to generating neurons, akin to their
earlier developmental state (Mokalled et al., 2016; Ohnmacht
et al., 2016; Reimer et al., 2008). For example, low levels of motor
neuron generation are increased by 400% close to a spinal injury
site (Ohnmacht et al., 2016). For such a switch, concerted
changes in the expression of several genes are needed, which
are likely to involve epigenetic changes, such as histone deace-
tylation (Goldman and Poss, 2020). Indeed, activity of histone
deacetylase 1 (Hdac1) regulates neural differentiation (Janssens
et al., 2017; Montgomery et al., 2009; Olivera-Martinez et al.,
2014; Tang et al., 2019; Yamaguchi et al., 2005) and is a decisive
factor in developmental motor neuron generation in zebraﬁsh
(Cunliffe, 2004).
Here, we demonstrate that Tnf, derived from a pro-regenera-
tive subset of macrophages, acts directly on spinal ERG progen-
itor cells in zebraﬁsh via AP-1 activity to increase expression of
hdac1, which in turn promotes neurogenesis after spinal cord
injury.
RESULTS
Single-cell expression proﬁling indicates Tnf pathway
activity in ventricular progenitor cells after injury
To analyze lesion-induced gene regulation in progenitor cells at
single-cell
resolution,
we
performed
single-cell
RNA-seq
(scRNA-seq) on FACS-isolated her4.3:GFP ERG progenitors at
24 h after spinal injury (hours post-lesion; hpl) at 3 days post-
fertilization (dpf), compared with age-matched uninjured ani-
mals. At this post-injury time point, spinal progenitor cells
show increased lesion-induced proliferation (Ohnmacht et al.,
2016). Increased numbers of new neurons, of which the majority
are new motor neurons, are observed at 48 hpl (Ohnmacht et al.,
2016). We pooled cells from 600 larvae per condition for injured
and uninjured samples, yielding 2,477 cell proﬁles for the unle-
sioned and 1,203 cell proﬁles for the lesioned samples after qual-
ity control (Figure S1A; STAR methods).
Unsupervised clustering revealed 16 distinct clusters mostly
including subpopulations of neural cells, such as ERG progenitor
cells, identiﬁed by speciﬁc marker genes (Figure 1A; Table S1;
Data S1). Cell clusters were similar for unlesioned and lesioned
samples, with a visible over-representation of neuroblasts after
injury (Figure 1B). ERG progenitors, including proliferating ERG
progenitors, were identiﬁed by high levels of endogenous
her4.3 expression, which overlaps with expression of sox2 and
foxj1a, markers for spinal ventricular progenitor cells across ver-
tebrates (Becker et al., 2018). Only these populations of cells
contained proliferating cells, indicated by high levels of mki67
and ccnd1 (Lange et al., 2020) expression. This underscores
their likely progenitor cell identity (Figure 1C). Undifferentiated
and differentiated neurons and oligodendrocytes that did not de-
tectably express her4.3 were also included in the FACS-isolated
her4.3:GFP population of cells. That is likely caused by the rela-
tive stability of the GFP protein, which remained in the progeny of
GFP-expressing her4.3+ ERG progenitor cells, effectively acting
as a short-term cell lineage tracer (Lange et al., 2020). This al-
lowed us to compare representation of cell types in our samples.
We found a 480% relative increase in neuroblast (69 neuroblasts
relative to 328 progenitor cells in the uninjured proﬁle and 281
neuroblasts relative to 148 progenitor cells in the lesioned sam-
ple) and a 23% reduction in oligodendrocyte production (348 ol-
igodendrocytes relative to 328 progenitor cells in the uninjured
proﬁle and 122 oligodendrocytes relative to 148 progenitor cells
in the lesioned proﬁle) after injury (Table S2). Similarly, global
comparisons indicated increases in expression of neuroblast-
related genes, such as gap43 (6.9-fold, p < 0.001), sox11b
(2.1-fold, p < 0.001), and atf3 (4.4-fold, p < 0.001), and downre-
gulation of oligodendrocyte-related genes, such as plp1b (3.2-
fold, p < 0.001), mbpa (3.0-fold, p < 0.001), and mag (1.9-fold,
p = 0.02; Table S3). This conﬁrmed a switch from oligodendro-
genesis to neurogenesis after injury, as previously reported
(Ohnmacht et al., 2016).
In progenitor cells (ERG progenitors plus proliferating ERG
progenitors in Figure 1A), genes related to Tnf signaling were
strongly upregulated after injury. This comprised fosl2 (Jahangiri
et al., 2016) (2.8-fold, p < 0.001, rank 8) and junbb (Mechta-Gri-
goriou et al., 2001) (2.2-fold, p value < 0.001, rank 17), compo-
nents of the AP-1 transcriptional regulator complex that is acti-
vated by Tnf (Kyriakis, 1999). nfkb1, another major signal
transducer of Tnf, was not detectably expressed (Hayden and
Ghosh, 2014). Expression of tnfaip2b, a Tnf-regulated gene
(Wolf et al., 1994), was increased after injury (1.8-fold, p <
0.001, rank 37; Table S4). The principal Tnf receptor, tnfrsf1a,
was also upregulated 1.4-fold (p < 0.001; Data S2). The propor-
tion of tnfrsf1a-expressing progenitor cells increased from 18%
ll
Article
1618
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021

(59/328 progenitor cells) in the unlesioned sample to 45%
(66/148) after injury. Transcripts for the tnfa/b ligands were not
noticeably expressed in our proﬁles, suggesting absence of
auto- or paracrine signaling from progenitors or their progeny.
Notably, all of the above transcripts were enriched in progenitor
cells, compared with most other cell clusters (Figure 1D). Other
receptors that could activate the AP-1 complex were also en-
riched in progenitor cells (egfra, il4r.1, met, tgfbr1a; Figure S1B).
Of these, met showed a moderate upregulation after injury (1.18-
fold, p < 0.0001; Table S5). Overall, this proﬁle suggests tnfrsf1a-
mediated sensitivity to exogenous Tnf and activation of the Tnf
downstream signaling complex AP-1 in spinal progenitor cells
after injury.
tnfa-expressing macrophages have a unique
activation state
Reactive macrophages in the injury site are the principal source of
Tnf (Tsarouchas et al., 2018). To characterize the subtype of Tnf-
producing macrophage, we used scRNA-seq of FACS sorted
mpeg1:GFP+ cells from the injury site of lesioned larvae and
Figure 1. scRNA-seq indicates importance of TNF signaling in progenitor cells
(A) Unsupervised clustering of her4.3:GFP+ cells identiﬁes progenitor and other neural clusters.
(B) Cells from lesioned and unlesioned samples contribute to cell clusters with a disproportionally high contribution of the lesioned sample to ‘‘neuroblasts.’’
(C) Marker gene distribution identiﬁes proliferating ERG progenitor cell clusters.
(D) TNF receptor (tnfrsf1a), downstream gene (tnfaip2b), and components of AP-1 signal transducing complex (fosl2, junbb) are enriched in ERG progenitor cells
(tSNE plots), and expression is increased after injury (violin plots). For clarity, only cells with expression of > 2 are indicated in the feature plot of junbb. Color codes
indicate expression levels from low (gray) to high (red) (see also Figure S1; Table S1).
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021
1619

(legend on next page)
ll
Article
1620
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021

from corresponding control tissue of age-matched unlesioned
controls at the same time point as for the spinal progenitor cells
(24 hpl). The transgene is widely used to label macrophages in ze-
braﬁsh. However, mpeg1 (also known as perforin2) is also ex-
pressed in other immune and non-immune cells (Ferrero et al.,
2020; McCormack et al., 2015). We obtained 3,767 cells from
1,800 unlesioned and 4,579 cells from 1,800 lesioned animals af-
ter quality control (Figure S1C). Unsupervised clustering revealed
16 clusters, with tnfa mainly expressed in a cluster of non-prolifer-
ating cells that expressed high levels of macrophage markers
mpeg1 and mfap4. Interestingly, an adjacent cluster shared
expression of mpeg1, mfap4, but showed much higher expres-
sion of microglia markers, such as apoeb and p2ry12 (Mazzolini
et al., 2020) and only low levels of tnfa expression, suggesting a
microglia identity (Figures 2A–2C; Table S6; Data S3). Tnfa was
slightlyupregulated inthe macrophagecluster(1.12-fold;p value =
0.01) after injury, underscoring potentially different roles of micro-
glia and blood-derived macrophages after spinal injury. After
injury, cells in the macrophage cluster exhibited a 1.7-fold in-
crease in expression of slc7a7, which is essential for macrophage
phagocytosis (Demy et al., 2020) (Figure 2C). Hence, tnfa was
mainly expressed in blood-derived macrophages that engaged
in phagocytosis, consistent with their role in debris removal (Tsar-
ouchas et al., 2018).
To determine lesion-induced subtypes of tnfa+ macrophages,
we performed unsupervised clustering of only these cells for un-
lesioned and lesioned samples and found two clusters for each
sample. Overlaying expression of the activation marker fth1a
(Torti and Torti, 2002) identiﬁed one of the two subpopulations
in each sample. This subpopulation was much larger after injury
(control: 19%, 40 of 215 cells; injured: 55%, 223 of 408 cells).
This is consistent with few macrophages in unlesioned animals
that may be activated by naturally occurring cell death and
many more macrophages that are activated by extensive cell
death after an injury (Tsarouchas et al., 2018) (Figure 2D). We
designated these fth1a+ subpopulations as ‘‘unlesioned acti-
vated’’ and ‘‘lesioned activated’’ tnfa+ macrophages, respec-
tively. Lesioned activated tnfa+ macrophages were most similar
to unlesioned activated tnfa+ macrophages in their expression
proﬁle (Figure 2E) but showed strongly increased expression of
cathepsins ctsk, ctsla, and ctss2.1 among the 9 most differen-
tially expressed genes, compared with unlesioned activated
tnfa+ cells (Table S7). Cathepsin expression is indicative of
lesion-induced activation of macrophages (Patel et al., 2018).
This supports that we have isolated tnfa+ macrophages that
are activated by the injury.
To characterize the expression proﬁle of lesioned activated
tnfa+ cells, we compared these with all cells in the macrophage
cluster from unlesioned larvae. This indicated a mixture of upre-
gulated M1 and M2 markers found after classical or alternative
activation of macrophages in carp (Wentzel et al., 2020) (Table
S8). In addition, lesioned activated tnfa+ macrophages ex-
pressed high levels of M2 markers CD9b (Suzuki et al., 2009)
and IL1R2 (Peters et al., 2013) (Table S8). This characterizes a
speciﬁc subtype of lesion-activated macrophages as a source
cell of Tnf after injury.
ERGs are exposed to macrophage-derived Tnf after
injury
To determine whether following spinal injury progenitor cells
came into close proximity with lesion-site macrophages and
Tnf in vivo, we used triple-labeling of Tnf (antibody), macro-
phages (mpeg1:GFP transgene), and motor neuron progenitor
ERGs (olig2:DsRed transgene) in whole-mounted larvae at 20
hpl. Motor neurons are the most frequently generated cell type
in response to injury and a band of olig2-expressing ERGs in
the ventral spinal cord give rise to these after injury (Ohnmacht
et al., 2016).
We frequently found more than 20 mpeg1:GFP+ macrophages
per larva no more than 20 mm away from olig2:DsRed+ ERGs af-
ter injury but less than one in the corresponding area in uninjured
larvae (Figures S2A and S2B). Antibody labeling showed gradi-
ents of speciﬁc (Tsarouchas et al., 2018) granular Tnf protein la-
beling close to macrophages in the injury site that reached into
the olig2:DsRed+ cell layer (Figures 3A and S2A). This shows
that ERGs close to the injury site are exposed to Tnf.
Tnf levels correlate with magnitude of regenerative
neurogenesis
To determine the importance of Tnf for neuronal regeneration,
we altered its abundance by manipulating the immune response
in vivo. Dexamethasone, an artiﬁcial glucocorticoid with effective
immuno-suppressive features (Juszczak and Stankiewicz, 2018;
Ronchetti et al., 2018), and bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS),
which augment the immune response after injury (Novoa et al.,
2009),
were
used.
Dexamethasone
decreased
and
LPS
increased the numbers of macrophages in the injury site, indi-
cating effective treatment (Figures S2C and S2D). Similarly,
injury-induced upregulation of tnfa expression was reduced by
dexamethasone treatment to uninjured control levels, while
LPS treatment increased tnfa levels 4.78-fold (compared with
lesioned vehicle-treated), as determined by qRT-PCR of isolated
injury site tissue at 24 hpl (Figure 3B).
As readouts for regenerative neurogenesis, we determined
expression levels of hdac1, an epigenetic regulator of motor
neuron
generation
(Cunliffe,
2004),
in
FACS-isolated
her4.3:GFP+ ERG progenitor cells from the injured spinal cord.
We
considered
increased
hdac1
expression
to
indicate
increased neurogenic activity of progenitor cells. In addition,
we determined numbers of proliferating olig2:GFP+/EdU+ motor
neuron
progenitor
ERGs
and
of
mnx1:GFP+/EdU+
newly
Figure 2. tnfa+ macrophages have a unique signature after injury
(A) Unsupervised clustering of mpeg1:GFP+ cells at 1 dpl shows multiple clusters of cell identities.
(B) Macrophages and microglia express mpeg1 and mfap4, but macrophages express lower levels of apoeb and p2ry12 than microglia.
(C) tnfa is mainly expressed in macrophages. tnfa and slc7a7 are upregulated in macrophages after injury.
(D) Unsupervised clustering of tnfa+ macrophages identiﬁes two clusters in unlesioned and lesioned samples. Expression of fth1a identiﬁes clusters of ‘‘activated
macrophages.’’ For clarity, only cells with expression of > 1 are indicated in feature plot of fth1a.
(E) Heatmaps of differentially expressed genes between tnfa+ macrophages. Top 10 genes shown for the indicated categories (see also Figure S1; Tables S1–S5).
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021
1621

generated motor neurons after exposure to EdU for 48 hpl (Ohn-
macht et al., 2016).
After dexamethasone treatment, hdac1 expression was
reduced by 55% in puriﬁed her4.3:GFP+ cells (> 94%; Fig-
ure S2G), indicating that progenitor cells expressed lower
levels of hdac1 after the treatment (Figure 3C). In whole-
mount preparations, we found that the number of EdU incor-
porating olig2:GFP+ motor neuron progenitor ERGs was
reduced by 32% (Figure 3D), demonstrating that proliferation
of progenitor cells was reduced by the dexamethasone treat-
ment. Numbers of motor neurons were similarly reduced in
this experimental paradigm (Ohnmacht et al., 2016), showing
that reduced proliferation of progenitor cells led to decreased
neurogenesis. Dexamethasone treatment also reduced devel-
opmental neurogenesis in unlesioned larvae (Figure S2E). This
conﬁrms that dexamethasone also directly inﬂuences neuro-
genesis in addition to dampening the immune response
(Nelson et al., 2019).
Figure 3. Tnf levels correlate with immune system-induced regenerative neurogenesis
All photomicrographs are lateral views at 48 hpl (except A); asterisk indicates injury site; boxed areas are shown in higher magniﬁcation on the right. All qRT-PCR
results are relative to unlesioned control, set to 1 and indicated by dashed red line; each dot represents one experiment.
(A) Macrophages (mpeg1:GFP+) and Tnf protein are concentrated in the spinal injury site and close to (within 20 mm) motor neuron progenitor cells (olig2:DsRed+).
A 4-dpf-larva is shown at 22 hpl (top: merge of all channels; middle: mpeg1:GFP; bottom: Tnf). See Figure S2A for separate channels and S2B for quantiﬁcation.
(B) qRT-PCR shows LPS increases and dexamethasone decreases tnfa expression (Incubation: 6 to 24 hpl for dexamethasone and 0 to 24 hpl for LPS; analysis
at 24 hpl; Kruskal-Wallis test p = 0.0007; Dunn’s post-test: *p = 0.027; ***p = 0.0003; n.s.: p = 0.687.
(C) Dexamethasone decreases hdac1 mRNA expression after injury (incubation: 6 to 24 hpl; t test: ****p = 0.0001).
(D) Dexamethasone treatment reduces the number of proliferating motor neuron progenitor ERGs (olig2:GFP+/EdU+; incubation: dexamethasone: 6 to 48 hpl;
EdU 0 to 48 hpl; t test: *p = 0.040).
(E) LPS treatment increases hdac1 mRNA expression after injury (incubation: 0 to 24 hpl; t test: *p = 0.023).
(F and G) LPS treatment increases the number of proliferating motor neuron progenitor ERGs (olig2:GFP+/EdU+) (F; t test, ****p < 0.0001) and number of new
motor neurons (G; mnx1:GFP+/EdU+; t test, ****p < 0.0001); incubation: LPS: 0 to 48 hpl; EdU 0 to 48 hpl). Scale bars: 50 mm; 10 mm for insets. Data are rep-
resented as mean ± SEM (see also Figure S2; Tables S6–S8).
ll
Article
1622
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021

Conversely, LPS treatment increased hdac1 expression (1.7-
fold; Figure 3E), as well as the numbers of newly formed motor
neuron progenitor cells (olig2:GFP+/EdU+; by 57.5%; Figure 3F)
and motor neurons (mnx1:GFP+/EdU+; by 104%; Figure 3G). In
unlesioned animals, the number of newly formed motor neuron
progenitor cells (olig2:GFP+/EdU+; Figure S2F) was not altered
by LPS treatment. Hence, systemic stimulation of the immune
system alone was insufﬁcient to augment constitutive neurogen-
esis, similar to other CNS regions (Caldwell et al., 2019). Overall,
these ﬁndings show that regenerative neurogenesis in the spinal
cord is regulated by the immune response at the level of gene
expression and proliferation of ERG progenitor cells and posi-
tively correlates with levels of tnfa expression in the injury site.
Tnf and Tnfrsf1a are necessary for regenerative
neurogenesis
To directly test the relevance of Tnf signaling for regenerative
neurogenesis, we used three approaches in vivo, the drug poma-
lidomide that inhibits Tnf release (Muller et al., 1999), a highly
effective tnfa gRNA (Tsarouchas et al., 2018) that acutely mu-
tates the gene after injection into zygotes, and a stable tnfa
mutant line (Keatinge et al., 2021).
Pomalidomide reduced the levels of hdac1 mRNA expression
detected by qRT-PCR in FACS-puriﬁed her4.3:GFP+ progenitor
cells by 51.7% at 24 hpl (Figure 4A), indicating that Tnf
signaling promotes hdac1 expression in progenitor cells. The
number of newly generated motor neuron progenitor cells
Figure 4. Tnf signaling promotes regenerative neurogenesis from progenitors
Lateral views at 48 hpl are shown in photomicrographs; asterisks indicate the injury site; arrows indicate double-labeled cells; boxed areas are shown in higher
magniﬁcation on the right. All qRT-PCR results are relative to unlesioned control, set to 1 and indicated by dashed red line; each dot represents one experiment.
(A) Pomalidomide incubation reduces hdac1 mRNA levels in qRT-PCR of puriﬁed ERG progenitor cells (incubation: 0 to 24 hpl; Mann-Whitney U test:
**p = 0.0095).
(B and C) Pomalidomide treatment reduces the number of newly formed motor neuron progenitor cells (olig2:GFP+/EdU+; t test, ***p = 0.0008; B) and motor
neurons (mnx1:GFP+/EdU+; t test, ****p < 0.0001; C) after spinal injury (incubation 2 to 48 hpl).
(D) Acute tnfa gRNA perturbation reduces the number of newly formed motor neurons (mnx1:GFP+/EdU+) after spinal injury (EdU incubation 0 to 48 hpl; t test,
**p = 0.0077).
(E) Homozygous mutants for tnfa show reduced lesion-induced generation of neurons (HuC+/EdU+; EdU incubation: 0 to 48 hpl; t test, **p = 0.0026).
(F) Acute injection of tnfrsf1a gRNA attenuates lesion-induced motor neuron (mnx1:GFP+/EdU+; ANOVA and Tukey’s post-test, **p = 0.0085, *p = 0.026) gen-
eration.
(G and H) Ex vivo incubation of ERG progenitors with recombinant zebraﬁsh (zf) Tnf-a and human TNF proteins for 4 h increases mnx1 mRNA expression levels,
normalized to controls (G; Kruskall-Wallis test p = 0.0017; Dunn’s post-test *p = 0.0244 for zf Tnf-a, *p = 0.0160 for human Tnf). hdac1 mRNA expression (F) is also
increased by both proteins compared with controls (one-way ANOVA p = 0.0029; Tukey’s post-test: *p = 0.0127; **p = 0.0085), but not in the presence of the AP-1
inhibitor S11302 (n.s. p = 0.9695). Scale bars, 50; 10 mm for insets. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. (see also Figure S3)
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021
1623

(olig2:GFP+/EdU+) in whole-mounted larvae was reduced by
53% at 48 hpl (Figure 4B), showing that Tnf signaling affects
progenitor cell proliferation. Moreover, Pomalidomide treat-
ment reduced the number of new motor neurons by 49% at
48 hpl (Figure 4C), similar to the reduction in the number of
proliferating progenitor cells. This suggests that Tnf signaling
acts mainly at the level of gene regulation and proliferation of
progenitor cells to enhance lesion-induced neurogenesis.
Acute injection of tnfa gRNA and Cas9 protein for efﬁcient tnfa
gene editing reduced the number of newly generated motor neu-
rons (mnx1:GFP+/EdU+) by 36.2% at 48 hpl (Figure 4D). Finally,
we utilized a stable tnfa germ-line mutant to analyze the overall
level of neurogenesis using an antibody against HuC/HuD
(abbreviated as HuC), as a pan-neuronal marker, in combination
with EdU labeling. This indicated a 33.4% reduction in the num-
ber of HuC+/EdU+ neurons compared with wild-type animals at
48 hpl (Figure 4E). Hence, Tnf signaling promotes regenerative
neurogenesis.
Gene expression proﬁling indicated increased expression of
the Tnf receptor gene tnfrsf1a in ERG progenitor cells after injury.
To elucidate the functional importance of this receptor for regen-
erative neurogenesis, we designed efﬁcient gRNAs targeting
exons 4 and 5 of tnfrsf1a (Figure S3A). Acute injection caused
reduced
number
of
newly
generated
motor
neurons
(mnx1:GFP+/EdU+) compared with uninjected (by 51%) and con-
trol gRNA-injected larvae (by 46%) at 48 hpl (Figure 4F). In
contrast, ongoing neurogenesis of motor neurons in uninjured
larvae was not affected by tnfrsf1a gRNA injections (Figure S3B).
This shows that the receptor is dispensable for developmental
neurogenesis. Together these data show that both tnfa and
tnfrsf1a
are
necessary
for
lesion-induced
regenerative
neurogenesis.
Tnf directly promotes expression of regeneration-
associated genes in ERGs
Disruption of tnfa does not alter kinetics of macrophage invasion
but leads to transiently increased neutrophil counts in the injury
site at 24 hpl (Tsarouchas et al., 2018). This could mean that lack
of Tnf signaling affects regenerative neurogenesis indirectly. To
determine whether Tnf signaling stimulated spinal progenitor
cells directly, we established an ex vivo paradigm, in which
FACS-puriﬁed
progenitor cells (4 dpf, her4.3:GFP+) were
Figure 5. Hdac1 function is necessary for regenerative neurogenesis downstream of immune system activity
Cross sections for (A and B) at 24 hpl; lateral views for (C, D, and F) at 48 hpl are shown; asterisks indicate the injury site; arrows indicate double-labeled cells;
boxed areas are shown in higher magniﬁcation on the right. All incubations were from 0 to 48 hpl.
(A and B) The ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (ISH) signal for hdac1 is stronger in the spinal cord proximal to the injury site than distal to it (arrows in A). Proximal to
the injury site, the hdac1 ISH signal overlaps with GFP immunohistochemistry (IHC), detecting the her4.3:GFP transgene.
(C) TSA and mocetinostat reduce the number of newly generated motor neuron progenitor ERGs (olig2:GFP+/EdU+); example images and quantiﬁcation are
shown (one-way ANOVA; p < 0.0001; Tukey’s post-test: ***p = 0.0005; ****p < 0.0001).
(D and E) TSA reduces the number of newly generated motor neurons (mnx1:GFP+/EdU+) after spinal injury; example images in (D), quantiﬁcation in (E) (t test
****p < 0.0001).
(F) Mocetinostat treatment reduces the number of newly generated motor neurons after injury (Mann-Whitney U test ***p = 0.0002).
(G) Mocetinostat co-application partially suppresses LPS-induced increase in motor neuron generation after injury (one-way ANOVA p < 0.0001; Holm-Sidak’s
post-test ****p < 0.0001; *p = 0.0463; ns, p = 0.0643). Scale bars: (A and B): 50 mm, inset 25 mm; (C, D, and F): 50 mm, insets: 10 mm. Data are represented as mean ±
SEM (see also Figure S4).
ll
Article
1624
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021

exposed to recombinant zebraﬁsh Tnf-a and human TNF pro-
teins for 4 h. Isolated ERGs were still viable after 4 h ex vivo (Fig-
ure S3C). To determine whether Tnf proteins could drive ERGs in
this preparation toward neurogenesis, we determined expres-
sion levels of mnx1 (Seredick et al., 2012), as a proxy for motor
neuron differentiation, by qRT-PCR. Treatments with both zebra-
ﬁsh Tnf-a (2.9-fold) and human Tnf (3.7-fold) led to upregulation
of mnx1 (Figure 4G). This indicates that isolated ERGs are sensi-
tive to Tnf signaling and that Tnf signaling drives progenitor cells
toward motor neuron differentiation.
Next, we tested effects of Tnf on hdac1 expression in this
ex vivo system. As in vivo, hdac1 mRNA expression was
increased by recombinant zebraﬁsh Tnf-a (2.7-fold) and human
Tnf (3.0-fold; Figure 4H). Since AP-1 components were upregu-
lated in the scRNA-seq datasets after injury, we hypothesized
that hdac1 expression could be upregulated through AP-1 activ-
ity downstream of Tnf signaling. Indeed, the pharmacological
AP-1 inhibitor SR 11302 (Ye et al., 2014) fully abolished Tnf-
a-mediated upregulation of hdac1 in ERGs ex vivo (Figure 4H).
This provides evidence for an AP-1-dependent mechanism of
direct
Tnf
signaling
to
ERG
progenitors
in
regenerative
neurogenesis.
hdac1 upregulation in progenitor cells is necessary for
regenerative neurogenesis
Next, we aimed to determine whether Tnf-dependent hdac1
expression was functionally important for neuronal regeneration,
rather than merely correlated with it. First, we used in situ
Figure 6. Hdac1 function in ERG progenitor cells is necessary for regenerative neurogenesis
(A) Doxycycline (Dox) exposure leads to strong detectability of YFP in tg(her4.3:TetA; TetRE:YFP-dnhdac1) transgenic animals at 24 h post-induction; lateral
views are shown (rostral left; dorsal up).
(B) A cross section (dorsal up) through the spinal cord of a tg(her4.3:TetA; TetRE:YFP-dnhdac1) larva shows labeling in ventricular ERG progenitors, some of
which are glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (Gfap) immune positive. Peripheral HuC immuno-labeled neurons are rarely labeled by the trasngene.
(C) Western blot shows a doxycycline-induced increase in histone acetylation levels (AcH4) in FACS puriﬁed ERGs. Anti-tubulin labeling was used as a standard.
(D) Activation of transgene expression reduces the number of newly generated neurons (HuC+/EdU+, t test: **p = 0.009; incubation time for doxycycline and EdU:
0 to 48 hpl). Control is doxycycline-treated non-transgenic siblings.
(E) Graphical summary of immune system mediated regenerative neurogenesis with experimental interventions indicated in red. Scale bars: 50 mm. Data are
represented as mean ± SEM.
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021
1625

hybridization to determine expression of hdac1 in ventricular
progenitor cells. At 24 hpl, hdac1 transcripts were detectable
in the spinal cord proximal to the injury site, but not at a distance
to it, in agreement with the proximodistal gradient of lesion-
induced neurogenesis in this system (Ohnmacht et al., 2016)
(Figures 5A and S4A). Double labeling with anti-GFP in the
her4.3:GFP transgenic line demonstrated that hdac1 expression
occurred in ERG progenitor cells, but also other non-progenitor
cells (Figures 5A and 5B). Hence, in situ hybridization conﬁrmed
increased endogenous hdac1 expression in ERGs that corre-
lated with regenerative neurogenesis after injury.
To establish whether Hdac1 function was necessary for regen-
erative neurogenesis, we used the pharmacological pan-Hdac
inhibitor trichostatin A (Yoshida et al., 1995) (TSA, 200 nM) and
the more Hdac1-selective inhibitor mocetinostat (Fournel et al.,
2008) (1 mM). Both compounds reduced lesion-induced prolifer-
ation of olig2:GFP+/EdU+ progenitor cells (TSA: by 42.92%; mo-
cetinostat: by 36.83%; Figure 5C) and the number of newly
generated mnx1:GFP+/EdU+ motor neurons (TSA: by 75%; mo-
cetinostat: by 59%; Figures 5D–5F). Moreover, inhibition of
Hdac1 function by mocetinostat abolished the promoting effect
of LPS on lesion-induced generation of mnx1:GFP+/EdU+ motor
neurons (Figure 5G). However, LPS compensated for some of
the inhibitory effect of mocetinostat on neurogenesis (compare
Figures 5F and 5G), indicating that LPS did not act through the
Tnf/Hdac1 axis alone. This indicates that Hdac1 partially medi-
ates immune system-induced regenerative neurogenesis.
Inadditiontospinalprogenitorcells,othercelltypessurrounding
the injury site increased expression of hdac1. Therefore, effects of
inhibiting hdac1 could, at least in part, be indirect through other
cells, such as immune cells. To determine the functional impor-
tance of Hdac1 speciﬁcally in progenitor cells after injury, we
spatiotemporally conditionally inhibited Hdac1 function only in
ERG progenitors. To this end we used the TetON system for con-
ditional cell-type-speciﬁc gene expression (Knopf et al., 2010). We
generated a double-transgenic line, in which the regulatory se-
quences of the ERG progenitor gene her4.3 drove expression of
the doxycycline (DOX)-inducible Tet-activator protein (Wehner
et al., 2014) and a Tet-responder line, in which a dominant-nega-
tive form of hdac1, fused to a YFP ﬂuorescent reporter, was ex-
pressed. To obtain a dominant-negative form of hdac1, we intro-
duced a point mutation causing a shift from histidine to alanine in
position 142 in the deacetylase active domain to produce a deace-
tylase domain-dead version of the protein. This approach was
equivalent to dominant-negative approaches to the highly
conserved sequence of the domain in the human gene (Hassig
etal.,1998;Pinhoetal.,2016).ThelinewasdesignatedTg(her4.3:-
TetA;TetRe:YFP-dnhdac1). Upon DOX treatment, the YFP-
dnhdac1 transgene was expressed in ventricular progenitor cells
to a much higher level than without induction or in other cell types
after induction, indicating spatiotemporally controlled expression
(Figures 6A and 6B). The construct was functional, as shown by
4-fold higher acetylation levels of histones in ERG progenitor
cells, compared with uninduced controls (Figure 6C).
Using this double-transgenic line to selectively target dnhdac1
to progenitor cells reduced the number of newly generated
HuC+/EdU+ neurons by 42.7% after injury (Figure 6D). In unin-
jured animals, ongoing neurogenesis was also reduced by over-
expression of dnhdac1 in progenitor cells (Figure S4B), conﬁrm-
ing that hdac1 is important for developmental neurogenesis. This
shows that hdac1, speciﬁcally in progenitor cells, is a functional
link in the chain of events of immune-system-activated regener-
ative neurogenesis (summarized in Figure 6E).
In adult ﬁsh, a rapid invasion of the injured spinal cord by mac-
rophages occurs within days (Hui et al., 2010) and lesion-acti-
vated macrophages produce Tnf. In situ hybridization for
hdac1 at 2 weeks post-lesion, the peak of regenerative neuro-
genesis (Reimer et al., 2008), indicated a strong increase in
expression selectively in the ventricular layer (Figure S4C). This
included olig2:GFP+ motor neuron progenitor cells (Figure S4D).
These observations support that macrophage to spinal ERG pro-
genitor cell signaling in spinal cord regeneration is likely
conserved across developmental stages.
DISCUSSION
We provide evidence for direct communication from a subset of
pro-regenerative macrophages to spinal progenitor cells via Tnf
to promote injury-induced neurogenesis.
Do activated tnfa+ macrophages represent pro-
regenerative macrophages?
Similar to mammals, activated tnfa+ macrophages show high
levels of cathepsin expression after injury, identifying them as
reactive macrophages (B€uhling et al., 2001). Tnf is seen as a
marker for pro-inﬂammatory M1-like differentiated macrophages,
also in zebraﬁsh, but it is now recognized that M1 versus M2 po-
larization signiﬁes a spectrum of differentiation stages (Nguyen-
Chi et al., 2015). Using scRNA-seq, we can now fully dissect the
expression proﬁle of speciﬁc subtypes of macrophages. For
example, lesion-activated tnfa+ macrophages express a mixture
of M1 and M2 markers, including hbegf, an M2 marker with likely
additional pro-regenerative properties (Wan et al., 2012). By virtue
of the direct pro-regenerative action of tnfa on spinal neurogene-
sis, we identify lesion-activated tnfa+ macrophages as a pro-
regenerative subtype in CNS regeneration.
Experimental inhibition of Tnf signaling reduces neurogenesis
by around 50% but does not completely abolish it. That is likely
because reactivated developmental neurogenic signals, such as
growth factors and neurotransmitters (Briona et al., 2015; Gold-
shmit et al., 2012, 2018; Mokalled et al., 2016; Reimer et al.,
2009, 2013) contribute to regeneration.
Since Tnf also promotes axon regrowth after spinal injury in ze-
braﬁsh, the same macrophage subtype could also act on axo-
tomized neurons to promote axon growth (Tsarouchas et al.,
2018). However, Tnf could also act via stimulation of ERGs and
other cells to secrete growth factors that act on axon growth
(Mokalled et al., 2016; Tsata et al., 2021; Wehner et al., 2017).
Other pro-regenerative macrophages have been described in
other organs, for example Nampt-secreting macrophages in
skeletal muscle regeneration (Ratnayake et al., 2021) or wt1b-
expressing macrophages found in heart and ﬁn regeneration
(Sanz-Morejo´ n et al., 2019).
Do pro-regenerative macrophages act on spinal
progenitor cells directly?
Crucially, ex vivo exposure of puriﬁed ERGs to both zebraﬁsh
and human Tnf showed direct action on ERGs by upregulating
ll
Article
1626
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021

critical genes for neurogenesis, hdac1 and mnx1. hdac1 regula-
tion in ERGs also correlated with manipulations of the immune
system and Tnf levels in vivo, further supporting direct action
of the mainly macrophage-derived cytokine Tnf (Tsarouchas
et al., 2018). Similar to our acute incubation, exposure of mouse
neurospheres to Tnf increases neurogenesis via Tnfrsf1a (Ber-
nardino et al., 2008). However, Tnf exposure inhibits proliferation
in rat neurospheres (Ben-Hur et al., 2003). While our cell-type-
speciﬁc manipulations support direct positive action of Tnf on
ERGs, the immune response in the injury site is highly dynamic
and interactive. For example, inhibiting tnfa expression in-
creases neutrophil numbers and il-1b expression in the injury
site (Tsarouchas et al., 2018). Hence, Tnf from pro-regenerative
macrophages may also indirectly affect spinal neurogenesis via
other cell types and signals in the injury site, in addition to its
direct action.
Is Tnf a regeneration-speciﬁc signal?
Tnf signaling may not be relevant for developmental neurogene-
sis in the spinal cord. The main source of Tnf are reactive macro-
phages, only present after an injury (Tsarouchas et al., 2018) and
expression of tnfrsf1a is dispensable for developmental neuro-
genesis in unlesioned animals, but not for regenerative neuro-
genesis, as we show here. In addition, our tnfa mutants show
apparently normal development. Moreover, during earlier devel-
opment overall expression levels of tnfa are low until at least 2
dpf, after the ﬁrst wave of motor neuron generation is over.
Knockdown experiments of tnfa showed that the retina, as part
of the central nervous system, also developed normally (Lei
et al., 2016). Similarly, mecp2 mutant zebraﬁsh show reduced
levels of tnfa expression throughout development but develop
to normal body length at least up to 7 dpf (van der Vaart et al.,
2017). These observations support the notion of unique Tnf
signaling mechanisms during regenerative neurogenesis.
What are the downstream effectors of Tnf?
scRNA-seq highlighted the AP-1 complex as signal transducer,
and our pharmacological inhibition of AP-1 conﬁrmed this action
in ERGs ex vivo. In salamanders, upregulation of AP-1 compo-
nents c-fos and junb in spinal ERGs after injury has been linked
to a pro-regenerative response. Similarly, Tnf-induced neuro-
genesis in mouse SVZ neurospheres coincides with increased
expression of c-jun, also a component of AP-1 (Bernardino
et al., 2008). Moreover, c-jun abundance in cortical progenitor
cells diminishes with age, correlated with reduced neurogenesis,
supporting a role for AP-1 in neurogenesis. Notably, our scRNA-
seq analysis indicates additional signals that may act via AP-1.
Another major signal transducer of Tnf, NF-kB1, forces differen-
tiation of progenitor cells in the developing mammalian cortex
(Methot et al., 2013; Yamanishi et al., 2015). We observed only
very low levels of nfkb1 in our scRNA-seq. We speculate that
the balance between Nfkb1 and AP-1 signaling in ERGs may
determine efﬁcient regenerative neurogenesis.
If Tnf is a signal that acts on ERGs by regeneration-speciﬁc
mechanisms, these need to eventually converge on generic
mechanisms of neurogenesis. Indeed, Tnf signaling increased
expression of mnx1, a bona ﬁde motor neuron differentiation fac-
tor (Seredick et al., 2012), suggesting that at least part of the
developmental program for neurogenesis and differentiation is
re-initiated by Tnf. hdac1, which is similarly increased in expres-
sion by Tnf, may function in reprogramming ERGs for neurogen-
esis (Goldman and Poss, 2020; Mitra et al., 2018). However, us-
ing our cell-type-speciﬁc inhibition of hdac1 function in ERGs,
we conﬁrm that hdac1 is required for both regenerative and
developmental neurogenesis in zebraﬁsh. Therefore, its upregu-
lation after injury could be also be a part of the reactivated devel-
opmental program for neurogenesis. Knowing that hdac1 and
mnx1 are upregulated during the switch from oligodendrogene-
sis to neurogenesis in ERG progenitor cells downstream of im-
mune system activation provides a framework to understanding
intracellular signaling in spinal progenitor cells after injury. This
will be useful for translational approaches, given that simply
enhancing extracellular Tnf signaling may negatively affect other
aspects of spinal repair.
Limitations of the study
While we show a signaling axis from Tnf via AP-1 and Hdac1 for
neurogenesis, there are likely to be additional signals from mac-
rophages that promote regenerative neurogenesis. Further can-
didates for functional tests can be gleaned from our present
scRNA-seq analyses. Moreover, there are likely to be additional
or alternative intracellular signaling pathways to promote neuro-
genesis in ERG cells. For example, even when Hdac1 function
was blocked, LPS could partially overcome this block to allow
limited neurogenesis. Further scRNA-seq analyses under these
experimental conditions, as well as direct binding assays of tran-
scriptional regulators are required to comprehensively unravel
the dynamics of intracellular signaling in ERGs in regenerative
neurogenesis.
Conclusion
In conclusion, we have provided evidence in a three-dimensional
in vivo context for direct communication between activated mac-
rophages and spinal progenitor cells after an injury that is spe-
ciﬁc to a regeneration context and we identify pivotal signals
and downstream gene activation. This increases our funda-
mental understanding of lesion-induced neurogenesis in the spi-
nal cord and provides potential molecular targets for intervention
in non-regenerating systems.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d RESOURCES AVAILABILITY
B Lead contact
B Materials availability
B Data and code availability
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Animals
d METHOD DETAILS
B Spinal cord injuries
B Generation of TetRE:YFP-dnhdac1 line:
B gRNA injections
B RFLP analysis of gRNA efﬁciency
B Drug treatment of whole larvae
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021
1627

B Ex vivo incubations
B Immunohistochemistry
B In situ hybridisation
B FACS isolation
B qRT-PCR
B Western blot
B scRNAseq
B Cell counting in whole-mounted larvae
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
devcel.2021.04.031.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the SuRF facility at Edinburgh Bioquarter for expertly facilitating
FACS sorting. Funded by the EU Cofund ERANET NEURON consortium NEU-
RONICHE with contributions from MRC (MR/R001049/1), Spinal Research,
and Wings for Life to C.G.B., a project grant from the BBSRC (BB/R003742/
1) to T.B. and a Wellcome Trust Senior Research Fellowship in Clinical Science
(ref. 219542/Z/19/Z) to N.C.H.; T.M. held a Tissue Repair PhD studentship
(MRC), L.K.D. was funded by a BBSRC Eastbio PhD studentship, D.W. was
funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Forschungsstipendium
WE5736/1-1).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, L.C., T.B., and C.G.B.; methodology, L.C., T.M., and
L.K.D.; investigation, L.C., T.M., L.K.D., E.A.A., A.-M.O., E.P., J.S., T.M.T.,
M.K., and D.W.; resources: B.E.P.H., R.D., and N.C.H.; writing – original draft,
L.C., T.B., and C.G.B.; writing – review & editing, L.C., T.B., and C.G.B.; fund-
ing acquisition, T.B. and C.G.B.; supervision, L.C., D.W., T.B., and C.G.B.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
INCLUSION AND DIVERSITY
One or more of the authors of this paper self-identiﬁes as a member of the
LGBTQ+ community.
Received: October 10, 2020
Revised: March 15, 2021
Accepted: April 28, 2021
Published: May 24, 2021
REFERENCES
Becker, C.G., and Becker, T. (2015). Neuronal regeneration from ependymo-
radial glial cells: cook, little pot, cook! Dev. Cell 32, 516–527.
Becker, C.G., Becker, T., and Hugnot, J.P. (2018). The spinal ependymal zone
as a source of endogenous repair cells across vertebrates. Prog. Neurobiol.
170, 67–80.
Becker, T., and Becker, C.G. (2020). Dynamic cell interactions allow spinal
cord regeneration in zebraﬁsh. Curr. Opin. Physiol. 14, 64–69. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cophys.2020.01.009.
Ben-Hur, T., Ben-Menachem, O., Furer, V., Einstein, O., Mizrachi-Kol, R., and
Grigoriadis, N. (2003). Effects of proinﬂammatory cytokines on the growth,
fate, and motility of multipotential neural precursor cells. Mol. Cell. Neurosci.
24, 623–631.
Bernardino, L., Agasse, F., Silva, B., Ferreira, R., Grade, S., and Malva, J.O.
(2008). Tumor necrosis factor-alpha modulates survival, proliferation, and
neuronal differentiation in neonatal subventricular zone cell cultures. Stem
Cells 26, 2361–2371.
Briona, L.K., Poulain, F.E., Mosimann, C., and Dorsky, R.I. (2015). Wnt/b-cat-
enin signaling is required for radial glial neurogenesis following spinal cord
injury. Dev. Biol. 403, 15–21.
B€uhling, F., Reisenauer, A., Gerber, A., Kr€uger, S., Weber, E., Bro¨ mme, D.,
Roessner, A., Ansorge, S., Welte, T., and Ro¨ cken, C. (2001). Cathepsin K–a
marker of macrophage differentiation? J. Pathol. 195, 375–382.
Caldwell, L.J., Davies, N.O., Cavone, L., Mysiak, K.S., Semenova, S.A.,
Panula,
P.,
Armstrong,
J.D.,
Becker,
C.G.,
and
Becker,
T.
(2019).
Regeneration of dopaminergic neurons in adult zebraﬁsh depends on immune
system activation and differs for distinct populations. J. Neurosci. 39,
4694–4713.
Chen, M., Reed, R.R., and Lane, A.P. (2017). Acute inﬂammation regulates
neuroregeneration through the NF-kB pathway in olfactory epithelium. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, 8089–8094.
Cunliffe, V.T. (2004). Histone deacetylase 1 is required to repress Notch target
gene expression during zebraﬁsh neurogenesis and to maintain the production
of motoneurones in response to hedgehog signalling. Development 131,
2983–2995.
Demy, D.L., Carre` re, M., Noche, R., Tauzin, M., Le Bris, M., Baek, C.,
Leshchiner, I., Goessling, W., and Herbomel, P. (2020). The cationic amino
acid exporter Slc7a7 is induced and vital in zebraﬁsh tissue macrophages
with sustained efferocytic activity. J. Cell Sci. 133. https://doi.org/10.1242/
jcs.249037.
Ellett, F., Pase, L., Hayman, J.W., Andrianopoulos, A., and Lieschke, G.J.
(2011). mpeg1 promoter transgenes direct macrophage-lineage expression
in zebraﬁsh. Blood 117, e49–e56.
Esposito, E., and Cuzzocrea, S. (2011). Anti-TNF therapy in the injured spinal
cord. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 32, 107–115.
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Buchner, A., and Lang, A.G. (2009). Statistical power an-
alyses using G*Power 3.1: tests for correlation and regression analyses.
Behav. Res. Methods 41, 1149–1160.
Ferguson, A.R., Christensen, R.N., Gensel, J.C., Miller, B.A., Sun, F., Beattie,
E.C., Bresnahan, J.C., and Beattie, M.S. (2008). Cell death after spinal cord
injury is exacerbated by rapid TNF alpha-induced trafﬁcking of GluR2-lacking
AMPARs to the plasma membrane. J. Neurosci. 28, 11391–11400.
Ferrero, G., Gomez, E., Lyer, S., Rovira, M., Miserocchi, M., Langenau, D.M.,
Bertrand, J.Y., and Wittamer, V. (2020). The macrophage-expressed gene
(mpeg) 1 identiﬁes a subpopulation of B cells in the adult zebraﬁsh.
J. Leukoc. Biol. 107, 431–443.
Flanagan-Steet,
H.,
Fox,
M.A.,
Meyer,
D.,
and
Sanes,
J.R.
(2005).
Neuromuscular synapses can form in vivo by incorporation of initially aneural
postsynaptic specializations. Development 132, 4471–4481.
Fournel, M., Bonﬁls, C., Hou, Y., Yan, P.T., Trachy-Bourget, M.-C., Kalita, A.,
Liu, J., Lu, A.-H., Zhou, N.Z., Robert, M.-F., et al. (2008). MGCD0103, a novel
isotype-selective histone deacetylase inhibitor, has broad spectrum antitumor
activity in vitro and in vivo. Mol. Cancer Ther. 7, 759–768.
Goldman, J.A., and Poss, K.D. (2020). Gene regulatory programmes of tissue
regeneration. Nat. Rev. Genet. 21, 511–525.
Goldshmit, Y., Sztal, T.E., Jusuf, P.R., Hall, T.E., Nguyen-Chi, M., and Currie,
P.D. (2012). Fgf-dependent glial cell bridges facilitate spinal cord regeneration
in zebraﬁsh. J. Neurosci. 32, 7477–7492.
Goldshmit, Y., Tang, J.K.K.Y., Siegel, A.L., Nguyen, P.D., Kaslin, J., Currie,
P.D., and Jusuf, P.R. (2018). Different Fgfs have distinct roles in regulating neu-
rogenesis after spinal cord injury in zebraﬁsh. Neural Dev 13, 24.
Greenhalgh, A.D., David, S., and Bennett, F.C. (2020). Immune cell regulation
of glia during CNS injury and disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 21, 139–152.
Hassig, C.A., Tong, J.K., Fleischer, T.C., Owa, T., Grable, P.G., Ayer, D.E., and
Schreiber, S.L. (1998). A role for histone deacetylase activity in HDAC1-medi-
ated transcriptional repression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 3519–3524.
Hayden, M.S., and Ghosh, S. (2014). Regulation of NF-kB by TNF family cyto-
kines. Semin. Immunol. 26, 253–266.
ll
Article
1628
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021

Hui, S.P., Dutta, A., and Ghosh, S. (2010). Cellular response after crush injury in
adult zebraﬁsh spinal cord. Dev. Dyn. 239, 2962–2979.
Hui, S.P., Sheng, D.Z., Sugimoto, K., Gonzalez-Rajal, A., Nakagawa, S.,
Hesselson, D., and Kikuchi, K. (2017). Zebraﬁsh regulatory T cells mediate
Organ-speciﬁc regenerative programs. Dev. Cell 43, 659–672.e5.
Hunyara, J.L., and Kolodkin, A.L. (2020). Repurposing developmental mecha-
nisms in the adult nervous system. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 65, 14–21.
Jahangiri, L., Sharpe, M., Novikov, N., Gonza´ lez-Rosa, J.M., Borikova, A.,
Nevis, K., Paffett-Lugassy, N., Zhao, L., Adams, M., Guner-Ataman, B., et al.
(2016). The AP-1 transcription factor component Fosl2 potentiates the rate
of
myocardial
differentiation
from
the
zebraﬁsh
second
heart
ﬁeld.
Development 143, 113–122.
Janssens, D.H., Hamm, D.C., Anhezini, L., Xiao, Q., Siller, K.H., Siegrist, S.E.,
Harrison, M.M., and Lee, C.Y. (2017). An Hdac1/Rpd3- poised circuit balances
continual self-renewal and rapid restriction of developmental potential during
asymmetric stem cell division. Dev. Cell 40, 367–380.e7.
Johansson, S., Price, J., and Modo, M. (2008). Effect of inﬂammatory cyto-
kines on major histocompatibility complex expression and differentiation of
human neural stem/progenitor cells. Stem Cells 26, 2444–2454.
Juszczak, G.R., and Stankiewicz, A.M. (2018). Glucocorticoids, genes and
brain function. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 82, 136–168.
Keatinge, M., Tsarouchas, T.M., Munir, T., Porter, N.J., Larraz, J., Gianni, D.,
Tsai, H.H., Becker, C.G., Lyons, D.A., and Becker, T. (2021). CRISPR gRNA
phenotypic screening in zebraﬁsh reveals pro-regenerative genes in spinal
cord injury. PLoS Genet 17, e1009515.
Knopf, F., Schnabel, K., Haase, C., Pfeifer, K., Anastassiadis, K., and
Weidinger, G. (2010). Dually inducible TetON systems for tissue-speciﬁc con-
ditional gene expression in zebraﬁsh. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107,
19933–19938.
Kroner, A., Greenhalgh, A.D., Zarruk, J.G., Passos Dos Santos, R., Gaestel,
M., and David, S. (2014). TNF and increased intracellular iron alter macrophage
polarization to a detrimental M1 phenotype in the injured spinal cord. Neuron
83, 1098–1116.
Kucenas, S., Takada, N., Park, H.C., Woodruff, E., Broadie, K., and Appel, B.
(2008). CNS-derived glia ensheath peripheral nerves and mediate motor root
development. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 143–151.
Kyriakis, J.M. (1999). Activation of the AP-1 transcription factor by inﬂamma-
tory cytokines of the TNF family. Gene Expr 7, 217–231.
Kyritsis, N., Kizil, C., Zocher, S., Kroehne, V., Kaslin, J., Freudenreich, D.,
Iltzsche, A., and Brand, M. (2012). Acute inﬂammation initiates the regenerative
response in the adult zebraﬁsh brain. Science 338, 1353–1356.
Lan, X., Chen, Q., Wang, Y., Jia, B., Sun, L., Zheng, J., and Peng, H. (2012).
TNF-alpha affects human cortical neural progenitor cell differentiation through
the autocrine secretion of leukemia inhibitory factor. PLoS One 7, e50783.
Lange, C., Rost, F., Machate, A., Reinhardt, S., Lesche, M., Weber, A., Kuscha,
V., Dahl, A., Rulands, S., and Brand, M. (2020). Single cell sequencing of radial
glia progeny reveals the diversity of newborn neurons in the adult zebraﬁsh
brain. Development 147, dev185595.
Lei, X.D., Sun, Y., Cai, S.J., Fang, Y.W., Cui, J.L., and Li, Y.H. (2016). Role of
tumor necrosis factor-alpha in zebraﬁsh retinal neurogenesis and myelination.
Int. J. Ophthalmol. 9, 831–837.
Lu, P., Kadoya, K., and Tuszynski, M.H. (2014). Axonal growth and connectiv-
ity from neural stem cell grafts in models of spinal cord injury. Curr. Opin.
Neurobiol. 27, 103–109.
Mazzolini, J., Le Clerc, S., Morisse, G., Coulonges, C., Kuil, L.E., van Ham, T.J.,
Zagury, J.F., and Sieger, D. (2020). Gene expression proﬁling reveals a
conserved microglia signature in larval zebraﬁsh. Glia 68, 298–315.
McCormack, R.M., de Armas, L.R., Shiratsuchi, M., Fiorentino, D.G., Olsson,
M.L., Lichtenheld, M.G., Morales, A., Lyapichev, K., Gonzalez, L.E., Strbo,
N., et al. (2015). Perforin-2 is essential for intracellular defense of parenchymal
cells and phagocytes against pathogenic bacteria. eLife 4, e06508. https://doi.
org/10.7554/eLife.06508.
Mechta-Grigoriou, F., Gerald, D., and Yaniv, M. (2001). The mammalian Jun
proteins: redundancy and speciﬁcity. Oncogene 20, 2378–2389.
Meletis, K., Barnabe´ -Heider, F., Carle´ n, M., Evergren, E., Tomilin, N.,
Shupliakov, O., and Frise´ n, J. (2008). Spinal cord injury reveals multilineage dif-
ferentiation of ependymal cells. PLoS Biol 6, e182.
Methot, L., Hermann, R., Tang, Y., Lo, R., Al-Jehani, H., Jhas, S., Svoboda, D.,
Slack, R.S., Barker, P.A., and Stifani, S. (2013). Interaction and antagonistic
roles of NF-kB and Hes6 in the regulation of cortical neurogenesis. Mol. Cell.
Biol. 33, 2797–2808.
Mitra, S., Sharma, P., Kaur, S., Khursheed, M.A., Gupta, S., Ahuja, R., Kurup,
A.J., Chaudhary, M., and Ramachandran, R. (2018). Histone deacetylase-
mediated M€uller glia reprogramming through Her4.1-Lin28a axis is essential
for retina regeneration in zebraﬁsh. iScience 7, 68–84.
Mokalled, M.H., Patra, C., Dickson, A.L., Endo, T., Stainier, D.Y., and Poss,
K.D. (2016). Injury-induced ctgfa directs glial bridging and spinal cord regener-
ation in zebraﬁsh. Science 354, 630–634.
Montgomery, R.L., Hsieh, J., Barbosa, A.C., Richardson, J.A., and Olson, E.N.
(2009). Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 control the progression of neural precur-
sors to neurons during brain development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106,
7876–7881.
Muller, G.W., Chen, R., Huang, S.Y., Corral, L.G., Wong, L.M., Patterson, R.T.,
Chen, Y., Kaplan, G., and Stirling, D.I. (1999). Amino-substituted thalidomide
analogs: potent inhibitors of TNF-alpha production. Bioorg. Med. Chem.
Lett. 9, 1625–1630.
Nelson, C.M., Ackerman, K.M., O’Hayer, P., Bailey, T.J., Gorsuch, R.A., and
Hyde, D.R. (2013). Tumor necrosis factor-alpha is produced by dying retinal
neurons and is required for Muller glia proliferation during zebraﬁsh retinal
regeneration. J. Neurosci. 33, 6524–6539.
Nelson, C.M., Lennon, V.A., Lee, H., Krug, R.G., 2nd, Kamalova, A., Madigan,
N.N., Clark, K.J., Windebank, A.J., and Henley, J.R. (2019). Glucocorticoids
target ependymal glia and inhibit repair of the injured spinal cord. Front. Cell
Dev. Biol. 7, 56.
Nguyen-Chi, M., Laplace-Builhe, B., Travnickova, J., Luz-Crawford, P.,
Tejedor, G., Phan, Q.T., Duroux-Richard, I., Levraud, J.-P., Kissa, K.,
Lutfalla, G., et al. (2015). Identiﬁcation of polarized macrophage subsets in ze-
braﬁsh. eLife 4, e07288.
Novoa, B., Bowman, T.V., Zon, L., and Figueras, A. (2009). LPS response and
tolerance in the zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio). Fish Shellﬁsh Immunol 26, 326–331.
Ohnmacht, J., Yang, Y., Maurer, G.W., Barreiro-Iglesias, A., Tsarouchas, T.M.,
Wehner, D., Sieger, D., Becker, C.G., and Becker, T. (2016). Spinal motor neu-
rons are regenerated after mechanical lesion and genetic ablation in larval ze-
braﬁsh. Development 143, 1464–1474.
Olivera-Martinez, I., Schurch, N., Li, R.A., Song, J., Halley, P.A., Das, R.M.,
Burt, D.W., Barton, G.J., and Storey, K.G. (2014). Major transcriptome re-orga-
nisation and abrupt changes in signalling, cell cycle and chromatin regulation
at neural differentiation in vivo. Development 141, 3266–3276.
Patel, S., Homaei, A., El-Seedi, H.R., and Akhtar, N. (2018). Cathepsins: pro-
teases
that
are
vital
for
survival
but
can
also
be
fatal.
Biomed.
Pharmacother. 105, 526–532.
Peters, V.A., Joesting, J.J., and Freund, G.G. (2013). IL-1 receptor 2 (IL-1R2)
and its role in immune regulation. Brain Behav. Immun. 32, 1–8.
Pinho, B.R., Reis, S.D., Guedes-Dias, P., Leita˜ o-Rocha, A., Quintas, C.,
Valenta˜ o, P., Andrade, P.B., Santos, M.M., and Oliveira, J.M. (2016).
Pharmacological modulation of HDAC1 and HDAC6 in vivo in a zebraﬁsh
model: therapeutic implications for Parkinson’s disease. Pharmacol. Res.
103, 328–339.
Ratnayake, D., Nguyen, P.D., Rossello, F.J., Wimmer, V.C., Tan, J.L., Galvis,
L.A.,
Julier,
Z.,
Wood,
A.J.,
Boudier,
T.,
Isiaku,
A.I.,
et
al.
(2021).
Macrophages provide a transient muscle stem cell niche via NAMPT secretion.
Nature 591, 281–287.
Reimer, M.M., Kuscha, V., Wyatt, C., So¨ rensen, I., Frank, R.E., Kn€uwer, M.,
Becker, T., and Becker, C.G. (2009). Sonic hedgehog is a polarized signal
for
motor
neuron
regeneration
in
adult
zebraﬁsh.
J.
Neurosci.
29,
15073–15082.
Reimer, M.M., Norris, A., Ohnmacht, J., Patani, R., Zhong, Z., Dias, T.B.,
Kuscha, V., Scott, A.L., Chen, Y.-C., Rozov, S., et al. (2013). Dopamine from
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021
1629

the brain promotes spinal motor neuron generation during development and
adult regeneration. Dev. Cell 25, 478–491.
Reimer, M.M., So¨ rensen, I., Kuscha, V., Frank, R.E., Liu, C., Becker, C.G., and
Becker, T. (2008). Motor neuron regeneration in adult zebraﬁsh. J. Neurosci.
28, 8510–8516.
Renshaw, S.A., Loynes, C.A., Trushell, D.M., Elworthy, S., Ingham, P.W., and
Whyte, M.K. (2006). A transgenic zebraﬁsh model of neutrophilic inﬂammation.
Blood 108, 3976–3978.
Ronchetti, S., Migliorati, G., Bruscoli, S., and Riccardi, C. (2018). Deﬁning the
role of glucocorticoids in inﬂammation. Clin. Sci. (Lond) 132, 1529–1543.
Sanz-Morejo´ n, A., Garcı´a-Redondo, A.B., Reuter, H., Marques, I.J., Bates, T.,
Galardi-Castilla, M., Große, A., Manig, S., Langa, X., Ernst, A., et al. (2019).
Wilms tumor 1b expression deﬁnes a pro-regenerative macrophage subtype
and is required for organ regeneration in the zebraﬁsh. Cell Rep 28, 1296–
1306.e6.
Schneider, C.A., Rasband, W.S., and Eliceiri, K.W. (2012). NIH Image to
ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 671–675.
Seredick, S.D., Van Ryswyk, L., Hutchinson, S.A., and Eisen, J.S. (2012).
Zebraﬁsh Mnx proteins specify one motoneuron subtype and suppress acqui-
sition of interneuron characteristics. Neural Dev 7, 35.
Shihabuddin, L.S., Horner, P.J., Ray, J., and Gage, F.H. (2000). Adult spinal
cord stem cells generate neurons after transplantation in the adult dentate gy-
rus. J. Neurosci. 20, 8727–8735.
Shin, J., Park, H.C., Topczewska, J.M., Mawdsley, D.J., and Appel, B. (2003).
Neural cell fate analysis in zebraﬁsh using olig2 BAC transgenics. Methods Cell
Sci 25, 7–14.
Stenudd, M., Sabelstro¨ m, H., and Frise´ n, J. (2015). Role of endogenous neural
stem cells in spinal cord injury and repair. JAMA Neurol 72, 235–237.
Stuart, T., Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Hafemeister, C., Papalexi, E., Mauck, W.M.,
3rd, Hao, Y., Stoeckius, M., Smibert, P., and Satija, R. (2019). Comprehensive
integration of single-cell data. Cell 177, 1888–1902.e21.
Suzuki, M., Tachibana, I., Takeda, Y., He, P., Minami, S., Iwasaki, T., Kida, H.,
Goya, S., Kijima, T., Yoshida, M., et al. (2009). Tetraspanin CD9 negatively reg-
ulates lipopolysaccharide-induced macrophage activation and lung inﬂamma-
tion. J. Immunol. 182, 6485–6493.
Tang, T., Zhang, Y., Wang, Y., Cai, Z., Lu, Z., Li, L., Huang, R., Hagelkruys, A.,
Matthias, P., Zhang, H., et al. (2019). HDAC1 and HDAC2 regulate intermediate
progenitor positioning to safeguard neocortical development. Neuron 101,
1117–1133.e5.
Torti, F.M., and Torti, S.V. (2002). Regulation of ferritin genes and protein.
Blood 99, 3505–3516.
Tsarouchas, T.M., Wehner, D., Cavone, L., Munir, T., Keatinge, M., Lambertus,
M., Underhill, A., Barrett, T., Kassapis, E., Ogryzko, N., et al. (2018). Dynamic
control of proinﬂammatory cytokines IL-1beta and Tnf-alpha by macrophages
in zebraﬁsh spinal cord regeneration. Nat. Commun. 9, 4670.
Tsata, V., Mo¨ llmert, S., Schweitzer, C., Kolb, J., Mo¨ ckel, C., Bo¨ hm, B., Rosso,
G., Lange, C., Lesche, M., Hammer, J., et al. (2021). A switch in pdgfrb+ cell-
derived ECM composition prevents inhibitory scarring and promotes axon
regeneration in the zebraﬁsh spinal cord. Dev. Cell 56, 509–524.e9.
van der Vaart, M., Svoboda, O., Weijts, B.G., Espı´n-Palazo´ n, R., Sapp, V.,
Pietri, T., Bagnat, M., Muotri, A.R., and Traver, D. (2017). Mecp2 regulates
tnfa during zebraﬁsh embryonic development and acute inﬂammation. Dis.
Model. Mech. 10, 1439–1451.
Wan, J., Ramachandran, R., and Goldman, D. (2012). HB-EGF is necessary
and sufﬁcient for Muller glia dedifferentiation and retina regeneration. Dev.
Cell 22, 334–347.
Wang, Z., He, X., and Fan, X. (2018). Postnatal administration of memantine
rescues TNF-alpha-induced decreased hippocampal precursor proliferation.
Neurosci. Lett. 662, 173–180.
Wehner, D., Cizelsky, W., Vasudevaro, M.D., Ozhan, G., Haase, C.,
Kagermeier-Schenk, B., Ro¨ der, A., Dorsky, R.I., Moro, E., Argenton, F., et al.
(2014). Wnt/beta-catenin signaling deﬁnes organizing centers that orchestrate
growth and differentiation of the regenerating zebraﬁsh caudal ﬁn. Cell Rep 6,
467–481.
Wehner, D., Jahn, C., and Weidinger, G. (2015). Use of the TetON system to
study molecular mechanisms of zebraﬁsh regeneration. J Vis Exp 25, e52756.
Wehner, D., Tsarouchas, T.M., Michael, A., Haase, C., Weidinger, G., Reimer,
M.M., Becker, T., and Becker, C.G. (2017). Wnt signaling controls pro-regen-
erative Collagen XII in functional spinal cord regeneration in zebraﬁsh. Nat.
Commun. 8, 126.
Wentzel, A.S., Petit, J., van Veen, W.G., Fink, I.R., Scheer, M.H., Piazzon, M.C.,
Forlenza, M., Spaink, H.P., and Wiegertjes, G.F. (2020). Transcriptome
sequencing supports a conservation of macrophage polarization in ﬁsh. Sci.
Rep. 10, 13470.
Westerﬁeld, M. (2000). The Zebraﬁsh Book: A Guide for the Laboratory Use of
Zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio), Fourth Edition (University of Oregon Press).
Wolf, F.W., Sarma, V., Seldin, M., Drake, S., Suchard, S.J., Shao, H., O’Shea,
K.S., and Dixit, V.M. (1994). B94, a primary response gene inducible by tumor
necrosis factor-alpha, is expressed in developing hematopoietic tissues and
the sperm acrosome. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 3633–3640.
Yamaguchi, M., Tonou-Fujimori, N., Komori, A., Maeda, R., Nojima, Y., Li, H.,
Okamoto, H., and Masai, I. (2005). Histone deacetylase 1 regulates retinal neu-
rogenesis in zebraﬁsh by suppressing Wnt and Notch signaling pathways.
Development 132, 3027–3043.
Yamanishi, E., Yoon, K., Alberi, L., Gaiano, N., and Mizutani, K. (2015). NF-kB
signaling regulates the generation of intermediate progenitors in the devel-
oping neocortex. Genes Cells 20, 706–719.
Ye, N., Ding, Y., Wild, C., Shen, Q., and Zhou, J. (2014). Small molecule inhib-
itors targeting activator protein 1 (AP-1). J. Med. Chem. 57, 6930–6948.
Yeo, S.Y., Kim, M., Kim, H.S., Huh, T.L., and Chitnis, A.B. (2007). Fluorescent
protein expression driven by her4 regulatory elements reveals the spatiotem-
poral pattern of Notch signaling in the nervous system of zebraﬁsh embryos.
Dev. Biol. 301, 555–567.
Yoshida, M., Horinouchi, S., and Beppu, T. (1995). Trichostatin A and trapoxin:
novel chemical probes for the role of histone acetylation in chromatin structure
and function. BioEssays 17, 423–430.
Zhang, Y., Liu, J., Yao, S., Li, F., Xin, L., Lai, M., Bracchi-Ricard, V., Xu, H., Yen,
W., Meng, W., et al. (2012). Nuclear factor kappa B signaling initiates early dif-
ferentiation of neural stem cells. Stem Cells 30, 510–524.
ll
Article
1630
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630, June 7, 2021

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Mouse anti-HuC/HuD (16A11)
ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# A-21271; RRID:AB_221448
Chicken anti-GFP
Abcam
Cat# ab13970; RRID:AB_300798
Mouse anti-Tnf
AnaSpec
Cat AS-55383
anti-Digoxigenin-AP, Fab fragments
Roche
Cat# 11093274910
Rabbit anti-histone H4 (acetyl
K5+K8+K12+K16)
Abcam
Cat# ab177790; RRID:AB_2732882
Mouse anti-alpha tubulin
DSHB
Cat# 12G10; RRID:AB_1157911
IRDye 800CW Goat anti-Mouse IgG (H + L)
Highly Cross-Adsorbed
Li-Cor
Cat# 925-32210; RRID:AB_2687825
IRDye 800LT Goat anti-Rabbit IgG (H + L)
Highly Cross-Adsorbed
Li-Cor
Cat# 926-32211; RRID:AB_621843
Alexa Fluor  488 AfﬁniPure Donkey Anti-
Chicken IgY (IgG) (H+L)
Jackson ImmunoResearch
Cat# 703-545-155; RRID:AB_2340375
Alexa Fluor 594 AfﬁniPure Donkey Anti-
Mouse IgG (H+L) (Minimally cross-reactive
to Rat, pre-adsorbed)
Jackson ImmunoResearch
Cat# 715-585-151; RRID:AB_2340855
Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins
Cas9 protein
BioLabs
Cat# M0386M
Fast Green FCF dye
Sigma
Cat# 2353-45-9
SygRNA-tracer
Sigma
Cat#TRACRRNA05N
Dexamethasone
Sigma
Cat# D1756
Lipopolysaccharides from Escherichia
coli O55:B5
Sigma
Cat# L2880
Pomalidomide
Cayman Chemicals
Cat# 19877
Mocetinostat
Cayman Chemicals
Cat# 18287
TSA
Sigma
Cat# T8552
Recombinant zebraﬁsh Tnf
Kingﬁsher Biotech
Cat# RP1318Z
Recombinant human TNF
Biolegend
N/A
AP-1 inhibitor SR 11302
Tocris
Cat# 2476
Collagenase
Sigma
Cat# C9891
Critical commercial assays
BioMix Red
Bioline
Cat# Bio-25006
RNeasy Mini Kit
Qiagen
Cat# 74106
iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit
Bio-Rad
Cat# 170-8891
SsoAdvanced Universal SYBR Green
Supermix
Bio-Rad
Cat# 1725271
Click-It EdU Imaging Kit
Invitrogen
Cat# C1008
Deposited data
scRNAseq of mpeg1.1+ cells from lesioned
and unlesioned zebraﬁsh larvae spinal cord
ArrayExpress
Accession code: E-MTAB-10379
scRNAseq of her4.3+ cells from lesioned
and unlesioned zebraﬁsh larvae spinal cord
ArrayExpress
Accession code: E-MTAB-10390
Experimental models: Organisms/strains
WIK wild type strain of zebraﬁsh
European Zebraﬁsh Resource
Center (EZRC)
https://zﬁn.org/action/genotype/
view/ZDB-GENO-010531-2
Tg (mnx1:GFP)
Flanagan-Steet et al., 2005
N/A
(Continued on next page)
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630.e1–e6, June 7, 2021
e1

RESOURCES AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Further information and request for resources should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact, Dr. Thomas Becker
(thomas.becker@ed.ac.uk).
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Tg (olig2:EGFP)
Shin et al., 2003
N/A
Tg (olig2:DsRed2)
Kucenas et al., 2008
N/A
Tg (mpeg1.1:EGFP)gl22
Ellett et al., 2011
N/A
Tg (mpx:GFP)uwm1
Renshaw et al., 2006
N/A
Tg (her4.3:EGFPy83)
Yeo et al., 2007
N/A
her4.3:irtTAM2 (3F)-p2a-AmCyanulm6
Wehner et al., 2014
N/A
tnfa mutant
Keatinge et al., 2021
N/A
her4.3:TetA;TetRE:YFP-dnhdac1
This paper
N/A
Oligonucleotides
control gRNA: 5’-
CCTCTTACCTCAGTTACAATTTAT-3’
This paper
N/A
gRNA targeting sequence zf tnfa: 5’-
CCCGATGATGGCATTTATTTTGT-3’
Tsarouchas et al., 2018
N/A
gRNA targeting sequence zf tnfrsf1a (exon
4): 5’- ATAGTTTGCTTGTTCCAGG -3’
This paper
N/A
gRNA targeting sequence zf tnfrsf1a (exon
5): 5’- AGGGTGAAGACTCCCTGGAA -3’
This paper
N/A
RFLP analysis for tnfrsf1a (exon 4) Forward:
5’-CAGGAATGCAGTGCAGAAAA-3’
This paper
N/A
RFLP analysis for tnfrsf1a (exon 4) Reverse:
3’-TGACAATCCAGTGCTATTTTGG-5’
This paper
N/A
RFLP analysis for tnfrsf1a (exon 5) Forward:
5’-AACATGTGGAGGGTTGGTGT-3’
This paper
N/A
RFLP analysis for tnfrsf1a (exon 5) Reverse:
3’-CGAGAGCATTCCCATCCTAA-5’
This paper
N/A
Primers for dnhdac1 mutagenesis and for
detecting hdac1, tnfa, tnfrsf1a and b-actin
mRNA, see Method Details
This paper
N/A
Recombinant DNA
Tet Responder vector
Wehner et al., 2015
N/A
Vector coding for Tol2 transposase
Wehner et al., 2015
N/A
Software and Algorithms
ImageJ
Schneider et al., 2012
https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/
GraphPad Prism 8.1.2
GraphPad Software Company
https://www.graphpad.com/
scientiﬁc-software/prism/
ZenBlue2.3 software, Zeiss
Carl Zeiss Company
https://www.zeiss.com/microscopy
Odyssey Fc Imaging system and Image
Studio Lite (v. 5.2)
Li-Cor Corporate Company
https://www.licor.com/bio/
image-studio-lite/
G*Power 3.1
Faul et al., 2009
https://gpower.software.informer.com/3.1/
LightCycler 96 Instrument Software
Version 1.1.1 (Roche)
Roche Life Science Company
https://lifescience.roche.com/en_gb/
brands/realtime-pcr-overview.
html#software
Cellranger pipeline v3.0.2
10X Genomics
https://support.10xgenomics.com/
single-cell-gene-expression/software/
downloads/latest
R 1.2.5042
R core team
https://www.R-project.org/
Seurat v3.1.5
Stuart et al., 2019
https://satijalab.org/seurat/articles/
install.html
ll
Article
e2
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630.e1–e6, June 7, 2021

Materials availability
Unique reagents generated in this study are available from the lead contact upon request.
Data and code availability
The single cell RNA sequencing datasets generated by this study have been deposited on ArrayExpress. The Accession number for
the mpeg1+ dataset is ArrayExpress: E-MTAB-10379 and the Accession number for the her4.3+ dataset is ArrayExpress:
E-MTAB-10390.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Source of zebraﬁsh used in this study are reported below and in the key resources table.
Animals
All zebraﬁsh lines were kept and raised under standard conditions (Westerﬁeld, 2000) and all experiments were approved by the
British Home Ofﬁce (project license no.: 70/8805). For experimental analyses, we used up to 5 day-old larvae of either sex of
the following available zebraﬁsh lines: wild type (wik); Tg (mnx1:GFP ml2), abbreviated as mnx1:GFP (Flanagan-Steet et al., 2005);
Tg (olig2:EGFP), abbreviated as olig2:GFP (Shin et al., 2003); Tg (olig2:DsRed2), abbreviated as olig2:DsRed (Kucenas et al.,
2008); Tg (mpeg1.1:EGFP)gl22, abbreviated as mpeg1:GFP (Ellett et al., 2011), Tg (mpx:GFP)uwm1, abbreviated as mpx:GFP
(Renshaw et al., 2006); Tg (her4.3:EGFPy83) (formerly known as her4.1:EGFP (Yeo et al., 2007)), abbreviated as her4.3:GFP; her4.3:
irtTAM2 (3F)-p2a-AmCyanulm6, abbreviated as her4.3:TetA (Wehner et al., 2014); tnfa mutant (Keatinge et al., 2021).
METHOD DETAILS
Spinal cord injuries
Zebraﬁsh larvae at 3 dpf were anaesthetised in PBS containing 0.02 % aminobenzoic-acid-ethyl methyl-ester (MS222, Sigma), as
previously described (Wehner et al., 2017). Larvae were transferred to an agarose-coated petri dish. Following removal of excess
water, the larvae were placed in a lateral position, and the tip of a sharp 30.5 G syringe needle was used to inﬂict a stab injury or
a dorsal incision on the dorsal part of the trunk to transect the spinal cord at the level of the 15th myotome. After injuries, the larvae
were returned into fresh water or into the appropriate solution depending on the experimental procedure.
Generation of TetRE:YFP-dnhdac1 line:
To generate the dominant-negative form of hdac1 (dnhdac1), the histidine in position 142 was exchanged to alanine by site-direct
mutagenesis (overlap-extension method). hdac1 was ampliﬁed and cloned from zebraﬁsh cDNA. This template was used to generate
dnhdac1 using the following mutagenic primers to change the nucleotide bases in positions 525 and 526 (XM_005159592) from CA to
GC (marked in red) paired with primers with added recognition sites for restriction enzymes (Pair 1: forward: 5’-TTATTTACGCGTC
CACCATGGTGAGCAAGGGCGAGGA-3’; reverse: 5’-GCCTCTGATTTCTTAGCAGCATGTAGACCTCCTGCCC-3’; Pair 2: forward:
5’-GGGCAGGAGGTCTACATGCTGCTAAGAAATCAGAGGC-3’; reverse: 5’- TTTATTAGATCTAAAAAACCTCCCACACCTCCCCCT
GAACCTC-3’). The two resulting fragments were fused and cloned into the Tet-responder vector (Wehner et al., 2015) down-stream
of a YFP coding sequence. Plasmid DNA (50 ng/ml) along with Tol2 transposase mRNA (25 ng/ml) was injected into single cell stage
embryos. Once adult, injected ﬁsh were screened for founders by breeding with the her4.3:TetA Tet-activator line. Founders were
visually selected for signal intensity and selectivity.
gRNA injections
The gRNAs were injected into the yolk at the one-cell stage of development. The injection mix was used the same day as prepared.
The mix consisted of 1 ml Cas9 protein (BioLabs, M0369M), 1 ml Fast Green FCF dye (Sigma, 2353-45-9), 1 ml 250 ng/ml SygRNA-
tracer (Sigma), 1 ml gRNA and 1 ml nuclease-free water. When two gRNAs were co-injected, the nuclease-free water was substituted
with the second gRNA. For every experiment two injection mixtures were made, one with the gRNA of interest and one with a control
gRNA (5’-CCTCTTACCTCAGTTACAATTTAT-3’). tnfa was targeted with a gRNA (5’-CCCGATGATGGCATTTATTTTGT-3’) as before
(Tsarouchas et al., 2018). tnfrsf1a was targeted by co-injection of gRNAs for exons 4 (5’- ATAGTTTGCTTGTTCCAGG -3’) and 5
(5’- AGGGTGAAGACTCCCTGGAA -3’).
RFLP analysis of gRNA efﬁciency
To test efﬁcacy of gRNAs targeting tnfrsf1a we used Forward primer: 5’-CAGGAATGCAGTGCAGAAAA-3’ and Reverse primer:
3’-TGACAATCCAGTGCTATTTTGG-5’ for exon 4 and Forward primer: 5’-AACATGTGGAGGGTTGGTGT-3’ and Reverse primer:
3’-CGAGAGCATTCCCATCCTAA-5’ for exon 5 to span recognition sites for restriction enzymes BstNI and BslI, respectively.
Genomic DNA was extracted from individual embryos at 1 dpf by heating the whole embryo with 100 ml of 50 mM NaOH at 95C
for 10 min. PCR products were generated using BioMix Red (Bioline, Bio-25006) and were subsequently incubated with 2 ml of
the respective restriction enzyme solution (BioLabs) for 1.5 h at the speciﬁed temperature, followed by separation on a 2 % agarose
gel (100 V for 40 min) and visualisation on a trans-illuminator.
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630.e1–e6, June 7, 2021
e3

Drug treatment of whole larvae
Dexamethasone (Sigma, Gillingham, UK) was dissolved in DMSO to a stock concentration of 5 mM. The working concentration was
10 mM prepared by dilution from stock solution in ﬁsh water. Lipopolysaccharides from Escherichia coli O55:B5 (LPS, Sigma) were
dissolved in PBS to a stock concentration of 1 mg/ml. The working dilution was 50 mg/ml. Pomalidomide (Cayman Chemicals,
Michigan, USA) was diluted in DMSO at a stock concentration of 10 mg/ml. For the treatments, 6.9 ml of the stock where diluted
in 1.5 ml of ﬁsh water. Mocetinostat (Cayman Chemicals, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) was used at a concentration of 1 mM; TSA (Sigma)
was used at 200 nM. Larvae were pre-treated for 2 h before the injury and were incubated for 24 and 48 hpl. Larvae were collected
from the breeding tanks and were randomly divided into Petri dishes at a density of maximally 30 larvae per dish, but no formal
randomization method was used. For most drug treatments, larvae were incubated with the drug from 3 dpf until 5 dpf, if not indicated
differently.
Ex vivo incubations
Per experiment, 150-200 4-day-old her4.3:GFP transgenic larvae per condition were incubated in 0.05 % trypsin (preheated to 37C)
on a shaker for 7 min. Samples were put on ice and centrifuged in a chilled (6C) table top centrifuge at 250 rpm for 7 min. The su-
pernatant was replaced with ice cold PBS, and samples were centrifuged again at the same settings. Tissue fragments were re-sus-
pended in 1 mL PBS (room temperature from here on) and dissociated using a 40 mm mesh ﬁlter. Cells were centrifuged at 250 RCF
for 7 min, the supernatant was removed, and cells were resuspended in 500 mL of serum-free Iscove’s Modiﬁed Dulbecco’s Medium
(IMDM). ERG progenitors were puriﬁed by FACS and incubated with various inhibitors and recombinant proteins in IMDM at room
temperature for 4 h. At the end of the incubation period, RNA was isolated for qRT-PCR. For incubation, the following inhibitors
and proteins were used: recombinant zebraﬁsh Tnf (20 ng/mL, Kingﬁsher Biotech), recombinant human TNF (20 ng/mL, Biolegend),
and the AP-1 inhibitor SR 11302 (1 mM, Tocris, Cat. No. 2476), compared to DMSO vehicle controls.
Immunohistochemistry
All incubations were performed at room temperature unless stated otherwise. Whole-mounts: At the time point of interest, larvae
were ﬁxed in 4 % PFA-PBS containing 1 % DMSO at 4 C overnight. After washes in PBS, larvae were washed in PBTx. After per-
meabilization by incubation in PBS containing 2 mg/ml Collagenase (Sigma) for 25 min, larvae were washed 3 x in PBTx. Then 50 nM
Glycine in PBTx was added for 10 minutes followed by two washes in PSTx. Larvae were then incubated in blocking buffer for 2 h and
incubated with primary antibody diluted in blocking buffer at 4C overnight. On the following day, larvae were washed 3 x in PBTx,
followed by incubation with secondary antibody diluted in blocking buffer at 4C overnight. The next day, larvae were washed three
times in PBTx and once in PBS for 15 min each, before mounting in 70 % glycerol. We used the following primary antibodies: mouse
anti-HuC/HuD (abbreviated as HuC; 1:100; InVitrogen); chicken anti-GFP (1.300; Abcam Cambridge, USA); mouse anti-Tnf (1:2000,
DSHB, Iowa, USA). Appropriate secondary antibodies were bought from Jackson ImmunoResearch (1:300).
In situ hybridisation
In situ hybridization on whole-mount larvae with digoxygenin (DIG)-labelled antisense probes was performed as previously described
(Tsata et al., 2021). Larvae were ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde (PFA; Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc) in PBS and treated with Proteinase K
(Invitrogen) followed by re-ﬁxation for 15 min in 4 % PFA in PBS. DIG-labelled antisense probes were allowed to hybridize overnight at
65C. This protocol allows efﬁcient probe penetration in whole-mount preparations of 5-day-old larvae (Wehner et al., 2017). Colour
reaction was performed after incubation with anti-DIG antibody conjugated to alkaline phosphatase (Sigma-Aldrich) using NBT/BCIP
substrate (Roche). Staining reaction was terminated by washing samples in PBT (0.1% Tween-20 in PBS). For NBT/BCIP-stained
samples, background staining was cleared by incubating samples in 100% ethanol.
In situ hybridization on agarose sections with DIG-labelled antisense probes was performed as described (Wehner et al., 2017).
Larvae were ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS (PFA), embedded in 4 % agarose in PBS and sectioned at 50-100 mm using a
vibrating blade microtome (Leica). Sections were treated with Proteinase K (Invitrogen) followed by re-ﬁxation in 4 % PFA in PBS.
A DIG-labelled antisense probe against hdac1 was allowed to hybridize overnight at 65 C. The antisense probe was synthesized
from the full-length hdac1 coding sequence used to generate the TetRE:YFP-dnhdac1 construct. Color reaction was performed after
incubation with anti-DIG antibody conjugated to alkaline phosphatase (Sigma-Aldrich) using SIGMAFAST Fast Red (Sigma-Aldrich).
Where required, samples were co-labelled with chicken anti-GFP antibody (Abcam, ab13970). Sections were stained for DAPI
(Thermo Scientiﬁc) to visualize nuclei, followed by two washes in PBS and mounted in 75 % Glycerol in PBS.
For adult in situ hybridization, 50 mm vibratome ﬂoating sections were permeabilised with Proteinase K (10 mg / ml) for 9 minutes at
room temperature, as described (Reimer et al., 2009). Sections were washed with 2 mg / ml glycine in PBS-Tween (0.1 %), followed
by a 20 min re-ﬁxation in 4 % PFA in PBS. Probes were hybridised at 65 C overnight, extensively washed in SSC buffer and incu-
bated in anti-DIG antibody (1:10000) at 4 C overnight. After extensive washes in PBST, colorimetric development was allowed to
take place for up to 4 hours at room temperature, followed by washes. Sections were either mounted on glass slides for visualisation
or processed for immunohistochemical detection of GFP in some transgenic animals.
FACS isolation
Per experiment and sample, 150-200 larvae were collected and the trunk containing the lesion site dissected (similar portion for
unlesioned control) on ice for qRT-PCR. Supernatant was removed and replaced with 0.05 % trypsin (pre-heated to 37 C). After
ll
Article
e4
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630.e1–e6, June 7, 2021

3-5 minutes tissue was dis-aggregated by pipetting and digestion was blocked by adding 10 % fetal bovine serum. Cell suspensions
were pressed through a 40 mm ﬁlter, centrifuged at 250 RCF for 7 min and the supernatant replaced by 500 ml of PBS + 5 % fetal
bovine serum. Cells were FACS sorted at 4 C and kept on ice for qRT-PCR.
qRT-PCR
Real-time PCR was performed using a Roche Light Cycler 96 (annealing temperature of 58 C) with SsoAdvancedTM Universal
SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad, 172-5271). Relative mRNA levels were determined using the Roche Light Cycler 96 SW1 soft-
ware. Samples were run in duplicate. We used the following primers: hdac1 forward 5’-TGTCCGAGTACAGCAAGCAG, reverse
5’-TGATGTAGACCTCCTGCCCA-3’; tnfa forward 5’-TCACGCTCCATAAGACCCAG-3’, reverse 5’-GATGTGCAAAGACACCTGGC
-3’; tnfrsf1a forward 5-ACTCATGGC GATCCAGCATT-3’, reverse 5’-AAGGAGGAGCAGAGCGTTAC-3’; b-actin forward 5’- CACG
AGAGATCTTCACTCCCC-3’, reverse 5’-TCCCATGCCAACCATCACTC-3’.
Western blot
Approximately 500 double-transgenic ﬁsh (her4.3:TetA;TetRE:YFP-dnhdac1) were induced at 3 dpf with 485 nM Doxycycline hyclate
(Sigma, D9891). Uninduced ﬁsh were used as control. 48 h post-induction, ﬁsh were treated with trypsin-EDTA (0.05 % ready-made
solution; Thermo Scientiﬁc) to obtain a single cell suspension for FACS sorting, using AmCyan ﬂuorescence (encoded by the Tetac-
tivator construct and therefore present in both induced and uninduced larvae). After FACS sorting, 1x106 YFP-positive and 1x106
YFP-negative cells were collected in cold Dulbecco’s PBS. Cells were spun at 1000 rpm for 5 min. The pellet was lysed in 200 ml
RIPA buffer supplemented with cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche) for 10 min/ 4 C. After sonication (10 sec), the lysate
was centrifuged at 14.000 rpm/10 min/4 C. The clear supernatant was boiled at 95 C with Laemmli buffer supplemented with beta-
mercaptoethanol. Equal amounts of sample (YFP- and YFP+) were resolved in a 12 % SDS-PAGE gel and proteins transferred to a
0.2 mm nitrocellulose membrane (BioRad). The protein detection was performed with primary antibodies against acetyl-histone H4
(1:1000, rabbit monoclonal, Abcam, ab177790) and alpha tubulin (1:5000, mouse monoclonal, DSHB, 12G10), and secondary anti-
bodies IRDye 800CW goat anti-mouse (1:10000, Li-Cor) and IRDye 800CW goat anti-rabbit (1:10000, Li-Cor). Membrane was
scanned using the Odyssey Fc imaging system (Li-Cor).
scRNAseq
Following cell dissociation and FACS sorting (described above), samples were processed on the 10X Chromium platform using 10X
Single Cell 3’ v3 chemistry following the manufacturer’s guidelines (10X Genomics, Pleasanton, USA). For each cell type, the two
conditions (unlesioned and lesioned) were prepared in tandem and processed together for GEM generation, reverse transcription,
cDNA ampliﬁcation and library construction following manufacturer’s instructions.
The libraries were sequenced on a Novaseq 6000 using a S2 ﬂowcell. The data was ﬁrst processed using the 10x Cellranger pipe-
line (version 3.0.2) and mapped to the zebraﬁsh genome GRCz10.The above procedures were carried out as a service by Edinburgh
Genomics (Edinburgh, UK). The resulting matrices were subject to quality control, normalisation and analysis in Seurat version 3 (Stu-
art et al., 2019) package for R, version 1.2.5042. Cells were selected to continue with down-stream analysis based on feature count
and mitochondrial gene percentage. For the her4.3 sample, only cells which had more than 200 features and fewer than 4500 features
expressed were retained. Additionally, only cells which had less than 5 % of their reads from mitochondrial genes were kept. Based
on these criteria, 3680 of the 5588 cells which were sequenced were used for further analysis (66 %). Genes which were found in
fewer than 3 cells were ﬁltered out.
For the mpeg1:GFP sample, only cells which had more than 200 features and fewer than 6000 features expressed were retained.
Additionally, only cells which had less than 20% of their reads from mitochondrial genes were kept. Genes which were found in fewer
than 3 cells were ﬁltered out. Based on these criteria, 8346 of the 9245 cells which were sequenced were used for further
analysis (90%).
Following this, data was normalised using ‘LogNormalize’ function with scale factor 10000, then the top 2000 highly variable genes
were selected and scaled to unit variance and zero mean with ‘Scale Data’. Principal Component Analysis was then performed on
these highly variable genes. RunTSNE and FindNeighbours were run based on the ﬁrst 20 principal components and unsupervised
clustering was performed with FindClusters (resolution = 0.5 for the her4.3 sample, resolution = 0.3 for the mpeg1 sample).
Differential expression analysis between the two conditions was performed using Seurat’s FindMarkers function using a Wilcoxon
rank-sum test.
Cell counting in whole-mounted larvae
A volume of interest was deﬁned centered on the lesion site from confocal images. The dimensions were: width = 200 - 300 mm,
height = 75 mm (above the notochord), depth = 50 mm. Images were analysed using the Imaris (Bitplane, Belfast, UK) or ImageJ
(http://imagej.nih.gov/ij) software. The number of cells was quantiﬁed manually in 3D view, blinded to the experimental condition
on at least three independent clutches of larvae (Tsarouchas et al., 2018).
To count the number of mpeg:GFP+ cells close to the spinal progenitor zone in lesioned larvae, two boxes were drawn of 70 x 40
micrometer each, each centring on the lesioned end of the olig2:GFP+ progenitor zone. mpeg:GFP+ cells were counted within 40
optical sections (of 1 micrometer thickness) of the centre of the olig2:DsRed+ zone.
ll
Article
Developmental Cell 56, 1617–1630.e1–e6, June 7, 2021
e5

===== Chang2016_Genesis_XenopusTailRNAseq =====
L E T T E R
Transcriptional dynamics of tail regeneration in Xenopus
tropicalis
Jessica Chang1
|
Julie Baker1,2
|
Andrea Wills3
1Department of Genetics, Stanford
University, Stanford, California, 94305
2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Stanford University, Stanford, California,
94305
3Department of Biochemistry, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195
Correspondence
Andrea Wills, Department of Biochemistry,
University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195. Email: aewills@uw.edu
Funding information
NSF; Grant Number: GRFP DGE-114747;
Katherine McCormick Advanced
Postdoctoral
Abstract
In contrast to humans, many amphibians are able to rapidly and completely regenerate
complex tissues, including entire appendages. Following tail amputation, Xenopus tropi-
calis tadpoles quickly regenerate muscle, spinal cord, cartilage, vasculature and skin, all
properly patterned in three dimensions. To better understand the molecular basis of
this regenerative competence, we performed a transcriptional analysis of the ﬁrst 72 h
of tail regeneration using RNA-Seq. Our analysis reﬁnes the windows during which
many key biological signaling processes act in regeneration, including embryonic pat-
terning signals, immune responses, bioelectrical signaling and apoptosis. Our work
provides a deep database for researchers interested in appendage regeneration, and
points to new avenues for further study.
K E Y W O R D S
Amphibian, organism, genomics, process, transcription, process
1
|
INTRODUCTION
Xenopus tropicalis is a powerful emerging model for studies of regener-
ation. Like axolotls and newts, Xenopus tadpoles can regenerate com-
plex structures such as limbs and tails. The X. tropicalis genome is
diploid, smaller than many other amphibian genomes (1.7 Gb), fully
sequenced and well annotated, making it tractable for genomic analysis
(Hellsten, Harland, Gilchrist, Hendrix, Jurka, Kapitonov, . . . Rokhsar
2010]). X. tropicalis fertilizations typically yield over 1000 embryos per
clutch, which develop to regenerative-stage tadpoles in just 2 days,
making high-throughput
studies
straightforward (Khokha,
Chung,
Bustamante, Gaw, Trott, Yeh, . . . Grammer, 2002). A further advantage
is that Xenopus tadpoles lose the ability to regenerate limbs and spinal
cords as they undergo metamorphosis (Kawasumi, Sagawa, Hayashi, &
Yokoyama, 2012]; Sims, 1962]; Slack, Lin, & Chen, 2008]), allowing a
means to identify the molecular hallmarks of regenerative competence
within diﬀerentiated tissues.
These strengths have led to a recent surge of studies examining
molecular mechanisms of tail regeneration in Xenopus. Amputated tails
fully regenerate lost spinal cord, muscle, vasculature, skin and cartilage
within several days (Chen, Love, Amaya, Gurtner, Werner, Barrandon,
. . . Auld, 2014]; Slack et al., 2008]). To form and repattern these tis-
sues, regeneration requires temporally regulated expression of multi-
ple developmental signaling pathways (FGF, Wnt, BMP, Notch, Shh
and Hox factors) as well as both intracellular and tissue-level stress
responses, including rapid changes in membrane potential, apoptosis,
reactive oxygen signaling and innate immune cell recruitment (Chris-
ten, Beck, Lombardo, & Slack, 2003]; Love, Chen, Bonev, Gilchrist,
Fairclough, Lea, . . . Amaya, 2011; Love, Chen, Ishibashi, Kritsiligkou,
Lea, Koh, . . . Amaya, 2013; Slack et al., 2008]; Taniguchi, Watanabe,
& Mochii, 2014]; Taylor & Beck; Tseng, Beane, Lemire, Masi, &
Levin, 2010]; Tseng, Carneiro, Lemire, & Levin, 2011]; Tseng &
Levin, 2012]). To better understand how developmental signaling,
cellular repair, and organismal stress responses are integrated over
time, we have conducted a transcriptome analysis to elucidate
biological processes that may be critical for regeneration over the
ﬁrst 72 h.
genesis 2017;55:e23015.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/dvg
V
C 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. |
1 of 6
https://doi.org/10.1002/dvg.23015
Received: 29 November 2016 |
Revised: 12 December 2016
|
Accepted: 13 December 2016
DOI 10.1002/dvg.23015

2
|
MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1 | Xenopus tropicalis husbandry, tadpole rearing,
and tail tip amputation
Xenopus tropicalis embryos were generated using natural matings or in
vitro fertilizations following published methods (Khokha et al., 2002]).
Tadpoles were reared to stage 41, following Nieuwkoop and Faber crite-
ria (Nieuwkoop & Faber, 1994]). At Stage 41, tadpoles were anesthetized
by immersion in 0.01% benzocaine until the escape reﬂex was lost. Tail
tips were amputated using a sterile scalpel at a position approximately 1=2
the distance from the tail tip to the anus. Post-amputation, we collected
250 lm of tissue adjoining the amputation plane, including all newly-
regenerated tissue, at 0, 6, 15, 24, or 72 h post amputation (hpa). Follow-
ing amputation, tadpoles were returned to normal 1/93 modiﬁed frog
ringer’s (MR) rearing medium until the desired regeneration time point.
All animal use procedures were carried out with IACUC approval
and veterinary oversight.
2.2 | RNA isolation and RNA-seq library preparation
RNA was isolated from clutches of sibling tadpoles collected at the
same time point. For biological duplicates, independent clutches were
used. Typically, 25–100 tail tips or regenerating blastemas were col-
lected for RNA isolation. RNA was isolated by incubation at 428C in
RNA lysis buﬀer (Sive, Grainger, & Harland, 2000]) containing SDS and
proteinase K, followed by phenol/chloroform extraction and precipita-
tion with ammonium acetate and ethanol. 1lg of RNA was used for each
RNA library preparation. RNA-Seq libraries were prepared using the Tru-
Seq kit (Illumina) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Resulting
libraries were sequenced on the HiSeq platform (Illumina), yielding 20–
150 million post-ﬁltered reads each. Our analysis used biological repli-
cates from all samples except 6 hpa and 15 hpa, which instead were
sequenced at additional depth (see Supporting Information Table 1).
2.3 | RNA-seq data analysis
Adapter sequences and low quality bases were trimmed using fastx_clip-
per (fastx_toolkit v0.13.2) for single end reads and trim_galore v0.3.3 for
paired end libraries. Reads were subsequently mapped to the Xentr9.0
genome assembly via Tophat v2.0.13 (Langmead & Salzberg, 2012]) with
very-sensitive parameters. Multimapped or unmapped reads were ﬁltered
using samtools v1.1. To generate count data, reads mapped to gene fea-
tures were summarized using HTSeq (Anders, Pyl, & Huber, 2015]).
To ﬁlter out genes with uniform expression over the time series, we
required that a gene be diﬀerentially expressed in at least one pairwise
comparison. All possible pairwise diﬀerential expression analyses were con-
ducted with DESeq2 (Anders, Huber, Nagalakshmi, Wang, Waern, Shou,
... Salzberg, 2010). Before adjusting p values for multiple testing, DESeq2
automatically implements independent ﬁltering using mean expressions
of each gene as a ﬁlter. Adjusting via the Benjamini & Hochberg method,
diﬀerentially expressed genes with FDR< 0.05 were called signiﬁcant.
Prior to clustering, we used DESeq2’s implementation of regular-
ized logarithm transformation to stabilize the variance of genes across
samples. Mean values between two biological replicates for genes that
are diﬀerentially expressed in at least one pairwise comparison were
input values for fuzzy c-means clustering, facilitated by FANNY from
the R package cluster (Maechler, Rousseeuw, Struyf, Hubert, & Hornik
2016]). The gap statistic (Amin, Greco, Kuchenbrod, Rigney, Chung,
Wallingford, . . . Conlon, 2014) was used to identify an appropriate
number of k groupings. To generate high conﬁdence sets of genes, we set
a membership threshold of 0.38, which represents the median of maxi-
mum membership values for each gene (Dembele & Kastner, 2003]).
3
|
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To examine the biology of regeneration, we performed RNA-Seq on
regenerating tail tips at six time points that span the early to late stages
of regeneration. Over this period, amputated tissues including the spi-
nal cord, vasculature, muscle, cartilage and skin, regrow (Figure 1a). We
amputated tails from stage 41 tadpoles, and collected amputated
whole tail tips (WhT, Figure 1b) or newly regenerated tissue at 0, 6, 15,
24, or 72 h post amputation (hpa). Tissue samples were collected from
independent clutches as biological replicates. mRNA extraction was
then performed and libraries were prepared for sequencing on the Illu-
mina HiSeq platform (see Methods and Supporting Information Figure
1). To identify genes with statistically variant expression levels over the
course of regeneration, we applied diﬀerential expression analyses for
all pairwise time point comparisons. In total, we found that of the
18,396 gene models available in the current X. tropicalis annotation,
3,897 were diﬀerentially expressed between at least two time points.
A master list of all diﬀerentially expressed genes is included as Support-
ing Information Table 1. We then applied fuzzy c-means clustering to
identify groups of genes with covariant expression over time, system-
atically characterizing dominant trends in gene expression. Using this
analysis, we found that there are 8 such temporal expression patterns
over the course of regeneration (Figure 1c). These comprise 1942
unique genes, or 50% of all diﬀerentially expressed genes. Through gene
ontology analysis, we functionally annotated key biological processes
that are prioritized in each of the 8 temporal patterns that encompass tail
regeneration. A full set of all enriched terms is included in Supporting
Information Table 2. These datasets provide a resource for examining
how dynamic transcripts may regulate distinct aspects of regeneration.
The predominant pattern of expression are genes highly upregu-
lated at 6hpa, which are enriched for several processes involved in cell
movement and communication (Cluster IV; Figure 2d). The most strongly
enriched term in this cluster is “microtubule based process” which
includes multiple dyneins, kinesins and tubulins, as well as associated sig-
naling components like MAP1B, MAP1A, RACGAP1, and ARMC4. We
also ﬁnd strong enrichment for “neurotransmitter transport” and “syn-
apse organization” driven by multiple neurotransmitter-speciﬁc solute
carrier proteins, synaptic vesicle components, calcium channel signaling
components, and other neuronal speciﬁc proteins. Collectively, these
terms suggest that cellular communication machinery, particularly
2 OF 6 |
CHANG ET AL.

utilizing neuronal-speciﬁc components, is upregulated earlier in regenera-
tion than previously known. Our analysis provides a clear set of candi-
date factors for future work focused on the processes underlying the
reorganization of cell populations in the ﬁrst few hours after amputation.
Shortly after a wave of intracellular remodeling at 6 h, we ﬁnd an
emphasis on pattern speciﬁcation, biology that is similar to that of the
whole tail tip prior to amputation. Cluster III is driven by developmental
signaling pathways for axis speciﬁcation, endoderm development and
anterior-posterior patterning, suggesting that existing developmental pro-
grams emerge after a wave of wound healing and cellular reorganization
(Figure 2c). Overall, this is consistent with many studies that have shown
upregulated expression and function of developmental signaling genes in
the ﬁrst day post-amputation.
Reactive oxygen species and innate immune activity have been
implicated in regeneration of the tail within the ﬁrst hours following
injury (Love et al., 2013]; Paredes, Ishibashi, Borrill, Robert, & Amaya,
2015]) and we ﬁnd strong evidence to support this ﬁnding, further nar-
rowing the window of time where these processes are the most active.
We show in Cluster VI (Figure 3b) that these processes are enriched
with peak expression at 15hpa. We also ﬁnd enrichment for “ncRNA
and “rRNA processing” within this cluster. While RNA metabolism has
not played a prominent role in studies of appendage regeneration,
FIGURE 1
Tail regeneration analysis in X. tropicalis. (a) Schematic of the Xenopus tropicalis tail at stage 41, highlighting structures that regenerate fol-
lowing amputation. (b) Time course of X. tropicalis tail regeneration following amputation at stage 41. Top pictures are cartoons representing regenera-
tion of tail tissues as shown in (a). The dotted lines circumscribe the portions of tissue collected for RNA-Seq analysis. Bottom pictures are DIC
micrographs of representative regenerating tails. (c) Fuzzy K clustering analysis recovers 8 dominant patterns of covariant gene expression.
WhT 5 Whole tail. Hpa5 hours post amputation
CHANG ET AL.
| 3 OF 6

lncRNAs and microRNAs have emerged as promising candidate regulators
of neural and muscle regeneration in other systems (Dey, Pfeifer, & Dutta
2014]; Yu, Zhou, Hu, Qian, Gao, Ding, ... Gu, 2013]; Zhou, Sun, Zhao,
Zhang, Wang, Li, Y., ... Zhang, 2015]; Zhou, Ding, & Gu, 2016]). Our anal-
ysis provides ﬁner temporal speciﬁcity to previously known regeneration
pathways, and suggests the potential for a broader regulatory role of
RNA processing and metabolism in tissue regeneration.
In addition to the ﬁndings described above, our analysis also validated
and reﬁned the temporal window of action for known biological processes
prioritized during regeneration. Clusters I and II contain genes that are highly
expressed in the trunk at 0 hpa but are progressively downregulated (Figure
2a,b), and like earlier studies we ﬁnd that these downregulated genes are
enriched for ionic transport and lipid biosynthesis (Love et al., 2011]). Simi-
larly, Cluster VII contains genes that are critical for immune cell extravasation
and actin based motility, notably the myeloid transcription factors Spi1 and
SpiB (Costa, Soto, Chen, Zorn, & Amaya, 2008]). Clusters VII and VIII (Figure
3c,d) both demonstrate a late prioritization of innate immune and wound
response signaling events, recapitulating earlier ﬁndings in the regenerating
FIGURE 2
Gene ontology and expression patterns for diﬀerentially expressed genes during regeneration, Clusters I–IV. (a) Cluster I contains genes
that are highly expressed in the tail tip, downregulated from 0 to 6 hpa, and then re-upregulated. (b) Cluster II contains genes that are highly expressed
in the whole tail and are downregulated steadily over the course of regeneration. Cluster III contains genes that are strongly expressed in the transected
trunk at 0hpa, and are downregulated during regeneration. Cluster IV contains genes that are upregulated in the ﬁrst few hours post amputation and
then downregulated. Heat maps of expression values uses the same color key as Figure 1c. Top gene ontology enrichment terms were identiﬁed using
EnrichR, and are shown with the corresponding –log10 of their adjusted p value. Higher –log10 represents more signiﬁcant terms. P values are adjusted
to take into account multiple hypothesis testing. WhT5 Whole tail. Hpa 5 hours post amputation
4 OF 6 |
CHANG ET AL.

spinal cord and highlighting other immune cell-speciﬁc genes that may con-
tribute to regenerative healing (Lee-Liu, Moreno, Almonacid, Tapia, Mu~noz,
von Marees, ... Larraín, 2014]). Certain posterior hox genes are known to
be critical for appendage regeneration (Christen et al., 2003]; Thummel, Ju,
Sarras, & Godwin, 2007]) and we ﬁnd that nearly all hox genes are
signiﬁcantly upregulated either at 15hpa or 24hpa, including anterior, medial,
and posterior genes from all 4 hox clusters.
4
|
CONCLUSIONS
Our analysis of the regenerating tail transcriptome represents a rich
resource for researchers studying many aspects of regeneration. We
expand on existing studies of tail regeneration by providing a tem-
poral reﬁnement of the dominant expression patterns and suggest
new biology that will drive further investigations.
FIGURE 3
Gene ontology and expression patterns for diﬀerentially expressed genes during regeneration: Clusters V–VIII. (a) Cluster V contains genes
with peak expression at 15 hpa. (b) Genes in cluster VI are strongly expressed beginning at 15 hpa and then are maintained at a high level until 72 hpa.
(c,d) Clusters VII and VIII contain genes that have peak expression late in regeneration, at 72 hpa. Heat maps of expression values uses the same color
key as Figure 1c. Top gene ontology enrichment terms were identiﬁed using EnrichR, and are shown with the corresponding –log10 of their adjusted
p value. Higher –log10 represents more signiﬁcant terms. p values are adjusted to take into account multiple hypothesis testing. WhT 5 Whole tail.
Hpa 5 hours post amputation
CHANG ET AL.
| 5 OF 6

Acknowledgments
The authors thank members of the Baker lab for their constructive
feedback during the development of this project. This project was
supported by a Katherine McCormick Advanced Postdoctoral fellow-
ship to AEW, NSF GRFP DGE-114747 to JKC.
References
Amin, N. M., Greco, T. M., Kuchenbrod, L. M., Rigney, M. M., Chung, M. I., Wall-
ingford, J. B., ... Conlon, F. L. (2014). Proteomic proﬁling of cardiac tissue
by isolation of nuclei tagged in speciﬁc cell types (INTACT). Development
(Cambridge, England), 141, 962–973. http://doi.org/10.1242/dev.098327
Anders, S., Huber, W., Nagalakshmi, U., Wang, Z., Waern, K., Shou, C., . .. Salz-
berg, S. (2010). Diﬀerential expression analysis for sequence count data.
Genome Biology, 11, R106. http://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2010-11-10-r106
Anders, S., Pyl, P. T., & Huber, W. (2015). HTSeq—A python framework
to work with high-throughput sequencing data. http://doi.org/10.
1101/002824
Chen, Y., Love, N. R., Amaya, E., Gurtner, G. C., Werner, S., Barrandon, Y., . . .
Auld, D. S. (2014). Tadpole tail regeneration in Xenopus. Biochemical Soci-
ety Transactions, 42, 617–623. http://doi.org/10.1042/BST20140061
Christen, B., Beck, C. W., Lombardo, A., & Slack, J. M. W. (2003). Regener-
ation-speciﬁc expression pattern of three posterior Hox genes. Devel-
opmental Dynamics : An Oﬃcial Publication of the American Association
of Anatomists, 226, 349–355. http://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.10231
Costa, R. M. B., Soto, X., Chen, Y., Zorn, A. M., & Amaya, E. (2008). spib
is required for primitive myeloid development in Xenopus. Blood,
112, 2287–2296. http://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2008-04-150268
Dembele, D., & Kastner, P. (2003). Fuzzy C-means method for clustering
microarray
data.
Bioinformatics
(Oxford,
England),
19,
973–980.
Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12761060
Dey, B. K., Pfeifer, K., & Dutta, A. (2014). The H19 long noncoding RNA
gives rise to microRNAs miR-675-3p and miR-675-5p to promote
skeletal muscle diﬀerentiation and regeneration. Genes & Develop-
ment, 28, 491–501. http://doi.org/10.1101/gad.234419.113
Hellsten, U., Harland, R. M., Gilchrist, M. J., Hendrix, D., Jurka, J., Kapito-
nov, V., . . . Rokhsar, D. S. (2010). The genome of the Western
clawed frog Xenopus tropicalis. Science (New York, N.Y.), 328, 633–
636. http://doi.org/10.1126/science.1183670
Kawasumi, A., Sagawa, N., Hayashi, S., & Yokoyama, H. T. K. (2012).
Wound healing in mammals and amphibians: Toward limb regenera-
tion in mammals. New Perspectives in Regeneration 33–49.
Khokha, M. K., Chung, C., Bustamante, E. L., Gaw, L. W. K., Trott, K. A.,
Yeh, J., . . . Grammer, T. C. (2002). Techniques and probes for the
study of Xenopus tropicalis development. Developmental Dynamics,
225, 499–510. http://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.10184
Langmead, B., & Salzberg, S. L. (2012). Fast gapped-read alignment with Bow-
tie 2. Nature Methods, 9, 357–359. http://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1923
Lee-Liu, D., Moreno, M., Almonacid, L. I., Tapia, V. S., Mu~noz, R., von
Marees, J., . . . Larraín, J. (2014). Genome-wide expression proﬁle of
the response to spinal cord injury in Xenopus laevis reveals extensive
diﬀerences between regenerative and non-regenerative stages. Neu-
ral Development, 9, 12. http://doi.org/10.1186/1749-8104-9-12
Love, N. R., Chen, Y., Bonev, B., Gilchrist, M. J., Fairclough, L., Lea, R., . . .
Amaya, E. (2011). Genome-wide analysis of gene expression during
Xenopus tropicalis tadpole tail regeneration. BMC Developmental Biol-
ogy, 11, 70. http://doi.org/10.1186/1471-213X-11-70
Love, N. R., Chen, Y., Ishibashi, S., Kritsiligkou, P., Lea, R., Koh, Y., . . .
Amaya, E. (2013). Amputation-induced reactive oxygen species are
required for successful Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Nature Cell
Biology, 15, 222–228. http://doi.org/10.1038/ncb2659
Maechler, M., Rousseeuw, P., Struyf, A., Hubert, M., & Hornik, K. (2016).
Cluster: (2016). Cluster Analysis Basics and Extensions. R package
version 2.0.4.
Nieuwkoop, P. D., & Faber, J. (1994). Normal table of Xenopus laevis. Daudin.
Paredes, R., Ishibashi, S., Borrill, R., Robert, J., & Amaya, E. (2015). Xeno-
pus: An in vivo model for imaging the inﬂammatory response follow-
ing injury and bacterial infection. Developmental Biology, 408, 213–
228. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.03.008
Sims, R. T. (1962). Transection of the spinal cord in developing Xenopus
laevis. Journal of Embryology and Experimental Morphology, 10, 115–
126. Retrieved from http://dev.biologists.org/content/10/2/115.long
Sive, H. L., Grainger, R. M., & Harland, R. M. (2000). Early Development
of Xenopus laevis. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
Slack, J. M. W., Lin, G., & Chen, Y. (2008). The Xenopus tadpole: A new
model for regeneration research. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences,
65, 54–63. http://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-007-7431-1
Taniguchi, Y., Watanabe, K., & Mochii, M. (2014). Notochord-derived hedge-
hog is essential for tail regeneration in Xenopus tadpole. BMC Develop-
mental Biology, 14, 27. http://doi.org/10.1186/1471-213X-14-27
Taylor, A. J., & Beck, C. W. Histone deacetylases are required for amphibian
tail and limb regeneration but not development. Mechanisms of Develop-
ment, 129, 208–218. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.mod.2012.08.001
Thummel, R., Ju, M., Sarras, M. P., & Godwin, A. R. (2007). Both Hoxc13
orthologs are functionally important for zebraﬁsh tail ﬁn regenera-
tion. Development Genes and Evolution, 217, 413–420. http://doi.org/
10.1007/s00427-007-0154-3
Tseng, A. S., Beane, W. S., Lemire, J. M., Masi, A., & Levin, M. (2010). Induc-
tion of vertebrate regeneration by a transient sodium current. The Jour-
nal of Neuroscience : The Oﬃcial Journal of the Society for Neuroscience,
30, 13192–13200. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3315-10.2010
Tseng, A. S., Carneiro, K., Lemire, J. M., & Levin, M. (2011). HDAC activ-
ity is required during Xenopus tail regeneration. PloS One, 6, e26382.
http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0026382
Tseng, A. S., & Levin, M. (2012). Transducing bioelectric signals into epi-
genetic pathways during tadpole tail regeneration. Anatomical Record
(Hoboken, N.J. : 2007), 295e, 51. http://doi.org/10.1002/ar.22495
Yu, B., Zhou, S., Hu, W., Qian, T., Gao, R., Ding, G., . . . Gu, X. (2013).
Altered long noncoding RNA expressions in dorsal root ganglion after
rat sciatic nerve injury. Neuroscience Letters, 534, 117–122. http://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2012.12.014
Zhou, L., Sun, K., Zhao, Y., Zhang, S., Wang, X., Li, Y., . . . Zhang, Y. (2015).
Linc-YY1 promotes myogenic diﬀerentiation and muscle regeneration
through an interaction with the transcription factor YY1. Nature Com-
munications, 6, 10026. http://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10026
Zhou, S., Ding, F., & Gu, X. (2016). Non-coding RNAs as emerging regu-
lators of neural injury responses and regeneration. Neuroscience Bulle-
tin, 32, 253–264. http://doi.org/10.1007/s12264-016-0028-7
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online ver-
sion of this article.
How to cite this article: Chang J, Baker J, and Wills A. Tran-
scriptional dynamics of tail regeneration in Xenopus tropicalis.
genesis. 2017;55:e23015. https://doi.org/10.1002/dvg.23015
6 OF 6 |
CHANG ET AL.

===== Chen2013_PLoSONE_MouseSCI+RNAseq =====
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
Transcriptome in Acute/Subacute Phases: A Resource for
Understanding the Pathology at the Systems Level
Kenian Chen1,2, Shuyun Deng1,2, Hezuo Lu1,2, Yiyan Zheng1,2, Guodong Yang1,2, Dong Kim1,2, Qilin Cao1,2*,
Jia Qian Wu1,2*
1 The Vivian L. Smith Department of Neurosurgery, University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of America , 2 Center for
Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, UT Brown Institution of Molecular Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America
Abstract
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating neurological disease without effective treatment. To generate a
comprehensive view of the mechanisms involved in SCI pathology, we applied RNA-Sequencing (RNA-Seq)
technology to characterize the temporal changes in global gene expression after contusive SCI in mice. We
sequenced tissue samples from acute and subacute phases (2 days and 7 days after injury) and systematically
characterized the transcriptomes with the goal of identifying pathways and genes critical in SCI pathology. The top
enriched functional categories include “inflammation response,” “neurological disease,” “cell death and survival” and
“nervous system development.” The top enriched pathways include LXR/RXR Activation and Atherosclerosis
Signaling, etc. Furthermore, we developed a systems-based analysis framework in order to identify key determinants
in the global gene networks of the acute and sub-acute phases. Some candidate genes that we identified have been
shown to play important roles in SCI, which demonstrates the validity of our approach. There are also many genes
whose functions in SCI have not been well studied and can be further investigated by future experiments. We have
also incorporated pharmacogenomic information into our analyses. Among the genes identified, the ones with
existing drug information can be readily tested in SCI animal models. Therefore, in this study we have described an
example of how global gene profiling can be translated to identifying genes of interest for functional tests in the future
and generating new hypotheses. Additionally, the RNA-Seq enables splicing isoform identification and the estimation
of expression levels, thus providing useful information for increasing the specificity of drug design and reducing
potential side effect. In summary, these results provide a valuable reference data resource for a better understanding
of the SCI process in the acute and sub-acute phases.
Citation: Chen K, Deng S, Lu H, Zheng Y, Yang G, et al. (2013) RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury Transcriptome in Acute/Subacute
Phases: A Resource for Understanding the Pathology at the Systems Level. PLoS ONE 8(8): e72567. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0072567
Editor: Michal Hetman, University of Louisville, United States of America
Received March 14, 2013; Accepted July 13, 2013; Published August 9, 2013
Copyright: © 2013 Chen et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
Funding: JQW, KC and SD were supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health, The Staman Ogilvie Fund—Memorial Hermann Foundation,
and the Senator Lloyd & B. A. Bentsen Center for Stroke Research. QC and HL were supported by the grant from NIH NS061975 and the TIRR foundation
through Mission Connect. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Competing interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
* E-mail: Jiaqian.wu@uth.tmc.edu; (JQW) Qi-Lin.Cao@uth.tmc.edu (QC)
Introduction
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is one of the most debilitating
neurological diseases. About 300,000 people are currently
living with SCI in the United States and nearly 11,000 new
cases are reported annually [1]. The expense associated with
the medical care is very high, but clinically available treatments
provide only modest benefit [2,3]. At present, there are no
effective treatments for this devastating neurological disorder.
Previous studies indicated that in the acute phase of SCI,
primary damage occurs as a direct result of trauma when
resilience thresholds are surpassed, leading to immediate
physical, biochemical and cellular alterations. Primary injury
triggers multiple secondary injury cascades that cause further
tissue loss and dysfunction [4]. Unraveling the detailed
molecular events and especially the key genes and pathways
would shed light on both understanding the injury mechanisms
and developing therapeutic strategies.
Due to technical limitations, previous studies have usually
focused on a small number of genes and pathways at a time
[5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15], and thus did not provide a
comprehensive view of the complex mechanisms contributing
to SCI pathology. Considering the large number of biochemical
cascades and cellular reactions involved, a global analysis is
necessary in order to elucidate the pathophysiology of SCI.
Although the use of cDNA microarray and genechip
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
1
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

technologies have provided valuable insights into the disorder
during 
the 
last 
decade 
[16,17,18,19,20,21], 
microarray
technology suffers from limitations in resolution, dynamic range
and accuracy [22]. Recent advances in Next Generation
Sequencing technology, specifically RNA-Seq technology,
make it possible to globally map transcribed regions and
quantitatively analyze RNA isoforms at an unprecedented level
of sensitivity and specificity [23,24].
Notably, recent large scale RNA-Seq studies have revealed
that most mammalian genes generate multiple RNA transcripts
through 
alternative 
splicing 
[25]. 
Alternative 
transcripts
encoding proteins with distinct functions or regulatory
properties can have profound physiological effects. Since the
formation of these gene isoforms is tissue and context-
dependent, targeting specific isoforms has the potential to
improve drug efficacy and reduce side effects [26,27]. Herein,
we use RNA-Seq technology to investigate the isoform
expression of genes during the SCI process, thus revealing
another layer of information that is valuable for targeted
therapy and drug design.
In this study, we have generated a comprehensive reference
data resource for a better understanding of the SCI process in
the acute and sub-acute phases. Comparing to the microarray
data from a prior SCI study that is similar to our study, RNA-
Seq data showed higher sensitivity, larger dynamic range and
was able to identify more differentially expressed genes.
Importantly, we have investigated the SCI process as a whole,
rather than as a collection of single gene entities. Based on the
data generated, we characterized the functions and pathways
involved, and developed a systems biology based framework to
analyze the SCI global gene networks that will enable the
identification of potential key determinants in the acute and
sub-acute phases. Some candidate genes that we identified
have been shown to play important roles in SCI, thus
supporting the validity of our approach. There are also many
additional genes that are identified whose functions in SCI
have not been well studied. In the future, we will examine the
roles of these interesting genes using animal models and
functional tests.
Methods
Animal model and tissue preparation
All animal care and surgical interventions were undertaken in
strict accordance with the Public Health Service Policy on
Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, Guide for the
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and with the approval of
Animal Welfare Committee at the University of Texas Health
Science Center at Houston.
A total of 24 female C57BI/6J mice (10-16 weeks of age;
20-25g; The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) were used
with 3 mice pooled together in each biological replicate: sham
control (n=2), 2 and 7 days after SCI (n=3). The surgical
procedure for SCI were described previously [28]. Briefly, after
anesthetization with a mixed solution of ketamine (80 mg/kg ip)
and xylazine (10 mg/kg ip), mice received a dorsal
laminectomy at the 9th thoracic vertebral (T9) level to expose
the spinal cord and then a moderate T9 contusive injury using
an Infinite Horizons impactor (Precision Systems and
Instrumentation) at 60 kdyn with the spine stabilized using steel
stabilizers inserted under the transverse processes one
vertebra above and below the injury [29]. The sham control
mice received only a dorsal laminectomy without contusive
injury. Afterwards, the wound was sutured in layers, bacitracin
ointment (Qualitest Pharmaceuticals, Huntsville, AL) was
applied to the wound area, 0.1mL of a 20 mg/ml stock of
gentamicin 
(Butler 
Schein, 
Dublin, 
OH) 
was 
injected
subcutaneously, and the animals recovered on a water-
circulating heating pad. Then mice received analgesic agent,
buprenorphine(0.05 mg/kg, SQ; Reckitt Benckise, Hull,
England) twice a day for two days. Bladders were manually
expressed until automatic voiding returned spontaneously,
which generally was within 7 days. The mice locomotion tests,
Basso Mouse Score, were performed at 2 and 7 days post-
injury before collecting the injured spinal cord tissues to confirm
the injury severity in each mouse is consistent with moderate
contusion SCI. At 2 or 7 days after SCI, the mice were
anesthetized again with ketamine and xylazine and perfused
briefly with normal physical saline. The injured spinal cords
were then dissected. 0.5 mm pieces of spinal cord were cut in
the injured epicenter and frozen in liquid nitrogen and
processed for RNA isolation. Histological staining was done by
the iron-eriochrome cyanine R (EC) staining. The spinal cords
from the epicenter, 6mm and 12mm to the epicenter caudally
and rostrally were used for staining.
RNA-Sequencing
RNA-Seq was performed on the polyadenylated fraction of
RNA isolated from tissue samples of acute (2D) and subacute
phase (7D) and normal tissues (control, denoted as CTR
hereafter). Three biological replicates were used for 2D and
7D, and two biological replicates were used for sham control.
Trizol was used to extract total RNA and the quality was
accessed by Bioanalyzer. Only samples with RIN>8 were used
for library construction. 150-300 ng total RNAs were used for
each sequencing library. RNA samples were polyA selected
and paired-end sequencing libraries were constructed using
TruSeq RNA Sample Prep Kit as described in the TruSeq RNA
Sample Preparation V2 Guide (Illumina). The samples were
then sequenced using the Illumina HiSeq sequencer.
Mapping sequence reads to the mouse genome
The 100bp paired-end RNA-Seq reads were mapped to the
mouse reference genome (version mm9) by the Top hat
software [30] (version 1.3.3) which uses the Bow tie read
mapper [31] (version 0.12.7). Because we used spinal cord
tissue which includes mixed cell types, in order to reconstruct
reliable gene structures and obtain accurate expression level
estimations, Top hat was fed with the option of “–no-novel-
juncs”. Only reads compatible with the annotated gene were
considered. The final step in setting up the parameters was to
designate option -G, a prompt which supplies Top hat with
known gene model annotations [32].
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
2
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

Transcriptome reconstruction and expression level
estimation
Mapped reads were assembled into RNA transcripts using
the Cufflinks software [33] (version 1.3.0). Cufflinks was run
using the annotation file (downloaded from Cufflinks web site)
of known genes and the mapped reads produced by Top hat.
Fragments Per Kilobase of exon model per Million mapped
fragments (FPKM) value (a normalized gene expression value
that are comparable between different samples and genes)
together with confidence intervals were estimated for each
replicate. The whole process (from mapping to FPKM
generation) was automated using our in-house pipeline.
FPKM threshold determination
To facilitate downstream analyses (such as gene expression
fold change analysis etc.) and to access the accuracy and
reliability of our RNA-Seq experiments, we conducted an
analysis based on the 95% confidence intervals of FPKM
values calculated by Cufflinks. For each gene, if its estimated
FPKM value had a lower confidence bound of 0 then it was
labeled as “unreliable” (had a possibility of being 0); in contrast,
if it had a lower confidence bound larger than 0, then it was
labeled as “reliable”. The numbers of “reliable” and “unreliable”
FPKM values were counted at each FPKM level. False positive
and false negative rate curves were produced in order to
identify a FPKM value that is optimized for both false positive
rate and false negative rate (Figure 1A). According to the
above procedure, we identified that at ~0.04 FPKM level, the
probability that a transcript can be reliably detected is ~0.97. At
0.1 FPKM level, the probability that a transcript can be reliably
detected is ~0.99. To be conservative and for the convenience
of calculating fold change, we choose 0.1 FPKM as the
threshold for following analysis. Any FPKM that is below 0.1
were set to 0.1 when calculating fold change of different
samples. This is similar in microarray data analysis, the
background intensities below threshold (floor value) are often
set to the threshold to avoid ratio inflation [34].
Clustering analysis
To group genes according to their expression patterns during
the SCI process, c-means clustering of genes expression
across CTR, 2D and 7D stages was performed using R
package mfuzz (version 2.16.1) [35]. Only genes that have fold
change > 2 between at least 2 stages were used for the
clustering (7239 genes). To evaluate the consistency of
expression 
estimation 
among 
samples, 
unsupervised
hierarchical clustering was performed using the hclust method
with complete linkage in R (Pearson correlation metric). Top
3000 genes with highest variation across SCI stages were
used.
Comparative analysis of RNA-Seq and prior microarray
SCI study
Microarray gene expression data of a similar SCI study was
downloaded from GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE5296).
Briefly, global changes in gene expression in C57BL6 mouse
model of contusion injury were evaluated using Affymetrix
Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays. Mice were subjected to a
moderate injury at the T8 spinal segment under isoflurane
anesthesia. Sections of spinal cord were analyzed from the site
of impact at 0.5, 4, 24, 72 h and 7 and 28 days after injury (n=3
per group), sham-injury (n=2 per group), or naive mice (n=2).
Four mice were pooled for each individual n, for a total of 12
mice for each injury time point. The time points that are in
common with our RNA-Seq data (sham control (0 hour) and 7
days after injury) were used for comparison analysis. We
downloaded the. cel files from GEO and processed those using
Bioconductor R packages (version 2.12). Intensity data were
normalized per chip using MAS5 algorithm implemented
through Bioconductor affy package. Gene symbols and gene
names were downloaded from Affymetrix NetAffx Mouse430_2
annotations file (http://www.affymetrix.com/support/technical/
byproduct.affx?product=moe430-20).
All probe sets except the AFFX control probe sets were then
mapped to gene identifiers using above mentioned annotation
file. In the situation when multiple probe sets were mapped to
one gene, the probe set with the greatest standard deviation of
expression values was selected.
To evaluate data correlation between microarray intensities
and RNA-Seq FPKM values, spearman correlation were
calculated. Only those genes that are detected on both
platforms were used for calculation. In order to compare the
ability of detecting differential expressed (DE) gene by
microarray and RNA-Seq, fold-change (in log scale) was
calculated using probe intensities of microarray or FPKM
values of RNA-Seq. Differential expressed genes were
determined as fold-change > 2 and p < 0.05 using an unpaired
two-sided t-test.
Quantitative RT-PCR
Quantitative RT-PCR was performed to validate gene
expression changes of C3AR1, CCL7, CD22, CD36, CLEC6A,
FCER1G, FCGR2B, Il7r, LPL, MSR1, and PTX3. Total RNAs
from injured and CTR mice were purified with Trizol reagent
(Invitrogen) and DNA was removed by DNase treatment
(Invitrogen). First-strand cDNA was synthesized from 900 ng
total RNA in a 20-µl volume using SuperScript® Double-
Stranded cDNA Synthesis Kit and SuperScriptII (Invitrogen).
The PCR reaction consisted of 1µl of 1:10-diluted cDNA, 5 µl of
iTaq SYBR Green Supermix With ROX (Bio-Rad Laboratories,
Inc.) and 100 pmol each of 5’ and 3’ primers (shown as below)
in a total volume of 10 µl and was performed in ABI 7900HT
(Applied Biosystems) for 40 cycles with denaturation at 95° C
for 15 seconds, annealing at 60° C for 30 seconds and
extension at 72° C for 30 seconds. RNA without reverse
transcriptase treatment was used as negative control. All qPCR
reactions were performed in triplicate and Ct values were
averaged. Relative Expression Fold Change was calculated
using 2-ΔΔCt method [36]. The calculation was performed
between 2D/CTR and 7D/CTR respectively. Housekeeping
gene Hprt was used. Amplification primers for qRT-PCR were
designed by using PrimerExpress3.0 Software (Applied
Biosystems, Life Technologies). The primer sequences were:
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
3
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

Figure 1.  Identification of differentially expressed genes.  (A) Detection threshold determination. False positive and negative
rates for the detection of genes as a function of detection threshold used, demonstrating how a detection threshold of 0.04 FPKM
was determined. A more conservative threshold 0.1 FPKM was chosen for downstream analysis (the probability that a transcript can
be reliably detected is ~0.99). (B) Table and Venn diagrams show the distribution of genes that changed > 2 fold and were
statistically significant (t-test p < 0.05) in 2D and 7D stages.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072567.g001
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
4
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

C3AR1 
forward 
primer: 
TCTCACCCTGGCCGATTTC,
C3AR1 reverse primer: GGGATAAGTTTGCACAGGAACAA;
CCL7 forward primer: AATGTGCCTGAACAGAAACCAA,
CCL7 reverse primer: CTTAGGACCGTGATCAACACATTT;
CD22 forward primer: CAGGGACCCCAGCAACAC, CD22
reverse primer: ATTCACATTCTCATAATCCCCATAGG; CD36
forward primer: CCTGGGAGTTGGCGAGAAA, CD36 reverse
primer: CCAATAACAGCTCCAGCAATGA, CLEC6A forward
primer: 
TCTGTGGCATTTAACTCAAGTGTGT, 
CLEC6A
reverse primer: TTGCATCTGTCTCCAAAATACGA; FCER1G
forward primer: CCCGGAGCCAGGAGACATAT, FCER1G
reverse 
primer: 
GAATTAGAAGTGGGAAAAGAATGCA;
FCGR2B forward primer: TCCAGGTGCTCAAGGAAGACA,
FCGR2B reverse primer: CGGATGGACCTCCCATTGT; IL7R
forward 
primer: 
CACAAGAACAACAATCCCACAGA, 
IL7R
reverse primer: ACTCGCTCCAGAAGCCTTTG; LPL forward
primer: CGCTCCATTCATCTCTTCATTG, LPL reverse primer:
AGGCAGAGCCCTTTCTCAAAG; 
MSR1 
forward 
primer:
TTTACCAGCAATGACAAAAGAGATG, MSR1 reverse primer:
AAGGGATGCTGTCATTGAACGT; 
PTX3 
forward 
primer:
GGACAACGAAATAGACAATGGACTT, PTX3 reverse primer:
CGAGTTCTCCAGCATGATGAAC; One internal control: HPRT
(forward 
primer: 
TATGCCGAGGATTTGGAAAA, 
reverse
primer: ACAGAGGGCCACAATGTGAT).
Systematic identification of potentially important genes
in SCI acute/subacute phases
In order to identify genes that play important roles during
SCI, we employed a systems based approach. First,
differentially expressed genes were selected for network
construction. With the purpose to create a reasonable size
network that included an essential number of genes involved in
SCI process, we selected top 10% up/down-regulated genes
(fold change > 2) for the network construction. In the second
step, selected differentially expressed genes were uploaded
into ingenuity pathway analysis. Networks for acute (2D) and
subacute (7D) phases were constructed using IPA software,
and merged into a global network for each stage. Genes that
do not have connections with other networks were left out.
Briefly, the IPA software constructs networks that are optimized
for both interconnectivity and the number of focus genes
(genes in the uploaded dataset). From these focus genes, the
network grows using neighborhood genes. Thus, some genes
that are not in the focus gene dataset are also included in the
final network (the white nodes). In 7D, because there are many
more down-regulated genes than in 2D, we constructed
separate networks using up- or down-regulated genes. In the
third step, the connection number of the genes that appeared
in the network was obtained from IPA and used as an indicator
of the genes’ involvement in the constructed network. In the
fourth step, genes were further selected based on the following
criteria: location on plasma membrane or in extra cellular space
and fold-change > 2. Because there are a relatively small
number of genes that have drug information in ingenuity
knowledge base, we also included the genes with available
drug information regardless of their cellular location. We then
calculated an index number considering both the fold change
and the connection number of a gene in the constructed
network and ranked the genes based on this number
(relevance index: RI = abs(log(Fold change)) *(Connection
number)). We searched related literatures in the PubMed
database to further select interesting genes for qRT-PCR
validation.
Gene set enrichment analysis
Gene 
set 
enrichment 
analysis 
(GSEA: 
http://
www.broad.mit.edu/GSEA) [37] was used to understand the
biological pathways involved in SCI. We used the built-in C2
and C5 curated gene sets (Molecular Signatures Database
(MSigDB 
3.0: 
www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb)). 
The
statistical significance of GSEA was analyzed using 1000
permutations. Enrichment was compared among Normal, 2D
SCI and 7D SCI stages in this study. A positive enrichment
score indicates that the specific molecular signature correlated
with the SCI phenotype. The significantly enriched gene sets,
such as those related to hypoxia and energy metabolism, were
further analyzed. Briefly, the genes in the leading subset (which
mainly contribute to the enrichment score) were analyzed using
IPA in order to study their functions and networks.
Results
Transcriptome dynamics at acute/subacute phases of
SCI
Clinically relevant contusion SCI model was used in this
study. The contusion SCI resulted in a central injury devoid of
neurons and glias due to the loss of neural tissue and an outer
rim of spared white matter in the injury epicenter (Figure S1).
The central injury gradually increased while the peripheral
spared white matter gradually decreased in the caudal and
rostral spinal cords (Figure S1). The injury size and the
percentage of spared white matter were closely correlated with
the injury severity determined by the injury forces of the
contusion impactor [38,39]. Moderate contusion SCI was used
in the present study and the injury severity was confirmed by
the histology staining and the locomotion test: Basso Mouse
Score.
Transcriptomes were reconstructed using our in-house
pipeline (see details in Materials and Methods). ~95% of all
reads were mapped to the mouse reference genome (NCBI37/
mm9) and over 100 million reads were recognized as spanning
a splice junction (Table S1) (all sequences have been
submitted to GEO database: GEO Series accession number
GSE45376). The estimated normalized expression levels were
reported in FPKM. To achieve accurate estimation of
expression level, we focused on known transcripts in our study
(Table S2). We identified a statistical threshold for the reliability
of expression measurement based on FPKM values (see
Materials and Methods). False positive and false negative rate
curves for each biological replicates were then generated to
identify an optimized FPKM threshold that minimized both false
positive rates and false negative rates (Figure 1A). These
analyses reveal that when a FPKM value is > ~0.04, the
reliability of the FPKM is estimated to be ~0.97; when a FPKM
value is > ~0.1, the reliability of the FPKM ~0.99, reflecting a
high quality of expression level estimation. Therefore, we set
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
5
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

the threshold to 0.1. FPKM values below 0.1 were set to 0.1 as
the lowest expression value to avoid ratio inflation when
calculating 
fold 
change 
of 
gene 
expression. 
Pearson
correlation coefficients of global gene expression between
replicates were high (r > 0.94) (Figure S2 A), indicate high
consistency between replicates. Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering of RNA-Seq data also shows good correlations
among replicates (Figure S2 B).
Quantitative comparison of 2D and 7D expression to CTR
expression allowed for the identification of all genes that were
differentially expressed in these two stages. All genes up/
down-regulated by more than 2-fold and statistically significant
(t-test p < 0.05) were counted and summarized in table (Figure
1B Venn diagram). According to our criteria, there were 2832
differentially expressed genes (DE genes) at 2D stage, and
4207 DE genes at 7D stage. 1802 genes differentially
expressed in both 2D and 7D stages. 7D had more DE genes
compared to 2D, because there were more down-regulated
genes in 7D than in 2D. 1187 genes were down-regulated in
2D; while 2579 genes were down-regulated in 7D. Down-
regulated gene number increased in 7D samples because of
increased neural cell death. Among these, 894 genes were
significantly down-regulated in both 2D and 7D. Genes
involved in ‘Nervous System Development and Function’ were
enriched. There were similar numbers of genes up-regulated in
2D and 7D. 1645 genes were up-regulated in 2D, and 1628
genes were up-regulated in 7D. A large number (906) were up-
regulated in both 2D and 7D, involving more than1/2 up-
regulated genes in 2D or 7D. Genes related with ‘Inflammatory
Response’ were enriched.
We used cluster analysis (c-means clustering) to separate
7239 genes that changed >2 folds over the time course into 9
groups (Figure S2 C). ‘Nervous system development and
function’ was among the top enriched functional categories in
clusters 3, 4 and 8, while ‘inflammatory response’ was among
the top enriched functional categories in clusters 1, 2, 5 and 9.
RNA-Seq in comparison with microarray study
A number of studies comparing the RNA-Seq and microarray
accuracy, dynamic range and differential expression detection
showed that RNA-Seq is superior to microarray and can
provide novel information [22,40,41,42,43,44]. To evaluate the
strength and validity of our RNA-Seq data, we searched GEO
for microarray experiments that are comparable to our study in
terms of the animal model and the type of injury. The only
comparable microarray SCI experiment is GSE5296 (see
Material and Method). In this study, C57BL6 mouse model of
contusion injury (at thoracic vertebral (T8) level) were
evaluated using Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays.
Global changes in gene expression were monitored at different
time points (sham control, 0.5, 4, 24, 72 h and 7 and 28 days
after injury). We compared the common time points of the
microarray study with our data at 0 hour (sham control) and 7
days after SCI. The spearman correlations between 0 hour
(sham control) and 7 days after SCI are very high in the
microarray study and are close to the correlations between
biological replicates of the same time point (Figure S3 A). RNA-
Seq shows increased detection of differential expressed genes
between CTR and 7D (Figure S3 B). Together, our analysis
results demonstrated that RNA-Seq is more sensitive and has
broader dynamic range than microarray (Figure S3 B,C).
Enriched functional categories and pathway analysis
The large number of DE genes in 2D and 7D demonstrates a
dramatic impact of the injury to the transcriptome. To
systematically characterize the functions of the DE genes, we
searched for the enriched functional categories among genes
that changed most significantly. To balance the numbers of up-
and down-regulated genes selected, top 10% up-regulated and
down-regulated genes (genes fold change >2) were used for
the analysis. Top enriched functional categories included
‘inflammation response’, ‘neurological disease’, ‘cell death and
survival’ and ‘nervous system development and function’ at
both 2D and 7D. However, the specific genes in these
functional categories and gene numbers varied between 2D
and 7D (Table S3). The number of genes involved in the
functional categories ‘inflammation response’, ‘cell death and
survival’ and ‘nervous system development’ all increased in 7D
(101, 73 and 111, respectively) compared with 2D (77, 47 and
48, respectively), reflecting that inflammation, cell death, and
nervous system necrosis become more extensive in 7D than in
2D samples. Most genes involved in ‘nervous system
development’ were down-regulated. In 2D, some genes, such
as Tnf, Il6, Lif, Il1b, Adipoq, Il1rn and Ccl13 were involved in
multiple functional categories, indicating that they may play
multiple roles in SCI acute phase. In 7D, CXCR4, Grin1, Spp1,
Cybb and Ccl13 were also involved in multiple functional
categories.
Further, we analyzed the biological processes enriched in
genes that changed most significantly (top 10% of the genes
fold change > 2) in 2D and 7D by using Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (IPA). For 2D and 7D, the top 15 enriched canonical
pathways are shown in Figure 2A. IPA analysis revealed that
2D and 7D shared many significantly over-represented
pathways. Among the top enriched pathways (p < 0.05), 19
appeared in both 2D and 7D. These included the LXR/RXR
Activation, Atherosclerosis Signaling and TREM1 Signaling
pathways among others. In addition to these shared pathways,
there were also different canonical pathways in 2D and 7D. For
example, among the enriched pathways, Glutamate Receptor
Signaling, which included mostly down-regulated genes
because of increased neuron cell death, only appeared in 7D.
In 2D, the LXR/RXR pathway was one of the top enriched
pathways, indicating the activation of the LXR/RXR pathway in
the acute phase (Figure 2B). Among the ~50 genes that are
involved in LXR/RXR pathway, 15 genes were up-regulated by
more than 20-fold, including Tnf, Il6 and Il1b, which participate
in multiple pathways (Table S4).
We also extended the above analysis by using more relaxed
fold change criteria (>2 fold in both directions and >10 fold in
both directions respectively), and identified similar critical
pathways and networks such as LXR/RXR activation pathway,
Atherosclerosis Signaling and others.
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
6
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

Figure 2.  The top canonical pathways enriched in the differentially expressed genes.  (A) Top 15 canonical pathways
enriched in top 10% up/down-regulated genes of 2D/CTR and 7D/CTR are shown. The –log(P value) of the enrichment of each
canonical pathway was plotted. (B) LXR/RXR Activation pathway up-regulated genes are colored pink. The color of a gene reflects
its fold change. The higher the fold change the deeper the color.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072567.g002
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
7
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

Alternative splicing
An advantage of RNA-Seq technology is its ability to discern
expression levels of the splicing isoforms of genes (Table S2),
thus providing yet another layer of information that can be
critical for future pharmacological interventions [26]. We
counted the number of genes that have more than one
annotated isoform expressed in all stages of SCI. There were
2741, 2946 and 2906 in CTR, 2D, 7D stages respectively. Up
to 12 annotated isoforms per gene were observed, although
the majority of genes (99%) had 1-5 isoforms (Figure 3A). The
maximum likelihood estimation of expression level of each
gene’s isoforms was performed using the cufflinks software.
Among the differentially expressed genes, 10327 isoforms
changed by >2 fold between at least 2 stages during SCI (CTR,
2D and 7D). The isoforms showed dynamic expression
changes over the time course of the injury. We describe two
interesting examples in Figure 3B.
The gene Spp1 (osteopontin, Opn) is a cytokine that is up-
regulated after cell injury and tissue repair [45]. Previous
studies have shown that blocking Spp1 expression at sites of
cutaneous wounding resulted in reduced granulation tissue,
scarring 
and 
inflammation-associated 
fibrosis 
[46].
Interestingly, Spp1 has also been shown to stimulate axon
growth in retinal ganglion cells [47]. Our RNA-Seq profiling of
Spp1 shows a dramatic increase in its overall expression
through the acute and subacute phases of SCI, a result that is
consistent with the previous studies. In addition, we found that
NM_009263, one of the 5 isoforms of Spp1, is the major
isoform in spinal cord tissue and is responsible for the overall
increase in expression (one-way ANOVA p < 0.0001) (Figure
3B left panel). Several other isoforms are also induced
compared to the CTR in 2D and 7D, but their absolute
expression values are much lower than NM_009263. The
distinct functions of these isoforms are still to be investigated.
Although many genes, such as Utg1a, Vegfa, and Ptprc,
showed similar changing patterns in its different isoforms, there
are a number of genes whose isoforms changed in the
opposite directions. Gene Morf4l2 (mortality factor 4 like 2) is
an example of “isoform switching” at different stages of SCI.
Two of the Morf4l2 gene’s major isoforms, NM_001168229,
and NM_001168230 show distinct expression patterns during
acute/subacute phases (Figure 3B right panel). Isoform
NM_001168229 expression level was higher in the CTR
sample and it steadily declined after SCI (one-way ANOVA p =
0.037); while the NM_001168230 level was lower in the CTR
sample and higher in 2D and further increased in 7D (one-way
ANOVA p = 0.0028). NM_001168230 became the major
isoform after injury. The function of Morf4l2 is not yet clear and
thus it will be interesting to investigate the functions of its
isoforms in CNS and SCI.
Establishing the systems based analysis framework
To obtain a comprehensive view of the complex mechanism
of SCI, we developed a systems biology based analysis
framework to identify potentially important genes in the global
gene network for further testing. We first constructed gene
regulatory networks for 2D and 7D stages separately using IPA
software and merged them into one global network for each
stage (see Materials and Methods) (Figure 4A). To construct
reasonable size networks that suitable for downstream
analysis, top 10% up/down-regulated genes were used. After
constructing networks that capture the essences of the
observed transcriptomic changes in SCI, we searched for key
determinants in these networks. Several criteria were used in
combination to select genes of interests (Figure 4B). First,
genes that are significantly differentially expressed are likely to
be involved in the SCI process. Secondly, hub genes, which
have a large number of interactions with other molecules
(connection number in the network) usually play an important
role in a network [48,49,50]. Thirdly, we are particularly
interested in molecules located on the plasma membrane and
extracellular space of cells because they are easily targeted by
drugs [51]. These also include the neighborhood genes brought
into the network by IPA analysis.
To better indicate the relevance of a gene, we calculated a
Relevance Index (RI) number that considered both the fold
change and the connection number of a gene in the
constructed network and ranked the genes in that network
based on this number (Table S5, Table S6 and Table S7). In
the 2D network, genes known to be involved in SCI, such as
Il6, Tnf, Il1b, Ccl2 (MCP-1) were ranked at the top of the list,
supporting the validity of our method [16]. We have also
incorporated pharmacogenomic information from IPA into our
analysis. Among the genes identified, some have existing drug
information in ingenuity knowledge base can be readily tested
in SCI animal models (Table S5, Table S6 and Table S7).
Using the above described criteria, we identified not only well
studied genes, but also genes that have not been carefully
studied in SCI, including Cd36, Lpl, C3ar1 and Msr1 [52]. We
performed qRT-PCR validation of the differential expression of
the genes of interests (Figure 5A). The expression changes
(SCI 2D/CTR and 7D/CTR) were very consistent with RNA-Seq
results.
GSEA analysis of functional gene set enrichment and
the characterization of gene markers
To understand the biological implications of our global
characterization, we performed a series of analysis to extract
the specific functional gene sets, pathways and networks
involved. Cell damage and death are the fundamental events in
SCI. Understanding how they are triggered is important
clinically and experimentally. Previous studies reveal that
inflammation, hypoxia, nutrients supply deficiency are the main
causes for the secondary spinal cord injury, and some of these
genes are intensively studied. Compared with the conventional
gene specific research, RNA-Seq analysis provides a genome-
wide view of the systemic changes during the spinal cord
injury. GSEA analysis (using the Molecular Signatures
Database (MSigDB) v 3.0) [37,53], revealed hundreds of
enriched gene sets among our differentially expressed genes,
indicating the complex mechanism of spinal cord injury. Those
gene sets related to inflammation and apoptosis ranked high
among the enriched ones. Gene sets related to hypoxia [54],
metabolic stress [55], glucose deprivation [56] and reactive
oxygen species [57] were also enriched in both 2D (Figure S4
A) and 7D samples (Figure S4 B) [55]. IPA analysis of the
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
8
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

Figure 3.  Alternative splicing analysis.  (A) The annotated isoform numbers per gene (x-axis) were plotted over number of genes
(y-axis). (B) Splicing isoform expression of genes Spp1 and Morfl2 in acute and subacute phases. Error bars represent ±SEM. P
values for transcript NM_009263, NM_00116829 and NM_001168230 were calculated by one-way ANOVA.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072567.g003
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
9
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

Figure 4.  Developing a systems based analysis framework to identify key determinants in the global gene network.  (A)
Network constructed in 7D stage using top 10% up-regulated genes. Gene TNF (tumor necrosis factor) was highlighted with its
connected edges (in blue). (B) The workflow of a systems based analysis framework in identifying potentially important genes.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072567.g004
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
10
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

leading edge genes (see methods) involved in these gene sets
further indicated that these genes formed networks that
function in cell death and survival (data not shown). Notably,
some of the nodes in the hypoxia and nutrient gene networks
are also the key factors in inflammation, such as Il6 and Tnf.
When we examined the enriched gene sets for reactive oxygen
species (ROS), we found that the genes can be further
classified into two subsets. The gene expression of
deoxygenases, such as Sod1 and Sod2 decreased in the sub-
acute phase of spinal cord injury, while other ROS scavengers,
such as Hmox1 and Txnrd1 increased.
Complicated interactions exist between immune cells and
neural cells after SCI. It is important to understand the cell
types involved in this process and their interaction dynamics.
Specific gene markers for macrophages (Itgam, Cd86, Arg1)
(Figure 6), oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPC: Cspg4/Ng2)
(Figure 7A), neural stem cells (NSC: Nestin) (Figure 7B),
endothelial cells (Pecam-1, also known as Cd31) (Figure 7C),
and hematopoietic stem cells (HSC: Cd34) (Figure 7D) were
selected based on the literature [58,59,60,61]. Their expression
levels were compared during acute and subacute phases of
SCI.
Previous studies showed that there are two subsets of
macrophages which have distinct functions [59,60]. The M1
marker, Cd86, increased in 7D (one-way ANOVA p=0.0026)
(Figure 6B), whereas the M2 marker, Arg1, increased in 2D
(one-way ANOVA p=0.0011) (Figure 6C). Furthermore, GSEA
analysis revealed that, although the M1 up-regulated gene set
was enriched in both 2D and 7D samples compared with
CTR(Figure 6D, E), the M1 specific gene set was further
enriched in 7D samples when compared with 2D samples
(Figure 6F), These data implied that M1 macrophages
Figure 5.  Validation using qRT-PCR.  Relative expression fold change from qRT-PCR were calculated using 2-ΔΔCt method. Error
bars represent ±SD (n=3). FPKM fold change were the ratio of average FPKM between samples.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072567.g005
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
11
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

increased in 7D samples, while M2 macrophages decreased
[60]. In the M1 up-regulated gene set, genes such as Fgd2 and
Tifab etc were significantly higher in 7D samples [62,63].
We also observed dynamic changes in astroglial markers.
Gfap is one of markers for reactive astrocytes after CNS
injuries [64]. Its expression is up-regulated in SCI acute and
subacute phases (one-way ANOVA, p = 0.0261) (Figure 7E).
Lcn2 and serpina3n have been shown as markers of the early
phase 
of 
reactive 
astrogliosis 
in 
both 
ischemia 
and
neuroinflammation injury models (Figure 7F,G). They are both
up-regulated in 2D and 7D and are expressed higher in 2D
compared to 7D [65].
Discussion
Although extensive work has been carried out to understand
the pathophysiology of SCI, a comprehensive view of the
underlying molecular mechanisms and pathways is still lacking.
Limited by resource and technology, previous studies of SCI
usually focus on known pathways and a small number of genes
[5,6,7,8,66,67]. In this study, we systematically characterized
the transcriptome of spinal cord injury at acute (2D) and
subacute (7D) phases by RNA-Seq. With such an informative
resource, we can now better understand the pathological
processes of SCI through integrative analysis of the gene
expression data.
One important advantage of massively parallel sequencing is
that it is more quantitative than microarray [68]. Given its higher
sensitivity, specificity and wider dynamic range, RNA-Seq can
accurately measure gene transcription changes at a genome-
wide scale, including known and unknown transcripts. Our
study is designed to reflect the transcriptomic change of injured
tissue samples which include multiple types of cells. In order to
reconstruct reliable gene structures and obtain accurate
expression level estimations, our procedure focused on known
genes and isoforms [32]. These reference datasets are a
valuable resource for the SCI research community for the
derivation of new hypotheses. Importantly, RNA-Seq also
enables splicing isoform identification and expression level
estimation, thus providing useful information for increasing the
specificity of drug design and reducing potential side effects.
Furthermore, in this study, we established a systems biology
based framework to extract potential key genes from
Figure 6.  The expression of macrophage marker genes in both acute and subacute phases of SCI.  Expression profile of the
common macrophage marker Itgam (A), M1 specific marker CD86 (B) and M2 specific marker Arg1(C) during the time-course of
SCI. P values were calculated by one-way ANOVA. GSEA analysis: differential gene expression was ranked by fold change (x-axis:
2D vs control (D), 7D vs control (E), 7D vs 2D (F)). The most up-regulated genes are shown on the left side (red), while the most up-
regulated genes were shown on the right side (blue). Black bars represent the positions of the M1 vs M2 up-regulated signature
genes in the ranked list. Enrichment score (ES, Y-axis) reflects the degree the genes are overrepresented. When the distribution is
at random, the enrichment score is zero. Enrichment of signature genes at the top of the ranked list results in a large positive
deviation of the ES from zero. NES, normalized enrichment score; FDR, false discovery rate-adjusted q value.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072567.g006
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
12
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

constructed networks of the SCI acute and subacute phases.
Gene profiling generates a large amount of information to be
mined. Recent development of network analysis made it
possible to better understand the hierarchical relationships
among genes involved in certain biological processes.
However, currently there is no systematic method to estimate
the importance of the genes in the network and to identify the
potential key determinants for further experimentation. The
analysis framework that we have developed combines existing
knowledge from the literature, such as molecular interactions
and cellular localization information, with our differential
expression data. Based on these criteria, we were able to
prioritize 
genes 
of 
interest 
that 
exhibited 
specific
characteristics, thus demonstrating the validity of our approach.
First, this list contains many important genes known to be
involved in SCI. In addition to Tnf, Il6, Il1b which were well
studied in SCI, many other genes, such as Hmox1 [69], Ccl11
[70], and Ccr1 [71], also gained attention. Hmox1 is an
inducible cytoprotective enzyme and has anti-inflammatory and
antioxidant effects after spinal cord injury [69]. Expression of
Ccl11 is associated with immune response modulation and
protection against neuroinflammation [70]. Ccr1 was suggested
to have a crucial role in the chronic central pain mechanisms
after SCI [71]. Very recently, genes such as Lcn2 [72] and Tlr4
[73] were also found to play important roles in SCI. Lcn2
(Lipocalin 2) is important in the defense against bacterial
infection by interfering with bacterial iron acquisition. It has also
been shown that a lack of Lcn2 reduces secondary damage
and improves locomotor recovery after spinal cord injury [72].
Tlr4 expression was found to lead to greater synaptic loss, and
was correlated with increased astrogliosis and up-regulation of
pro-inflammatory interleukins [73].
Secondly, most genes identified by our method are involved
in relevant biological processes (such as ‘inflammation’ or
‘nerve system development’ functional categories) and
pathways in SCI. For example, among pathways that are
enriched in the 2D network, Ccl2, Ccl7, Msr1, Il1rn, Il6, Il1b,
Tnf, Ptgs2, Lpl and Cd36 are involved in ‘LXR/RXR Activation’
(p = 1.38E-09, Fisher Exact Test for pathway enrichment), and
Il1rn, Osm, Cfb, Il6, Il1b, Tnf, Serpine1 and Hmox1 are
Figure 7.  Expression dynamics of cell markers of various cell types.  Expression profile of OPC marker Cspg4, also known as
NG2 (A), neural stem cell marker Nestin (B), endothelial marker Pecam-1, also known as CD31 (C), hematopoietic stem cell marker
CD34 (D), reactive astrocyte markers GFAP(E), Lcn2 and Serpina3n (F,G), are shown. P values were calculated by one-way
ANOVA.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072567.g007
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
13
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

involved in ‘Acute Phase Response Signaling’ (p=8.58E-6,
Fisher Exact Test). The LXR/RXR pathway is one of the top
enriched pathways in 2D and is also significantly enriched in
7D. The LXR/RXR pathway is activated by oxysterols and
intermediates in the cholesterol synthetic pathway, which are
important for the metabolic conversion of cholesterol to bile
acids in the liver [74]. In addition, the LXR pathway also plays
an important regulatory role in several metabolic signaling
pathways in adipose tissue, such as glucose uptake and de
novo fatty acid synthesis [74]. However, whether this pathway
has similar functions as in the nervous system remains largely
unknown. Previously, multiple studies have revealed that some
genes of this pathway, such as Lpl, are widely expressed in
multiple cell types in the spinal cord and are considered to be
essential in regulating feeding behavior and maintaining normal
neuronal function [75,76], further supporting a role for the LXR
pathway in the nervous system. In addition to lipid metabolism,
the LXR/RXR pathway was also found to be essential for the
endogenous anti-inflammatory response in macrophages [77].
It will be intriguing to investigate the roles of other genes in this
pathway in SCI.
Among pathways that are enriched in the 7D network,
Ccl2(MCP-1), Mmp3, Cxcr4 and Ccr2 genes are involved in the
‘Atherosclerosis Signaling’ pathway (p=1.03E-5 Fisher Exact
Test), and Cd28, Osm, Lgals3 and Clec7a genes are involved
in the ‘Role of Pattern Recognition Receptors in Recognition of
Bacteria and Viruses’(p=4.14E-4 Fisher Exact Test). Notably,
the ‘Atherosclerosis Signaling’ pathway is the top enriched
pathway in 7D; Ccl2(MCP-1), Cxcr4 and Ccr2in this pathway
have been shown to play a role in SCI. Ccl2 chemokine and its
receptor Ccr2 contribute to neuropathic pain development after
spinal cord injury [78]. Cxcr4 are key regulator of neuro-repair
processes after brain ischemia and spinal cord injury; inhibiting
Cxcr4 can enhance re-myelination and improve recovery
[79,80]. C3ar and C5ar in the ‘Role of Pattern Recognition
Receptors in Recognition of Bacteria and Viruses’ pathway
play a role in the inhibition of apoptosis. Genes related to
‘nerve system development’ included mostly down-regulated
genes because of increased neural cell death. Glutamate
Receptor Signaling pathway was enriched.
Importantly, based on this valid approach that we developed,
we were able to identify new genes of interests for further
investigation. The qRT-PCR validation indicates a highly
consistent expression pattern with the RNA-Seq result. Among
these, some genes have been indicated to have a role in other
pathological conditions, but not in SCI. For example, Lpl can
modify the synaptic loss and remodeling processes in a brain
injury model [76] and has a potential role in Alzheimer’s
disease [81]. It may also play a role in the pathophysiological
response to cerebral ischemia reperfusion [82]. Cd36 inhibition
was suggested as a viable strategy to enhance possible
recovery in stroke [83]. Ptx3 was found to have protective role
in seizure-induced neurodegeneration [84] and its expression
increases in the spinal cord during EAE (experimental
autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis) 
[52]. 
Therefore, 
we
demonstrated an example of how global gene profiling can be
translated into identifying genes of interest as potential
therapeutic targets for functional tests. We have also
incorporated pharmacogenomic information into our analysis.
Among the genes identified, the ones with existing drug
information in IPA database can be readily tested in SCI animal
models.
Additionally, by analyzing the transcriptome signatures in our
data using GSEA, we identified a large number of gene sets
that are significantly enriched in the SCI process. Conventional
studies examine genes of interest individually; transcriptomic
studies provide the expression of the gene markers
simultaneously and thus are more informative. Therefore, with
cell type specific markers, we can examine the responses of
different cell types and subtypes of cells in the spinal cord
injury environment and during the injury time course. Such
information provides valuable clues for detailed biological study
in the future. For example, previous studies revealed that there
are two subsets of macrophages, M1 and M2. M1 can be
identified as Cd86+, and M2 are Arg1+ [59,60]. We found that
M1 macrophages increased in 7D samples, while M2
macrophages decreased. M1macrophages have been shown
to be harmful for regeneration, whereas M2 macrophages are
potentially beneficial for regeneration [60]. This suggests that
the reduction of the M1/M2 ratio in the subacute phase and the
modulation 
of 
M1 
properties 
may 
potentially 
promote
regeneration. In the M1 up-regulated gene set, genes such as
Fgd2 and Tifab etc are significantly higher in 7D samples. Fgd2
was found to play a role in vesicle trafficking in immune cells
[62] and Tifab may be an important regulator during the
maturation of macrophages [63]. It is possible that these genes
may play a role in distinguishing the functions of M1and M2
macrophages. This could be tested by further experimentation.
A recent transcriptome study characterized the induced
genes [65] of reactive astrogliosis in two different injury models
(ischemia and neuroinflammation). We compared the top 50
induced genes from these two injury models with our RNA-Seq
dataset and found most induced genes in both injury models
are up-regulated in our SCI 2D and 7D data. Thereby, ischemia
and neuroinflammation both contribute to the activation of
reactive astrocytes and gliosis in SCI acute/subacute phases.
In summary, our study has not only characterized the
dynamic change of genes known to play a role in SCI, but also
provided new potential key determinants and pathways in this
pathological process. The examples that we have described
here are only a brief demonstration of the potential value of this
resource, and from our study there is a large amount of
biological information available to be explored by the scientific
community. By following up the hypotheses generated from
these analyses, we hope to identity new mechanisms and
therapeutic targets for reducing secondary tissue damage and
promoting regeneration.
Supporting Information
Table S1.  Summary of read mapping.
(TIF)
Table S2.  Expression value (FPKM) of genes and
isoforms.
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
14
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

(XLSX)
Table S3.  Top enriched functional categories in acute and
subacute SCI.
(XLSX)
Table S4.  The expression of genes involved in LXR/RXR
pathway 2 days after SCI.
Abbreviations: E (Extracellular Space); P (Plasma Membrane);
C (Cytoplasm); N (Nucleus); Y (there is drug for the gene in
IPA database).
(XLS)
Table S5.  Genes of interest identified from network
constructed in acute SCI(2D).
Genes were listed in the order of their Relevance Index
number. RI = abs(log(Fold change)) *(Connection number).
(XLSX)
Table S6.  Genes of interest identified from network
constructed with up-regulated genes in subacute SCI (7D).
Genes were listed in the order of their Relevance Index
number. RI = abs(log(Fold change)) *(Connection number).
(XLSX)
Table S7.  Genes of interest identified from network
constructed with down-regulated genes in subacute SCI
(7D).
Genes were listed in the order of their Relevance Index
number. RI = abs(log(Fold change)) *(Connection number).
(XLSX)
Figure S1.  Histological staining of the injured spinal cord
by the iron-eriochrome cyanine R (EC) staining shows a
moderate contusion injury.
The contusion SCI resulted in a central injury devoid of neural
tissue and an outer rim of spared white matter in the injury
epicenter at both 2 and 7 days after contusion. The central
injury gradually decreased while the peripheral spared white
matter gradually increased caudally and rostrally away from the
epicenter center. The injury was further increased in 7D in
comparison to 2D after SCI.
(TIF)
Figure S2.  Sample correlation and clustering analyses.
(A) Pearson correlation coefficients between samples. (B)
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of CTR, 2D, and 7D RNA-
Seq data (top 3000 genes with highest variation across SCI
stages were used). (C) Clustering of differentially expressed
genes. 7239 genes whose expression changed > 2 folds were
clustered into 9 groups using c-means clustering algorithm.
(TIF)
Figure S3.  Comparison of RNA-Seq and microarray data.
(A) Spearman correlation between RNA-Seq data and
microarray data. Only genes that are detected by both
platforms (15153 genes) were used (‘m’ stands for microarray,
‘r’ stands for RNA-Seq). (B) The comparison of differential
expression detection. The number of DE genes (Y-axis) was
plotted as a function of fold threshold used (7D/CTR, X-axis,
log scale). At the same fold threshold, RNA-Seq can detect
more DE genes than microarray. (C) The comparison of
dynamic range. The fraction of genes (Y-axis) was plotted as a
function of fold changes (7D/CTR, X-axis, log scale) detected
by RNA-Seq and microarray. RNA-Seq shows a broader
dynamic range for the fold change detection in SCI data. Only
genes that are detected by both platforms were used.
(TIF)
Figure S4.  Analyses of the functional gene set enrichment
by GSEA.
(A) Differential gene expression was ranked by fold change (2D
vs control, x-axis). The most up-regulated genes are shown on
the left side (red), while the most down-regulated genes were
shown on the right side (blue). Black bars represent the
positions of the individual genes of the signature gene set
(hypoxia signature (a), rapamycin response up-regulated gene
signature (rapamycin inhibits mTOR pathway and represents
the metabolic stress) (b), glucose deprivation up-regulated
gene sets (c) and reactive oxygen species related gene sets
(d)) in the ranked list. Enrichment score (ES, Y-axis) reflects
the degree the genes are overrepresented. When the
distribution is at random, the enrichment score is zero.
Enrichment of signature genes at the top of the ranked list
results in a large positive deviation of the ES from zero. (B)
Genes were ranked according to the expression ratio (7D vs
control) and further analyzed by GSEA with the same
molecular signature gene sets as above and indicated as a’, b’,
c’ and d’ correspondingly. ES, enrichment score; NES,
normalized enrichment score; FDR, false discovery rate-
adjusted q value.
(TIF)
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Eva Zsigmond and Dr. Pramod Dash for critical
reading and editing of the manuscript.
Author Contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: JQW QC DK.
Performed the experiments: SD HL YZ. Analyzed the data:
JQW KC GY. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools:
JQW QC KC. Wrote the manuscript: JQW KC QC GY.
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
15
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

References
1. (2005)pinal Cord Injury: Progress, Promise, and Priorities; Liverman
CT, Altevogt BM, Joy JE, Johnson, Uhwneopri RT, editors: The
National Academies Press.
2. Lee GY, Paradiso G, Tator CH, Gentili F, Massicotte EM et al. (2006)
Surgical management of tethered cord syndrome in adults: indications,
techniques, and long-term outcomes in 60 patients. J Neurosurg Spine
4: 123-131. doi:10.3171/spi.2006.4.2.123. PubMed: 16506479.
3. Fehlings MG, Perrin RG (2006) The timing of surgical intervention in
the treatment of spinal cord injury: a systematic review of recent clinical
evidence. Spine (Phila Pa 1976 31: S28-S35; discussion S36 PubMed:
16685233.
4. Oyinbo CA (2011) Secondary injury mechanisms in traumatic spinal
cord injury: a nugget of this multiply cascade. Acta Neurobiol Exp 71:
281-299. PubMed: 21731081.
5. Herrmann JE, Imura T, Song B, Qi J, Ao Y et al. (2008). STAT3 is a
critical regulator of astrogliosis and scar formation after spinal cord
injury. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society
for Neuroscience 28: 7231-7243.
6. Rowland JW, Hawryluk GWJ, Kwon B, Fehlings MG (2008) Current
status of acute spinal cord injury pathophysiology and emerging
therapies: promise on the horizon. Neurosurg Focus 25: E2. doi:
10.3171/FOC/2008/25/9/E2. PubMed: 18980476.
7. He B-L, Ba Y-C, Wang X-Y, Liu S-J, Liu G-D et al. (2012) BDNF
expression with functional improvement in transected spinal cord
treated with neural stem cells in adult rats. Neuropeptides, 47: 1-7.
PubMed: 22959240.
8. Cuzzocrea S, Genovese T, Mazzon E (2008) EFFECT OF 17-beta -
ESTRADIOL ON SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION PATHWAYS AND
SECONDARY 
DAMAGE 
IN 
EXPERIMENTAL 
SPINAL 
CORD
TRAUMA. Shock 29: 362-371. PubMed: 17704735.
9. Kaplin AI, Deshpande DM, Scott E, Krishnan C, Carmen JS et al.
(2005) IL-6 induces regionally selective spinal cord injury in patients
with the neuroinflammatory disorder transverse myelitis. J Clin Invest
115: 2731-2741. doi:10.1172/JCI25141. PubMed: 16184194.
10. Cho N, Nguyen DH, Satkunendrarajah K, Branch DR, Fehlings MG
(2012) Evaluating the role of IL-11, a novel cytokine in the IL-6 family,
in a mouse model of spinal cord injury. J Neuroinflammation 9: 134.
doi:10.1186/1742-2094-9-134. PubMed: 22715999.
11. Kleibeuker W, Gabay E, Kavelaars A, Zijlstra J, Wolf G et al. (2008)
IL-1 beta signaling is required for mechanical allodynia induced by
nerve injury and for the ensuing reduction in spinal cord neuronal
GRK2. Brain Behav Immun 22: 200-208. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2007.07.009.
PubMed: 17869478.
12. Zhou Z, Peng X, Insolera R, Fink DJ, Mata M (2009) IL-10 promotes
neuronal survival following spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol 220: 183-190.
doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.08.018. PubMed: 19716366.
13. Plunkett JA, Yu CG, Easton JM, Bethea JR, Yezierski RP (2001)
Effects of interleukin-10 (IL-10) on pain behavior and gene expression
following excitotoxic spinal cord injury in the rat. Exp Neurol 168:
144-154. doi:10.1006/exnr.2000.7604. PubMed: 11170729.
14. Cheng X, Wang Y, He Q, Qiu M, Whittemore SR et al. (2007) Bone
morphogenetic protein signaling and olig1/2 interact to regulate the
differentiation and maturation of adult oligodendrocyte precursor cells.
Stem Cells 25: 3204-3214. doi:10.1634/stemcells.2007-0284. PubMed:
17872503.
15. Cao Q, Xu XM, Devries WH, Enzmann GU, Ping P et al. (2005)
Functional recovery in traumatic spinal cord injury after transplantation
of multineurotrophin-expressing glial-restricted precursor cells. J
Neurosci 
25: 
6947-6957. 
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1065-05.2005.
PubMed: 16049170.
16. Bareyre FM, Schwab ME (2003) Inflammation, degeneration and
regeneration in the injured spinal cord: insights from DNA microarrays.
Trends Neurosci 26: 555-563. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2003.08.004. PubMed:
14522149.
17. Carmel JB, Galante a, Soteropoulos P, Tolias P, Recce M, et al (2001)
Gene expression profiling of acute spinal cord injury reveals spreading
inflammatory signals and neuron loss. Physiol Genomics 7: 201-213.
PubMed: 11773606.
18. Velardo MJ, Burger C, Williams PR, Baker HV, López MC et al. (2004)
Patterns of gene expression reveal a temporally orchestrated wound
healing response in the injured spinal cord. J Neurosci Off J Soc
Neurosci 
24: 
8562-8576. 
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3316-04.2004.
PubMed: 15456830.
19. Liu CL, Jin AM, Tong BH (2003) Detection of gene expression pattern
in the early stage after spinal cord injury by gene chip. Chin J
Traumatol 6: 18-22. PubMed: 12542959.
20. Tachibana T, Noguchi K, Ruda MA (2002) Analysis of gene expression
following spinal cord injury in rat using complementary DNA microarray.
Neurosci Lett 327: 133-137. doi:10.1016/S0304-3940(02)00375-0.
PubMed: 12098653.
21. Jaerve A, Kruse F, Malik K, Hartung HP, Müller HW (2012) Age-
dependent modulation of cortical transcriptomes in spinal cord injury
and repair. PLOS ONE 7: e49812. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0049812.
PubMed: 23236355.
22. Marioni JC, Mason CE, Mane SM, Stephens M, Gilad Y (2008) RNA-
seq: an assessment of technical reproducibility and comparison with
gene expression arrays. Genome Res 18: 1509-1517. doi:10.1101/gr.
079558.108. PubMed: 18550803.
23. Kahvejian A, Quackenbush J, Thompson JF (2008) What would you do
if you could sequence everything? Nat Biotechnol 26: 1125-1133. doi:
10.1038/nbt1494. PubMed: 18846086.
24. Wu JQ, Habegger L, Noisa P, Szekely A, Qiu C et al. (2010) Dynamic
transcriptomes during neural differentiation of human embryonic stem
cells revealed by short, long, and paired-end sequencing. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 107: 5254-5259. doi:10.1073/pnas.0914114107.
PubMed: 20194744.
25. Yeo G, Holste D, Kreiman G, Burge CB (2004) Variation in alternative
splicing across human tissues. Genome Biol 5: R74. doi:10.1186/
gb-2004-5-10-r74. PubMed: 15461793.
26. Barrie ES, Smith RM, Sanford JC, Sadee W (2012) mRNA transcript
diversity creates new opportunities for pharmacological intervention.
Mol Pharmacol 81: 620-630. doi:10.1124/mol.111.076604. PubMed:
22319206.
27. Pal S, Gupta R, Davuluri RV (2012) Alternative transcription and
alternative splicing in cancer. Pharmacol Ther 136: 283-294. doi:
10.1016/j.pharmthera.2012.08.005. PubMed: 22909788.
28. Fan C, Zheng Y, Cheng X, Qi X, Bu P et al. (2013) Transplantation of
D15A-expressing glial-restricted-precursor-derived astrocytes improves
anatomical and locomotor recovery after spinal cord injury. Int J Biol Sci
9: 78-93. PubMed: 23289019.
29. Hill RL, Zhang YP, Burke DA, Devries WH, Zhang Y et al. (2009)
Anatomical and functional outcomes following a precise, graded, dorsal
laceration spinal cord injury in C57BL/6 mice. J Neurotrauma 26: 1-15.
doi:10.1089/neu.2008.0543. PubMed: 19196178.
30. Trapnell C, Pachter L, Salzberg SL (2009) TopHat: discovering splice
junctions with RNA-Seq. Bioinformatics 25: 1105-1111. doi:10.1093/
bioinformatics/btp120. PubMed: 19289445.
31. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL (2009) Ultrafast and
memory-efficient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human
genome. Genome Biol 10: R25. doi:10.1186/gb-2009-10-3-r25.
PubMed: 19261174.
32. Łabaj PP, Leparc GG, Linggi BE, Markillie LM, Wiley HS et al. (2011)
Characterization and improvement of RNA-Seq precision in quantitative
transcript expression profiling. Bioinformatics (Oxf, England) 27: i383-
i391. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq657.
33. Trapnell C, Ba Williams, Pertea G, Mortazavi A, Kwan G et al. (2010)
Transcript 
assembly 
and 
quantification 
by 
RNA-Seq 
reveals
unannotated 
transcripts 
and 
isoform 
switching 
during 
cell
differentiation. Nat Biotechnol 28: 511-515. doi:10.1038/nbt.1621.
PubMed: 20436464.
34. Quackenbush 
J 
(2002) 
Microarray 
data 
normalization 
and
transformation. Nat Genet 32 Suppl: 496-501. doi:10.1038/ng1032.
PubMed: 12454644.
35. Schwämmle V, Jensen ON (2010) A simple and fast method to
determine the parameters for fuzzy c-means cluster analysis.
Bioinformatics 
26: 
2841-2848. 
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq534.
PubMed: 20880957.
36. Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD (2001) Analysis of relative gene expression
data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T))
Method. Methods 25: 402-408. doi:10.1006/meth.2001.1262. PubMed:
11846609.
37. Subramanian A, Kuehn H, Gould J, Tamayo P, Mesirov JP (2007)
GSEA-P: a desktop application for Gene Set Enrichment Analysis.
Bioinformatics 
23: 
3251-3253. 
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btm369.
PubMed: 17644558.
38. Luchetti S, Beck KD, Galvan MD, Silva R, Cummings BJ et al. (2010)
Comparison of immunopathology and locomotor recovery in C57BL/6,
BUB/BnJ, and NOD-SCID mice after contusion spinal cord injury. J
Neurotrauma 27: 411-421. doi:10.1089/neu.2009.0930. PubMed:
19831737.
39. Cao Q, Zhang YP, Iannotti C, DeVries WH, Xu XM et al. (2005)
Functional and electrophysiological changes after graded traumatic
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
16
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

spinal cord injury in adult rat. Exp Neurol 191 Suppl 1: S3-S16. doi:
10.1016/j.expneurol.2004.08.026. PubMed: 15629760.
40. Fu X, Fu N, Guo S, Yan Z, Xu Y et al. (2009) Estimating accuracy of
RNA-Seq and microarrays with proteomics. BMC Genomics 10: 161.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-10-161. PubMed: 19371429.
41. Nookaew I, Papini M, Pornputtapong N, Scalcinati G, Fagerberg L et al.
(2012) A comprehensive comparison of RNA-Seq-based transcriptome
analysis from reads to differential gene expression and cross-
comparison with microarrays: a case study in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Nucleic Acids Res 40: 10084-10097. doi:10.1093/nar/
gks804. PubMed: 22965124.
42. Kogenaru S, Qing Y, Guo Y, Wang N (2012) RNA-seq and microarray
complement each other in transcriptome profiling. BMC Genomics 13:
629. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-13-629. PubMed: 23153100.
43. Su Z, Li Z, Chen T, Li QZ, Fang H et al. (2011) Comparing next-
generation sequencing and microarray technologies in a toxicological
study of the effects of aristolochic acid on rat kidneys. Chem Res
Toxicol 24: 1486-1493. doi:10.1021/tx200103b. PubMed: 21834575.
44. Bradford JR, Hey Y, Yates T, Li Y, Pepper SD et al. (2010) A
comparison 
of 
massively 
parallel 
nucleotide 
sequencing 
with
oligonucleotide microarrays for global transcription profiling. BMC
Genomics 
11: 
282. 
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-282. 
PubMed:
20444259.
45. Desmoulière A, Chaponnier C, Gabbiani G (2005) Tissue repair,
contraction, and the myofibroblast. Wound Repair Regen 13: 7-12. doi:
10.1111/j.1067-1927.2005.130116p.x. PubMed: 15659031.
46. Andrews S, Ford D, Martin P (2012) Knockdown of osteopontin
reduces the inflammatory response and subsequent size of
postsurgical adhesions in a murine model. Am J Pathol 181:
1165-1172. doi:10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.06.027. PubMed: 22858059.
47. Ries A, Goldberg JL, Grimpe B (2007) A novel biological function for
CD44 in axon growth of retinal ganglion cells identified by a
bioinformatics approach. J Neurochem 103: 1491-1505. doi:10.1111/j.
1471-4159.2007.04858.x. PubMed: 17760872.
48. Borneman AR, Leigh-Bell JA, Yu H, Bertone P, Gerstein M et al. (2006)
Target hub proteins serve as master regulators of development in
yeast. Genes Dev 20: 435-448. doi:10.1101/gad.1389306. PubMed:
16449570.
49. Jeong H, Mason SP, Barabási AL, Oltvai ZN (2001) Lethality and
centrality 
in 
protein 
networks. 
Nature 
411: 
41-42. 
doi:
10.1038/35075138. PubMed: 11333967.
50. Batada NN, Hurst LD, Tyers M (2006) Evolutionary and physiological
importance of hub proteins. PLOS Comput Biol 2: e88. doi:10.1371/
journal.pcbi.0020088. PubMed: 16839197.
51. Rajendran L, Knölker HJ, Simons K (2010) Subcellular targeting
strategies for drug design and delivery. Nat Rev Drug Discov 9: 29-42.
doi:10.1038/nrd2897. PubMed: 20043027.
52. Agnello D, Carvelli L, Muzio V, Villa P, Bottazzi B et al. (2000)
Increased peripheral benzodiazepine binding sites and pentraxin 3
expression in the spinal cord during EAE: relation to inflammatory
cytokines and modulation by dexamethasone and rolipram. J
Neuroimmunol 109: 105-111. doi:10.1016/S0165-5728(00)00279-4.
PubMed: 10996212.
53. Liberzon A, Subramanian A, Pinchback R, Thorvaldsdóttir H, Tamayo P
et 
al. 
(2011) 
Molecular 
signatures 
database 
(MSigDB) 
3.0.
Bioinformatics 
27: 
1739-1740. 
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr260.
PubMed: 21546393.
54. Harris AL (2002) Hypoxia--a key regulatory factor in tumour growth. Nat
Rev Cancer 2: 38-47. doi:10.1038/nrc704. PubMed: 11902584.
55. Yang Z, Ming XF (2012) mTOR signalling: the molecular interface
connecting metabolic stress, aging and cardiovascular diseases. Obes
Rev 13 Suppl 2: 58-68. doi:10.1111/j.1467-789X.2012.01038.x.
PubMed: 23107260.
56. Peng T, Golub TR, Sabatini DM (2002) The immunosuppressant
rapamycin mimics a starvation-like signal distinct from amino acid and
glucose deprivation. Mol Cell Biol 22: 5575-5584. doi:10.1128/MCB.
22.15.5575-5584.2002. PubMed: 12101249.
57. Houstis N, Rosen ED, Lander ES (2006) Reactive oxygen species have
a causal role in multiple forms of insulin resistance. Nature 440:
944-948. doi:10.1038/nature04634. PubMed: 16612386.
58. Correia C, Grayson WL, Park M, Hutton D, Zhou B et al. (2011) In vitro
model of vascularized bone: synergizing vascular development and
osteogenesis. PLOS ONE 6: e28352. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0028352. PubMed: 22164277.
59. Nakajima H, Uchida K, Guerrero AR, Watanabe S, Sugita D et al.
(2012) Transplantation of mesenchymal stem cells promotes an
alternative pathway of macrophage activation and functional recovery
after spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 29: 1614-1625. doi:10.1089/neu.
2011.2109. PubMed: 22233298.
60. Kigerl KA, Gensel JC, Ankeny DP, Alexander JK, Donnelly DJ et al.
(2009) Identification of two distinct macrophage subsets with divergent
effects causing either neurotoxicity or regeneration in the injured mouse
spinal cord. J Neurosci 29: 13435-13444. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
3257-09.2009. PubMed: 19864556.
61. Baumann N, Pham-Dinh D (2001) Biology of oligodendrocyte and
myelin in the mammalian central nervous system. Physiol Rev 81:
871-927. PubMed: 11274346.
62. Huber C, Mårtensson A, Bokoch GM, Nemazee D, Gavin AL (2008)
FGD2, a CDC42-specific exchange factor expressed by antigen-
presenting cells, localizes to early endosomes and active membrane
ruffles. J Biol Chem 283: 34002-34012. doi:10.1074/jbc.M803957200.
PubMed: 18838382.
63. Matsumura T, Kawamura-Tsuzuku J, Yamamoto T, Semba K, Inoue J
(2009) TRAF-interacting protein with a forkhead-associated domain B
(TIFAB) is a negative regulator of the TRAF6-induced cellular functions.
J Biochem 146: 375-381. doi:10.1093/jb/mvp080. PubMed: 19470519.
64. Sofroniew MV, Vinters HV (2010) Astrocytes: biology and pathology.
Acta Neuropathol 119: 7-35. doi:10.1007/s00401-009-0619-8. PubMed:
20012068.
65. Zamanian JL, Xu L, Foo LC, Nouri N, Zhou L et al. (2012) Genomic
analysis of reactive astrogliosis. J Neurosci 32: 6391-6410. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6221-11.2012. PubMed: 22553043.
66. Demjen D, Klussmann S, Kleber S, Zuliani C, Stieltjes B et al. (2004)
Neutralization of CD95 ligand promotes regeneration and functional
recovery after spinal cord injury. Nat Med 10: 389-395. doi:10.1038/
nm1007. PubMed: 15004554.
67. Darian-Smith C (2009) Synaptic plasticity, neurogenesis, and functional
recovery after spinal cord injury. Neuroscientist 15: 149-165. doi:
10.1177/1073858408331372. PubMed: 19307422.
68. Wang Z, Gerstein M, Snyder M (2009) RNA-Seq: a revolutionary tool
for transcriptomics. Nat Rev Genet 10: 57-63. doi:10.1038/nrg2484.
PubMed: 19015660.
69. Kanno H, Ozawa H, Dohi Y, Sekiguchi A, Igarashi K et al. (2009)
Genetic ablation of transcription repressor Bach1 reduces neural tissue
damage and improves locomotor function after spinal cord injury in
mice. J Neurotrauma 26: 31-39.
70. Adzemovic MZ, Öckinger J, Zeitelhofer M, Hochmeister S, Beyeen AD
et al. (2012) Expression of Ccl11 associates with immune response
modulation and protection against neuroinflammation in rats. PLOS
ONE 
7: 
e39794. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0039794. 
PubMed:
22815714.
71. Knerlich-Lukoschus F, von der Ropp-Brenner B, Lucius R, Mehdorn
HM, Held-Feindt J (2011) Spatiotemporal CCR1, CCL3(MIP-1alpha),
CXCR4, CXCL12(SDF-1alpha) expression patterns in a rat spinal cord
injury model of posttraumatic neuropathic pain. J Neurosurg Spine 14:
583-597. PubMed: 21332278.
72. Rathore KI, Berard JL, Redensek A, Chierzi S, Lopez-Vales R et al.
(2011) Lipocalin 2 plays an immunomodulatory role and has
detrimental effects after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci 31: 13412-13419.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0116-11.2011. PubMed: 21940434.
73. Freria CM, Velloso LA, Oliveira AL (2012) Opposing effects of Toll-like
receptors 2 and 4 on synaptic stability in the spinal cord after peripheral
nerve 
injury. 
J 
Neuroinflammation 
9: 
240. 
doi:
10.1186/1742-2094-9-240. PubMed: 23092428.
74. Ulven SM, Dalen KT, Gustafsson JA, Nebb HI (2005) LXR is crucial in
lipid metabolism. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 73: 59-63.
doi:10.1016/j.plefa.2005.04.009. PubMed: 15913974.
75. Huey PU, Marcell T, Owens GC, Etienne J, Eckel RH (1998)
Lipoprotein lipase is expressed in cultured Schwann cells and functions
in lipid synthesis and utilization. J Lipid Res 39: 2135-2142. PubMed:
9799799.
76. Wang H, Eckel RH (2012) Lipoprotein lipase in the brain and nervous
system. 
Annu 
Rev 
Nutr 
32: 
147-160. 
doi:10.1146/annurev-
nutr-071811-150703. PubMed: 22540257.
77. Joseph SB, Castrillo A, Laffitte BA, Mangelsdorf DJ, Tontonoz P (2003)
Reciprocal regulation of inflammation and lipid metabolism by liver X
receptors. Nat Med 9: 213-219. doi:10.1038/nm820. PubMed:
12524534.
78. Van Steenwinckel J, Reaux-Le Goazigo A, Pommier B, Mauborgne A,
Dansereau MA et al. (2011) CCL2 released from neuronal synaptic
vesicles in the spinal cord is a major mediator of local inflammation and
pain after peripheral nerve injury. J Neurosci 31: 5865-5875. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5986-10.2011. PubMed: 21490228.
79. Carbajal KS, Miranda JL, Tsukamoto MR, Lane TE (2011) CXCR4
signaling regulates remyelination by endogenous oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells in a viral model of demyelination. Glia 59: 1813-1821.
doi:10.1002/glia.21225. PubMed: 21830237.
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
17
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

80. Zendedel A, Nobakht M, Bakhtiyari M, Beyer C, Kipp M et al. (2012)
Stromal cell-derived factor-1 alpha (SDF-1alpha) improves neural
recovery after spinal cord contusion in rats. Brain Res 1473: 214-226.
doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2012.07.037. PubMed: 22842524.
81. Blain JF, Poirier J (2004) Could lipoprotein lipase play a role in
Alzheimer’s disease? Scientificworldj 4: 531-535. doi:10.1100/tsw.
2004.111. PubMed: 15311328.
82. Wang X, Sun W, Xu E (2010) The expression and activity of brain
lipoprotein lipase is increased after acute cerebral ischemia-reperfusion
in 
rats. 
Neuropathology 
30: 
131-139. 
doi:10.1111/j.
1440-1789.2009.01061.x. PubMed: 19780982.
83. Qin L, Kim E, Ratan R, Lee FS, Cho S (2011) Genetic variant of BDNF
(Val66Met) 
polymorphism 
attenuates 
stroke-induced 
angiogenic
responses by enhancing anti-angiogenic mediator CD36 expression. J
Neurosci 
31: 
775-783. 
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4547-10.2011.
PubMed: 21228186.
84. Ravizza T, Moneta D, Bottazzi B, Peri G, Garlanda C et al. (2001)
Dynamic induction of the long pentraxin PTX3 in the CNS after limbic
seizures: 
evidence 
for 
a 
protective 
role 
in 
seizure-induced
neurodegeneration. 
Neuroscience 
105: 
43-53. 
doi:10.1016/
S0306-4522(01)00177-4. PubMed: 11483299.
RNA-Seq Characterization of Spinal Cord Injury
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org
18
August 2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 8 | e72567

===== Chen2019_CerebralCortex_Astrocytes+Sox2+TBI =====
Cerebral Cortex, January 2019;29: 54–69
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhx303
Advance Access Publication Date: 17 November 2017
Original Article
O R I G I N A L A R T I C L E
Astrocyte-Speciﬁc Deletion of Sox2 Promotes
Functional Recovery After Traumatic Brain Injury
Chunhai Chen1,2,3,†, Xiaoling Zhong1,2,†, Derek K. Smith1,2, Wenjiao Tai1,2,
Jianjing Yang1,2, Yuhua Zou1,2, Lei-Lei Wang1,2, Jiahong Sun1,2,
Song Qin1,2,4,5 and Chun-Li Zhang1,2
1Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 6000 Harry Hines Blvd,
Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA, 2Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and Medicine, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, 6000 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA, 3Department of
Occupational Health, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China, 4Department of Anatomy,
Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China and
5Center of Neural Injury and Repair, Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital Afﬁliated with Tongji University,
Shanghai 200072, China
Address correspondence to email: sqin@fudan.edu.cn (S.Q.) and Chun-Li.Zhang@UTSouthwestern.edu (C.-L.Z.).
†Denotes equal contribution.
Abstract
Injury to the adult brain induces activation of local astrocytes, which serves as a compensatory response that modulates
tissue damage and recovery. However, the mechanism governing astrocyte activation during brain injury remains largely
unknown. Here we provide in vivo evidence that SOX2, a transcription factor critical for stem cells and brain development,
is also required for injury-induced activation of adult cortical astrocytes. Genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation-seq
analysis of mouse cortical tissues reveals that SOX2 binds to regulatory regions of genes associated with signaling pathways
that control glial cell activation, such as Nr2e1, Mmd2, Wnt7a, and Akt2. Astrocyte-speciﬁc deletion of Sox2 in adult mice
greatly diminishes glial response to controlled cortical impact injury and, most unexpectedly, dampens injury-induced
cortical loss and beneﬁts behavioral recovery of mice after injury. Together, these results uncover an essential role of SOX2
in somatic cells under pathological conditions and indicate that SOX2-dependent astrocyte activation could be targeted for
functional recovery after traumatic brain injury.
Key words: brain repair, neural stem cell, reactive gliosis, SOX2, traumatic brain injury
Introduction
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is primarily triggered by an exter-
nal mechanical force. It induces a complex pathological process
that includes glial activation, inﬂammation, cell death, and tis-
sue loss (Xiong et al. 2013). At the cellular level, astrocytes are a
principal cell type that contributes to glial response and inﬂam-
mation, which ultimately regulates overall cell death and tissue
damage (Sofroniew and Vinters 2010; Burda and Sofroniew
2014; Pekny and Pekna 2014). In response to injury, local astro-
cytes turn into an active form called “reactive astrocytes,” char-
acterized by changes in morphology and gene expression, cell
cycle re-entry, and production of proinﬂammatory cytokines
(Sofroniew 2009; Buffo et al. 2010). Astrocyte activation, or
astrogliosis, plays a central role in the response to most
© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

neurological diseases and traumatic injuries. These reactive
astrocytes constitute a major cellular component of scar forma-
tion that is critical for wound healing and tissue remodeling in
response to brain injury (Ridet et al. 1997; Bush et al. 1999).
Thus, targeting speciﬁc genes that modulate reactive astrocytes
will have important inﬂuences on the outcome of neural injury
(Pardo et al. 2016).
SOX2 (Sex determining region of Y chromosome [Sry]-
related high mobility group box 2) belongs to the SOX family of
transcription factors (Gubbay et al. 1990). It is one of the earliest
transcription factors expressed in neural stem cells, and plays
a key role in specifying early neural lineages and brain develop-
ment (Avilion et al. 2003; Bylund et al. 2003). In the adult, SOX2
is enriched in neurogenic regions of the brain, including the
subventricular zone of the lateral ventricle and the subgranular
zone of the dentate gyrus (Bylund et al. 2003; Graham et al.
2003; Ferri et al. 2004; Episkopou 2005). SOX2+ cells are self-
renewable and multipotent in the adult neurogenic niche (Suh
et al. 2007). Outside of neural stem cell populations, SOX2 is
detectable in proliferating astrocytes in the developing mouse
brain and early postnatal astrocytes in culture (Bani-Yaghoub
et al. 2006). Interestingly, its expression becomes silenced in
astrocytes after long-term culture, but expression can be reacti-
vated by injury or growth stimulation. This SOX2 reactivation
accompanies astrocyte proliferation (Bani-Yaghoub et al. 2006).
Nevertheless, not much is known about the expression and
function of SOX2 in adult cortical astrocytes and its role under
pathological conditions.
Here, we examined the expression and function of SOX2 in
the adult brain under normal condition and after TBI. We found
that SOX2 is constitutively expressed in postmitotic cortical
astrocytes, and that its expression is greatly upregulated in
response to TBI. Using an inducible knockout model of Sox2
mutant mice, we also investigated its function in adult astro-
cytes. Although no obvious changes were detected in astrocyte
survival and morphology or animal behaviors under normal
conditions, injury-induced reactive astrogliosis was greatly
dampened in Sox2 mutant mice. Unexpectedly, Sox2-deletion
signiﬁcantly ameliorated injury-induced tissue loss and behav-
ioral deﬁcits, indicating that SOX2-mediated reactive astroglio-
sis is maladaptive to traumatic injury.
Materials and Methods
Animals
The following transgenic mice were used: Sox2f/f (The Jackson
Laboratory, stock 013093) (Shaham et al. 2009), Aldh1l1-EGFP
(MMRRC, stock 011015-UCD) (Gong et al. 2003), hGFAP-CreERT2
(The Jackson Laboratory, stock 012849) (Ganat et al. 2006),
mGfap-Cre (The Jackson Laboratory, stock 024098) (Gregorian
et al. 2009), Rosa-tdTomato (Rosa-tdT; The Jackson Laboratory,
stock 007914) (Madisen et al. 2010), and Rosa-YFP (The Jackson
Laboratory, stock 006148) (Srinivas et al. 2001). Wild-type male
C57BL/6J mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory.
The
hGFAP-CreERT2,
Sox2f/f,
and
Rosa-tdT
mice
were
bred
together to generate hGFAP-CreERT2; Sox2f/f; Rosa-tdT mice. Mice
were housed under a 12-h light/dark cycle with ad libitum
access to food and water in a controlled animal facility. Adult
male and female mice at 6 weeks of age and older were used
unless otherwise stated. No overt gender-associated mutant
phenotype was observed. Experimental procedures and proto-
cols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee at UT Southwestern Medical Center.
Tamoxifen and BrdU Treatments
Tamoxifen (T5648; Sigma) was dissolved in a mixture of etha-
nol and sesame oil (1:9 by volume) at a concentration of 40 mg/
ml. Tamoxifen was given by intraperitoneally injection at a
daily dose of 1 mg/10 g body weight for 3–5 days. Mice were
analyzed at least 7 days post tamoxifen treatments. BrdU
(B5002; Sigma; 1 g/l) was supplied in drinking water for dura-
tions as indicated in the text.
Controlled Cortical Impact Injury
The controlled cortical impact (CCI) model of TBI was employed.
Under anesthesia, a skin incision was made in the mouse fore-
head to expose the skull. A craniotomy was performed over the
right hemisphere and the bone ﬂap (2.2 mm in diameter) was
carefully removed. A cortical injury (0 bregma, 1 mm lateral to
the sagittal suture line) was introduced at an impact depth of
1 mm with a 2-mm diameter round impact tip (speed 3.0 m/s,
dwell time 100 ms) by using an electromagnetically driven CCI
device (Impact OneTM Stereotaxic CCI Instrument, Leica). Both
motor and sensory cortices were impacted. After injury, the skin
was sutured and further secured with liquid adhesive.
Behavior Tests
In accordance with previous publications on TBI (Schwarzbold
et al. 2010; Washington et al. 2012; Tweedie et al. 2013; Kondo
et al. 2015), we chose a battery of behavior paradigms to exam-
ine neurological functions associated with the injured cortical
area. All animals were encoded before tests. Their behaviors
were evaluated by 2 observers who were blinded to the experi-
mental conditions and treatments. Data were collected and
then decoded for group analyses. Nine or more mice were
included in each experimental group.
Modiﬁed neurologic severity scores (mNSS): mNSS was used
to exam the overall neurologic functions of mice before and 1,
7, 14, 21, and 28 days after injury. mNSS was graded on a scale
of 0–14 as previously described with modiﬁcations (normal
score 0; maximal deﬁcit score 14, for details see Supplementary
Table S4) (Chen et al. 2005). The mNSS value correlates with
impairment severity.
Elevated plus maze: An elevated plus maze was used to assess
risk-taking behavior of mice 5 weeks after injury as previously
described (Walf and Frye 2007; Kondo et al. 2015). Brieﬂy, the
maze consisted of 4 arms in a “plus” shape formation. The 2
open arms have no wall and the 2 closed arms have surrounding
walls (30 × 5 × 15 cm3) and an open top. The entire maze is raised
85 cm above the ﬂoor. Mice are placed in the center of the maze,
facing one of the open arms, and allowed to explore the maze
for a total of 5 min. The total time spent in the 2 closed and the 2
open arms was recorded and used as a surrogate measure of
risk-taking behavior; mice that spent less time in the open arms
were considered to have lower levels of risk-taking behavior.
Tail suspension test: The tail suspension test was used to mea-
sure behavioral despair. We carried out tail suspension test 6
weeks after injury using a methodology described previously (Can
et al. 2012). Brieﬂy, the mice were suspended by the tail using
adhesive tape 50 cm above the ﬂoor for 6 min. The immobility
time of each mouse—with immobility deﬁned as hanging pas-
sively, without active movements—was recorded. An increased
immobility time is considered as depression-like behavior.
Morris water maze: Morris water maze (MWM) was used to
evaluate spatial learning and memory under normal condition
or 8 weeks after injury as previously described (Zhang et al.
SOX2-Deletion Improves Recovery After Brain Injury
Chen et al.
|
55
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

2008). Mice were trained 4 trials per day for 10 days. The probe
trial was conducted 24 h after the last learning session. The
entire procedure in the pool was monitored by an automatic
tracking system to record swim speed, time to platform, total
distance moved, and time spent in the target quadrant where
the platform was previously located.
Immunohistochemistry
Mice were euthanized with CO2 overdose and intracardially per-
fused with ice-cold PBS and 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS.
Brains were collected and postﬁxed with 4% PFA overnight at 4 °C.
Then the brain samples were cryoprotected with 30% sucrose
solution in PBS for 24 h and cut into 40-μm-thick sections.
Sections were serially collected and stored in anti-freezing solu-
tion at −20 °C. Immunohistochemistry was performed as previ-
ously described (Niu et al. 2013). The following primary antibodies
were used: GFAP (G3893; mouse; 1:500; Sigma), BrdU (OBT0030; rat
BU1/75; 1:500; Accurate Chemical), SOX1 (4194 S; rabbit; 1:500; Cell
Signaling Technology), SOX2 (Sc-17320; goat; 1:200; Santa Cruz),
SOX3 (rabbit; 1:200; a gift from M. Klymkowsky (Wang et al. 2006)),
RBFOX3 (MAB377, mouse, 1:500, Millipore), OLIG2 (AB9610; rabbit;
1:500; Millipore), NG2 (MAB5384; mouse; 1:500; Millipore), IBA1
(019-19741; rabbit; 1:500; Waco), ALDC (sc-12065; goat; 1:200; Santa
Cruz), ALDH1L1(75-140; mouse; 1:50; NeuroMab), GS (MAB302;
mouse; 1:50; Chemicon), KI67 (LS-C121244; rabbit; 1:200; Lifespan
Biosciences), and GFP (detecting both GFP and YFP, chick, 1:500,
Aves Labs). Alexa Fluor 488-, 555-, or 647-conjugated corre-
sponding secondary antibodies from Jackson ImmunoResearch
were used for indirect ﬂuorescence. Cell nuclei were counter-
stained with Hoechst33342 (Ho) when appropriate. Images were
taken using a Zeiss LSM700 confocal microscope. A Cell Counter
software plugin in the ImageJ program was used to count cells.
Data were obtained from 12 random sections from 3 to 6 mice
in each group.
Quantiﬁcation of Reactive Gliosis and Lesion Size After
Injury
Reactive gliosis was examined as described previously (Clausen
et al. 2011; Kang et al. 2014). Brieﬂy, one-third of the brain sec-
tions spanning the whole injury cortex of each mouse were
used for quantiﬁcation. Reactive gliosis indicated by GFAP+
area was measured by using the Stereo Investigator software
(MBF Bioscience) under identical imaging parameters with a
ﬂuorescent microscope. In each slice, the GFAP+ area was
quantiﬁed from above the top edge of the corpus callosum to
the edge of lesion area with the same threshold of ﬂuorescent
intensity. The total GFAP+ area for each mouse was then calcu-
lated as the following: total GFAP+ area = (∑=
+
GFAP area
i
n
1
) × 3.
Brain lesion size was determined as previously described (Myer
et al. 2006). Brieﬂy, one-sixth of the brain sections spanning the
whole injury cortex of each mouse were used for quantiﬁcation.
Borders between healthy and degenerated cortex were gener-
ally sharp and clearly deﬁned by Hoechst33342 staining. Areas
of healthy cortical tissues on the ipsilateral and contralateral
sides were measured with ImageJ and were used to calculate
relative lesion size as a ratio of the 2 sides.
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation and Sequencing
The cortices of wild-type mice were dissected on ice and cut
into small pieces. After isolation, these cortical tissues were
incubated for 20 min at RT with 10 ml of long-arm cross-linker
solution consisting of 15 mM Hepes-Cl (pH 7.6), 60 mM KCl,
15 mM NaCl, 0.34 M sucrose, 2 mM MgCl2, and freshly added
1.5 mM ethylene glycol bis (succinimidyl succinate, EGTA) and
1 tab/10 mL EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablet. The tissues
were crosslinked with 5 volumes of freshly prepared solution
(1% formaldehyde, 50 mM Hepes-KOH (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl,
1 mM EDTA, and 0.5 mM EGTA) for 12 min at RT. The reaction
was quenched with 1/20 volume of 2.5 M glycine followed by 2
washes with ice-cold PBS. Subsequently, the tissues were
dounced in ice-cold PBS ﬁrst with a loose and later with a tight
pestle, followed by ﬁltration through a 100-μm cell strainer to
remove connective tissues. Dissociated cells were collected by
centrifugation at 2000 rcf for 5 min at 4 °C. Cell pellets were
resuspended in 10 ml of lysis buffer I (50 mM HEPES-KOH [pH
7.5], 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol, 0.5% Igepal CA-
630, 0.25% Triton X-100, and protease inhibitor). After incuba-
tion with gentle rocking for 10 min at 4 °C, cells were collected
by centrifugation at 2000 rcf for 4 min at 4 °C. Pellets were
resuspended in 10 ml of lysis buffer II (10 mM Tris–HCL [pH 8.0],
200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, and protease inhibi-
tor) and incubated with gentle rocking for 5 min at 4 °C. Nuclei
were collected by spinning at 2000 rcf for 5 min at 4 °C and
resuspended in shearing buffer (50 mM HEPES [pH 8.0], 10 mM
EDTA [pH 8.0], 1% SDS, EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor).
Chromatin was sheared for 45 min with 30 s ON and 30 s OFF
cycles until DNA fragments were 200–600 bp. Immunoprecipita-
tion was performed using anti-SOX2 (AB5603, rabbit, 5 μg, Milli-
pore) as previously described (Islam et al. 2015). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments were repeated in trip-
licate and 3 mice were used for each immunoprecipitation
reaction. ChIP-seq libraries were generated using a NEBNext
ChIP-Seq Library Prep Master Mix Set for Illumina (New England
Biolabs, E6240S) with NEBNext Multiplex Oligos for Illumina
(New England Biolabs, E7335S). Brieﬂy, 5 ng puriﬁed chromatin
and 5 ng puriﬁed immunoprecipitated chromatin were used for
ChIP-seq library construction. Replicate libraries were prepared
from 3 independent immunoprecipitations. Single-end 50-base
length sequencing reads were generated on an Illumina HiSeq
2500 System. Reads were aligned to the mouse reference
sequence GRCm38/mm10 with the Bowtie algorithm. Peak call-
ing, peak-gene annotation, and motif discovery (parameter: 200
nucleotide window from peak center) were performed using
HOMER (version 4.7). Gene ontology classiﬁcation was per-
formed using HOMER and Wikipathway analysis (version 2.0.2).
The UCSC Genome Browser was used to visualize tag densities
and multiexperiment datasets. The dataset GSE85213 was sub-
mitted to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) data repository.
Primary Astrocyte Culture and 4-OH-Tamoxifen
Treatment
We isolated primary cortical astrocytes from individual postna-
tal day 1 (P1) to P2 pups of hGFAP-CreERT2; Sox2f/f; Rosa-tdT mice
as previously described (Schildge et al. 2013). After genotyping,
we combined cells with the same genotype and cultured them
in DMEM high glucose with 10% of FBS. We removed loosely
attached microglia/macrophages and oligodendrocyte precur-
sor cells from the cell monolayer by vigorous shaking or blast-
ing with medium through a 10 ml pipette. Cells were passaged
and cultured in vitro for 3 weeks with medium change every 3
days. We then treated the cells for 3 days with daily change of
fresh medium containing 1 μM 4-OH-tamoxifen. Cells were
then collected for analysis.
56
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2019, Vol. 29, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

Isolation of Adult Cortical Astrocytes
We used a sucrose density centrifugation and immunopanning
to purify adult astrocytes from cortical tissues at 3 days post
CCI injury. Brieﬂy, we dissected the cortical tissues surrounding
the injury area in ice-cold PBS and transferred them into 1.5 ml
Eppendorf tubes containing 1 ml warm PPD solution (200 μl
Papain, 10.4 mg DNase I, 200 mg Dispase II in 100 ml DMEM
high glucose medium). We dissociated the tissues through
pipetting with a 1 ml tip for 10 times, incubated for 15–20 min
with occasional mixing at 37 °C, and dissociated again through
pipetting. We then collected cells through centrifugation for
3 min at 500 rcf and resuspended them into 10 ml PBS with 30%
sucrose and 3% FBS. This cell mixture was ﬁltered through a
40-μm mesh into a 50-ml tube. After a 30-s spin at 1000 rcf, the
supernatant was transferred to a new tube and further centri-
fuged for 1.5 min at 1000 rcf to collect cell pellets. Cells were
then resuspended in 4 ml PBS containing 0.02% BSA/DNase and
subjected to immunopanning. Panning petri dishes were pre-
pared ahead of cell isolation. Each 6-cm petri dish was coated
with 4 ml secondary antibody-containing 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH
9.5) buffer. The “secondary antibody-only” dish was coated
with buffer containing 12 μg of donkey anti-goat IgG (H + L)
antibody, while the “CD45” dish was coated with buffer con-
taining 12 μg of goat anti-rat IgG (H + L) antibody (Jackson
ImmunoResearch). After overnight incubation at 4 °C, these
dishes were then washed 3 times with PBS. The “secondary
antibody only” dish was further coated with 2.4 ml PBS with
0.2% BSA/DNase, while the “CD45” dish was coated with the
above buffer containing 0.2 μg of rat anti-mouse CD45 (BD
Biosciences). These dishes were incubated for at least 2 h at RT
before use. For immunopanning, cells were ﬁrst added to “second-
ary antibody only” dishes, which were gently swirled to evenly
distribute the cells. After sitting for 10 min, the dishes were gently
shaken and then incubated for another 10 min. The unbound cells
(the supernatant) were transferred to the “CD45” dishes for further
panning with the same method. The ﬁnal unbound cells—pre-
dominantly astrocytes—were transferred to a 10 ml conical tube
and collected by spinning for 3 min at 200 rcf at RT. Cell pellets
were then directly lysed in 1 ml Trizol regent for RNA isolation.
Quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNAs were extracted from cells with Trizol regent. qRT-
PCR was performed with SYBR Green chemistry and primers
listed in Supplementary Table S3.
Statistical Analysis
Experiments were routinely repeated at least 3 times and the repeat
number was increased according to sample variations. Data were
analyzed using GraphPad Prism 6 software and presented as means
± standard error of the mean (S.E.M.). Pairwise comparisons were
analyzed by two-tailed Student’s t-test. One-way ANOVA with
Tukey’s post hoc test was used for 3 or more independent variables.
Two-way ANOVA and post hoc Tukey’s test were used for mNSS
and Morris water maze. A P value < 0.05 was considered signiﬁcant.
Results
Astrocyte-Enriched Expression of SOX2 in the Adult
Cortex
SOX2 plays critical roles during neural development (Bylund
et al. 2003; Tanaka et al. 2004); however, its function in adult
non-neurogenic brain regions is not clear. We ﬁrst examined
SOX2 expression through immunohistochemistry. Both west-
ern blotting and immunocytochemistry conﬁrmed that the
antibody speciﬁcally recognizes SOX2 but not the closely
related SOX1 or SOX3 (Supplementary Fig. S1a, b). Interestingly,
SOX2
was
broadly
detectable
in
the
adult
mouse
cortex
(Supplementary Fig. S1c), although only 7% is RBFOX3+ neurons
and the expression in these cells is generally much weaker
(Fig. 1a, arrowhead). SOX2 expression in astrocytes were deter-
mined in Aldh1l1-EGFP mice, in which GFP expression is con-
trolled
by
regulatory
elements
for
the
astrocyte-enriched
Aldh1l1 gene (Tsai et al. 2012). Quantiﬁcation showed that
approximately 63.8% of SOX2+ cells express GFP (Fig. 1b).
SOX2 expression in astrocytes was further conﬁrmed with the
speciﬁc marker glutamine synthetase (GS; Fig. 1b). Over 60% of
SOX2+ cells express GS, whereas only 16% of the population
express OLIG2, a marker for oligodendrocytes and oligodendro-
cyte precursor cells (Fig. 1b, c). SOX2 expression, nonetheless, is
relatively
lower
in
OLIG2+GFP−
cells
than
in
neighboring
OLIG2-GFP+ cells (Fig. 1c, arrows and arrowheads; the ratio of
SOX2 ﬂuorescence intensity in OLIG2−GFP+ vs. OLIG2+GFP−= 3.3,
n = 50, P < 0.0001). In sharp contrast, SOX2 was not observed in
IBA1+ cells, a microglia/macrophage-restricted marker (Fig. 1d). To
determine whether aging inﬂuences SOX2 expression patterns,
we compared SOX2 expression in both young (2 months old) and
aged (24 months old) mice. No signiﬁcant difference was identi-
ﬁed in either the cellular distributions or expression levels
(Fig. 1b, c, e). Together, these data reveal that SOX2 is predomi-
nantly expressed in cortical astrocytes and its expression is not
much altered during the aging process.
Identiﬁcation of Genome-Wide SOX2-Binding Sites in
the Adult Cortex
The role of SOX2 is well established in neural stem cell regula-
tion and development of the nervous system (Suh et al. 2007;
Pevny and Nicolis 2010); however, not much is known about how
SOX2 functions in the adult cortex. We performed ChIP-seq using
adult mouse cortical tissue to deﬁne the genome-wide binding
patterns of SOX2. Bioinformatic analysis revealed 9334 bound
sites that are shared between three biologically independent
samples. Among these, 2114 high-ﬁdelity sites have a peak score
≥10. A de novo motif search identiﬁed motifs enriched within
each dataset. The 2 most enriched motifs resemble the canonical
SOX binding site or HMG-box (Fig. 2a). Two variants of this HMG-
box together represented more than 80% of the searched target
sequences. The second most enriched motif is annotated to POU
factors, which were previously shown as cofactors of SOX family
transcription factors (Tanaka et al. 2004). Approximately 43% of
searched
target
sequences
contain
this
POU-binding
motif
(Fig. 2a). These results strongly validate the high quality of our
SOX2 ChIP-seq datasets and suggest that many genes may be co-
regulated by SOX2 and POU factors.
SOX2-bound sites are mainly localized to intronic (41.3%),
intergenic (36.1%), and promoter-transcription start site (19.2%)
regions (Fig. 2b). Among the genes annotated to SOX2-bound
elements, numerous have been implicated in astrogliosis and
reactive astrocyte proliferation after TBI or other brain diseases,
such
as
Nr2e1,
Mmd2,
Wnt7a,
and
Akt2
(Fig.
2c,
and
Supplementary Table S1). Interestingly, the SOX2-binding site
in the Nr2e1 locus was previously identiﬁed to be functional in
a transgenic enhancer analysis (Islam et al. 2015), further con-
ﬁrming the speciﬁcity and ﬁdelity of our ChIP-seq results. To
globally
assess
the
function
of SOX2
targeted
genes,
we
SOX2-Deletion Improves Recovery After Brain Injury
Chen et al.
|
57
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

performed gene ontology (GO) analysis of all the genes with a
peak score ≥10 using HOMER and Wikipathway analysis. An
extensive list of enriched GO terms is presented in Supplementary
Table S2. Importantly, the most enriched GO terms related to
astrogliosis including the WNT signaling pathway (WP539), the
Delta-Notch signaling pathway (WP265), the TGF-β signaling
pathway (WP113), the IL-6 signaling pathway (WP387), and the
MAPK signaling pathway (WP493) (Fig. 2d, and Supplementary
Table S2). We conﬁrmed through quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)
analysis that expression of genes involved in astrogliosis was
largely
altered
upon
Sox2
deletion
in
cultured
astrocytes
(Supplementary Fig. S2, Supplementary Table S3). These results
suggest that SOX2 regulates astrocyte function by directly tar-
geting components of multiple signaling pathways.
Figure 1. SOX2 expression in adult mouse cortex. (a) Rare and weak SOX2 expression in cortical neurons (indicated by an arrowhead). Non-neuronal expression is
generally much stronger (indicated by arrows). (b) SOX2 expression in cortical astrocytes of Aldh1l1-EGFP mice. Astrocytes were identiﬁed by GS and the reporter GFP.
Arrows show a representative GFP+GS+SOX2+ cell. mo, month. (c) SOX2 expression in cortical OLIG2+ oligodendrocytes or oligodendrocyte precursors of Aldh1l1-EGFP
mice. Arrows show a representative SOX2highOLIG2−GFP+ cell, whereas arrowheads show a representative SOX2lowOLIG2+GFP−cell. SOX2 expression is always weaker
in OLIG2+ cells. (d) SOX2 is not expressed in IBA1+ microglia. A representative SOX2+IBA1−cell is indicated by an arrow. (e) SOX2 expression in cortical GFP+ astrocytes
(indicated by an arrow, SOX2highOLIG2−GFP+) or OLIG2+ cells (indicated by an arrowhead, SOX2lowOLIG2+GFP−) of 24-month-old Aldh1l1-EGFP mice. Scale bars: 25 μm
(a) and 50 μm (b–e).
58
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2019, Vol. 29, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

Minimal Effect of Sox2-Deletion on Astrocytes and
Animal Behaviors Under Homeostasis
To examine SOX2 function in adult astrocytes in vivo, we gener-
ated hGFAP-CreERT2; Sox2 f/f; Rosa-tdT mice, in which the ﬂoxed
alleles of Sox2 can be conditionally deleted in astrocytes that are
simultaneously marked by the Cre-dependent reporter tdTomato
(tdT) (Fig. 3a). For simplicity, this Sox2 mutant line is hereafter
referred as Sox2-cKO. The ﬂoxed allele-negative mice were used
as wild-type controls and dubbed Sox2-WT. The adult mice were
intraperitoneally injected with tamoxifen for 4 days and ana-
lyzed 7 days after the ﬁnal injection. Immunohistochemistry
conﬁrmed an efﬁcient deletion of SOX2 expression in cortical
astrocytes of adult Sox2-cKO mice (Fig. 3b,c). Unexpectedly, the
adult Sox2-cKO brains did not show any gross morphological
abnormalities when compared with Sox2-WT littermate controls
even at 3 months following tamoxifen injections. Quantiﬁcation
of cortical astrocytes failed to reveal any obvious changes in cell
density in Sox2-cKO mice (Fig. 3d, e). Astrocyte morphology also
remained similar between wild-type controls and Sox2-cKO
mice (Fig. 3d, f, g). Nonetheless, due to its expression in adult
neural stem cells, Sox2 mutant mice showed a mild but signiﬁ-
cant reduction of neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus and lateral
ventricle (Supplementary Fig. S3).
We then examined whether Sox2-deletion led to any changes
on animal behavior through a series of tests (Supplementary
Fig. S4a). The overall neurological function was assessed through
a modiﬁed neurological severity score (mNSS) system, which
mainly measures reﬂex and body coordination (Supplementary
Table S4). Both Sox2-cKO mice and wild-type controls performed
equally well as indicated by an average score of 1–1.5 during a
time course analysis (Fig. 3h). A two-way ANOVA and post hoc
multiple comparisons failed to reveal any signiﬁcant difference
between experimental groups. The depression-like behavior was
examined by tail suspension test (Fig. 3i). The average duration
in immobility was around 120 s during a 6-min test session; and
no signiﬁcant difference was identiﬁed between wild-type and
Sox2-cKO mice. Risk-taking and anxiety-like behavior was
monitored by elevated plus maze. Similarly, we failed to
observe any signiﬁcant deﬁcits in mice with Sox2-cKO (Fig. 3j).
In addition, spatial learning and memory examined by the
Morris water maze was also similar between wild-type and Sox2-
cKO mice (Supplementary Fig. S4b, c). Together, these data indi-
cate that SOX2 is not required for astrocyte survival and mor-
phology. It also has no signiﬁcant inﬂuence on cognitive and
emotional behaviors of mice under normal condition.
Robust Response of SOX2+ Cells to TBI
We used a CCI-induced TBI model to examine a potential role
of SOX2 under pathological conditions (Fig. 4a). A time course
analysis showed that CCI induced a rapid increase of both the
number of SOX2+ cells and the intensity of SOX2 expression
Figure 2. ChIP-seq analysis to reveal SOX2-regulated genes in the adult mouse cortex. (a) The predominant SOX2-bound motifs identiﬁed by genome-wide ChIP-seq
analysis. (b) Genome-wide distribution of SOX2-binding peaks. (c) Representative genes directly targeted by SOX2. ChIP-seq was performed in triplicates using inde-
pendent cortical tissues. (d) Highly enriched Gene Ontology terms by Wikipathway analysis.
SOX2-Deletion Improves Recovery After Brain Injury
Chen et al.
|
59
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

Figure 3. Lack of overt effects of SOX2-deletion on adult quiescent astrocytes. (a) An inducible approach to speciﬁcally delete Sox2 in adult astrocytes. tdT, tdTomato.
Tam, tamoxifen. (b) Representative confocal images showing deletion of SOX2 in tdT-traced astrocytes. (c) Quantiﬁcation showing robust deletion of SOX2 in cortical
astrocytes (means ± S.E.M., n = 3 mice, ****P < 0.0001 by t-test). (d) Morphology and density of cortical astrocytes traced by tdT with or without Sox2-deletion. Enlarged
views of the boxed regions are also shown. (e) Quantiﬁcation of astrocyte density in the adult cortex (means ± S.E.M.; n = 3 mice). (f, g) Morphology of cortical astro-
cytes examined by staining of the astrocyte-speciﬁc markers ALDC and ALDH1L1. (h) Overall neurological function determined by mNSS (means ± S.E.M.; n = 9 and 11
for WT and cKO mice, respectively; no signiﬁcant difference between groups by two-way ANOVA analysis). (i) Tail suspension test to examine depression-like behav-
ior (means ± S.E.M.; n = 9 and 11 for WT and cKO mice, respectively; n.s., not signiﬁcant by t-test). (j) Elevated plus maze test to examine risk-taking and anxiety-like
behavior (means ± S.E.M.; n = 9 and 11 for WT and cKO mice, respectively; n.s., not signiﬁcant by t-test). Scale bars: 50 μm.
60
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2019, Vol. 29, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

surrounding the injury site (Fig. 4b–d). Such increase was then
much reduced at 28 days post CCI. Most importantly, we found
that over 20% of those SOX2+ cells surrounding the injury area
expressed the cell proliferation marker KI67, indicating that a
signiﬁcant fraction of these cells entered cell cycle after injury
(Fig. 4e, f).
CCI leads to reactive gliosis, including activation of astro-
cytes, microglia, and NG2+ glia (Susarla et al. 2014). We analyzed
each of these cell types for SOX2 expression 3 days post-CCI. To
facilitate detection, cortical astrocytes were traced in mGfap-Cre;
Rosa-YFP mice (Srinivas et al. 2001; Gregorian et al. 2009). These
cortical YFP+ cells strongly expressed SOX2 and nearly all
expressed the reactive astrocyte marker GFAP (Fig. 5a). The ratio
of SOX2+YFP+ cells among all cortical SOX2+ cells increased
from 60% in the noninjured condition to over 80% after CCI
(Fig. 5b). This signiﬁcant increase conﬁrmed a speciﬁc response
of SOX2+ astrocytes to CCI.
Although CCI induced robust activation of microglia/macro-
phages as indicated by morphological change and upregulated
IBA1 expression, no microglia/macrophage stained positive for
SOX2 (Fig. 5c). CCI also did not cause misexpression of SOX2 in
RBFOX3+ neurons (Supplementary Fig. S5). Nonetheless, NG2+
or OLIG2+ cells were detected surrounding the injury site, many
of which expressed SOX2 (Fig. 5d, e; arrows). These cells repre-
sented 20–30% of total SOX2+ cells in the injured cortex (Fig. 5f, g).
Interestingly, nearly all SOX2+NG2+ cells were also YFP+ and more
than 60% of SOX2+OLIG2+ cells were labeled by YFP (Fig. 5d, e),
indicating that a fraction of astrocytes expressed NG2 and/or
OLIG2 after CCI. Nonetheless, SOX2+GFP+ cells were the predomi-
nant cells surrounding the injury site with an overall density of
Figure 4. TBI-induced upregulation of SOX2 expression. (a) A schematic diagram showing controlled cortical impact (CCI)-induced TBI and counting area (red colored
box) for quantiﬁcation. (b) Density of SOX2+ cells surrounding the injured cortex (means ± S.E.M., n = 3-5 mice; F = 42.82 and P < 0.0001 by one-way ANOVA; ***P =
0.0004 and ****P = 0.0001 by post hoc Tukey’s test). (c) Enhanced SOX2 expression in cells surrounding the injured cortex (means ± S.E.M., n = 3 mice; F = 14.71 and P =
0.0004 by one-way ANOVA; **P = 0.0032 and ***P = 0.0004 by post hoc Tukey’s test). (d) Representative confocal images of SOX2-staining in the injured cortex. Enlarged
views of the boxed regions are also shown. d, days post CCI injury. (e, f) Representative images and quantiﬁcation data of proliferating SOX2+ cells surrounding the
injury core at 3 days postinjury (dpi) (means ± S.E.M., n = 3 mice, ****P < 0.0001 by t-test). Scale bars: 50 μm.
SOX2-Deletion Improves Recovery After Brain Injury
Chen et al.
|
61
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

more than 1000 cells/mm2 (Fig. 5h). The density for SOX2+OLIG2+
or SOX2+NG2+ cells was much lower at 256 and 129 cells/mm2,
respectively (Fig. 5h). Together, these results suggest that CCI
induces a very robust response by SOX2+ cells, with a majority of
the responsive cells being reactive astrocytes.
Requirement of SOX2 for Injury-Induced Reactive
Astrocytes
Proliferation is a key feature of astrogliosis following TBI (Kernie
et al. 2001; Susarla et al. 2014). We ﬁrstly determined a critical
time period during which a majority of reactive astrocytes
undergo proliferation. We focused our analysis on the cerebral
cortex because injury in this brain region causes robust SOX2
expression, although CCI might impact on both the grey and
white matter (Hall et al. 2005). BrdU was administrated in drink-
ing water from 0 to 7 days, 8 to 14 days, and 15 to 21 days after
CCI (Fig. 6a). Reactive astrocytes were identiﬁed by staining for
GFAP around the injury site. Quantiﬁcation showed that astro-
cyte proliferation mainly occurred during the ﬁrst 7 days postin-
jury (Fig. 6b). Only a very few proliferating astrocytes were
detected
during
the
following
2-time
periods
(Fig.
6b,
c).
Figure 5. Broader SOX2 expression in reactive cortical glial cells. (a) Robust SOX2 expression in reactive cortical astrocytes, which are marked by GFAP and GFP expres-
sion in mGfap-Cre;Rosa-YFP mice at 3 dpi. (b) A predominant and increased SOX2 expression in reactive astrocytes (means ± S.E.M., n = 3 mice, ****P < 0.0001 by t-test).
(c) Lack of SOX2 in reactive IBA1+ microglia/macrophages. Immunohistochemistry was performed on cortical regions of mGfap-Cre;Rosa-YFP mice at 3 dpi. (d) SOX2
expression in reactive NG2+ glia. Astrocytes were traced by GFP in mGfap-Cre;Rosa-YFP mice at 3 dpi. (e) SOX2 expression in OLIG2+ cells. OLIG2+ expression is generally
weaker in SOX2+ reactive astrocytes. (f, g) Relative cellular distribution of SOX2+ cells in the adult cortex after TBI (means ± S.E.M., n = 3 mice). (h) Cell density of
SOX2-expressing reactive glial cells (means ± S.E.M., n = 3 mice). Scale bars: 50 μm.
62
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2019, Vol. 29, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

Therefore, we focused our further analysis on the ﬁrst 7 days
postinjury. Both adult Sox2-cKO mice and their littermate con-
trols
underwent
CCI
and
were
then
administered
BrdU-
containing drinking water for 7 days. Sox2-deletion reduced pro-
liferating reactive astrocytes by more than 50% over the ﬁrst 7
days postinjury, indicated by double-staining of BrdU and GFAP
around the injury core (Fig. 6d, e). The overall GFAP+ reactive
astrocytes were accordingly reduced by roughly 50% in Sox2-cKO
mice, compared with wild-type controls (Fig. 6f). Interestingly,
the average cell-body area of Sox2-deleted astrocytes was also
signiﬁcantly smaller than controls (Fig. 6g), indicating a reduced
hypertrophic response to CCI. We then isolated astrocytes from
the injured cortex 3 days after CCI and conﬁrmed many of those
SOX2-regulated candidate genes that were identiﬁed by ChIP-seq
(Fig. 6h). These results clearly indicate that SOX2 plays a key role
in activating cortical astrocytes after brain injury.
Cortical
injury-induced
microglia
activation/macrophage
recruitment was unexpectedly much reduced in Sox2-cKO mice
(Supplementary Fig. S6a-b). The total number of microglia/
macrophages surrounding the injury site decreased more than
50%, whereas those cells in proliferation reduced 65% upon
inducible deletion of Sox2. Since Sox2 is not expressed in micro-
glia/macrophages, these data indicate that Sox2-dependent
reactive astrogliosis noncell autonomously modulates micro-
glia/macrophages after CCI. Interestingly, neuronal cell density
surrounding the injury area was signiﬁcantly higher in Sox2
mutants than in wild-type controls (Supplementary Fig. S7a),
although they showed no difference in NG2 glia density, cell
apoptosis, or postinjury angiogenesis at 7dpi (Supplementary
Figs S6c, d and S7b, c).
Sox2-Deletion in Astrocytes Promotes Functional
Recovery After Injury
To determine whether SOX2 in reactive astrocytes played a role
during tissue remodeling after brain injury, we analyzed glial-
scar formation and lesion size surrounding the injured cortical
region. Both wild-type and Sox2-cKO mice underwent CCI and
were sacriﬁced for analysis 2 months later. Glial scars and
lesion area were demarcated by GFAP and nuclear Hoechst3342
staining, respectively. We found that the total lesion size in the
Sox2-cKO brains was much smaller than in the respective wild-
type controls (Fig. 7a, b). Glial scars were observed in the sur-
rounding lesion area in both wild-type and Sox2-cKO mice;
however, the total cortical area with reactive astrocytes (GFAP+
area) was signiﬁcantly reduced in Sox2-cKO mice (Fig. 7c).
In addition to molecular and cellular changes, TBI also leads
to behavioral deﬁcits (Luukkainen et al. 2012; Yang et al. 2012).
Accordingly, we conducted a series of neurological analysis of
mice after CCI (Supplementary Fig. S8a). Overall neurological
function was monitored by mNSS over time. When examined
at 24 h postinjury, both Sox2-cKO and control mice were
impaired to a nearly identical degree (Fig. 7d), indicating rela-
tively uniform injuries among these mice. Interestingly, the
neurological function of Sox2-cKO mice signiﬁcantly improved
during the following weeks, while their wild-type controls
showed only mild gains during the ﬁrst 7 days postinjury
(Fig. 7d). When examined at 5 weeks postinjury, Sox2-cKO mice
also spent signiﬁcantly less time in immobility during the tail-
suspension
test,
revealing
much-reduced
depression-like
behavior (Fig. 7e). Sox2-deletion similarly improved animal per-
formance in the elevated plus maze tests when examined at 6
weeks postinjury. Sox2-cKO mice stayed signiﬁcantly less time
in the open arm, whereas their total entries to this arm
remained similar to their controls (Fig. 7f). Such results suggest
that deletion of Sox2 in astrocytes protects mice from CCI-
induced risk-taking irrational behavior. Nonetheless, Sox2-cKO
mice performed similarly as their wild-type controls on the
hippocampus-dependent learning and memory by Morris water
maze tests (Supplementary Fig. S8b, c).
Discussion
A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms control-
ling reactive astrocyte function is fundamental to therapeutic
interventions for brain trauma. In this study, we show that the
transcription factor SOX2 plays a critical role in TBI-induced
reactive astrocytes. SOX2 is basally expressed in normal corti-
cal astrocytes and highly induced by TBI. As a transcription fac-
tor, SOX2 binds to regulatory regions of many genes involved in
regulating reactive astrocyte functions, such as cell cycle re-
entry and cytokine signaling. Injury-induced proliferation of
cortical astrocytes critically requires SOX2. Since reactive gliosis
is generally believed to help maintain tissue integrity after
traumatic injury (Faulkner et al. 2004; Rolls et al. 2009; Burda
et al. 2016), it is unexpected that conditional deletion of Sox2 in
adult astrocytes signiﬁcantly reduces injury area and lesion
size, and improves behavioral recovery after TBI. Therefore, our
results uncover for the ﬁrst time that SOX2-dependent signal-
ing pathways in reactive astrocytes may be speciﬁcally targeted
for brain recovery after traumatic injury.
SOX2 is well known for its critical role in embryonic stem
cells, neural stem cells, brain development, and adult neuro-
genesis (Graham et al. 2003; Ferri et al. 2004; Episkopou 2005;
Bani-Yaghoub et al. 2006; Pevny and Nicolis 2010). Nonetheless,
its function in differentiated cells is less clear. Our analysis
reveals that SOX2 is basally expressed and can be further
induced by TBI in adult cortical astrocytes. This result is consis-
tent with prior reports showing an astrocyte-enriched expres-
sion of SOX2 in both the brain and spinal cord (Bani-Yaghoub
et al. 2006; Guo et al. 2011). Similar to TBI, contusion spinal cord
injury and focal demyelination can also upregulate SOX2
expression in oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) and epen-
dymal cells (Lee et al. 2013; Zhao et al. 2015). Such induced
SOX2 expression in OPCs may be required for differentiation
and remyelination (Zhao et al. 2015). In addition to the central
nervous system, SOX2 is detectable in GFAP+ glial cells after
nerve injury of the inner ear (Lang et al. 2011). Further, these
injury-responsive SOX2+ glial cells gain neural stem cell-like
properties in culture (Lang et al. 2015). Although the exact
molecular mechanism remains to be investigated, the injury-
induced expression of growth factors and cytokines may be
responsible for SOX2 upregulation in multiple glial cells after
injury (Bani-Yaghoub et al. 2006; Srinivasan et al. 2016).
The injury-induced upregulation of SOX2 suggests it may play
a unique role in astrocyte activation after brain injury. In this
regard, we have recently demonstrated that SOX2 overexpression
is sufﬁcient to reprogram astrocytes into neuroblasts and func-
tional neurons in the adult brain and spinal cord (Niu et al. 2013,
2015; Su et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2016). Brain NG2 glia can be simi-
larly reprogrammed by ectopic SOX2 after injury (Heinrich et al.
2014). However, such neurogenic reprogramming of reactive
astrocytes or NG2 glia has not been observed in spite of robust
expression of endogenous SOX2 surrounding injured regions of
brain or spinal cord, which suggests that an expression threshold
or another yet-to-be-identiﬁed mechanism is required for this
fate reprogramming in vivo. Nonetheless, SOX2 upregulation may
lead to dedifferentiation of reactive astrocytes.
SOX2-Deletion Improves Recovery After Brain Injury
Chen et al.
|
63
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

Through inducible deletion of Sox2 in adult astrocytes, we
reveal for the ﬁrst time an essential role of SOX2 in regulating
the functions of reactive astrocytes after TBI. At the molecular
level, our ChIP-seq analysis identiﬁed more than 2100 high-
ﬁdelity SOX2 bound sites in mouse cortical tissue. Since cortical
astrocytes are the predominant cell type expressing SOX2 in
this region, our identiﬁed binding sites largely represent SOX2
regulatory regions in these adult differentiated cells. A global
GO analysis of annotated genes indicates that numerous SOX2
targets directly contribute to the regulation of the WNT, Delta-
Figure 6. Astrocyte activation requires SOX2. (a) A strategy for analysis of astrocyte activation post CCI-induced injury. Immunohistochemistry was performed at the
indicated time points. dpi, days postinjury. (b) Quantiﬁcation of reactive astrocytes during a time course. Cells were counted surrounding the injured cortex (means ±
S.E.M., n = 4 mice). (c) Representative images of activated cortical astrocytes indicated by BrdU-incorporation and GFAP staining. (d) Confocal images showing reduced
proliferation of cortical astrocytes in mice with Sox2-deletion. Enlarged views of the boxed regions are shown on the respective right panels. (e) Quantiﬁcation of pro-
liferating cortical astrocytes at 7 dpi (means ± S.E.M., n = 4 mice for each genotype, **P = 0.0049 by t-test). (f) Quantiﬁcation of total activated cortical astrocytes indicated
by GFAP staining at 7 dpi (means ± S.E.M., n = 4 mice for each genotype, **P = 0.0009 by t-test). (g) Quantiﬁcation of cell body areas of GFAP+ cells at 7 dpi (means ± S.E.M.,
n = 4 mice, **P < 0.01 by t-test). (h) Expression of SOX2 targeted genes from isolated adult cortical astrocytes 3 days after CCI (means ± S.E.M.; n = 4 mice; P < 0.05 for each
of the genes by t-test). Scale bars: 50 μm.
64
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2019, Vol. 29, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

Notch, TGF-β, IL-6, and MAPK signaling pathways. These path-
ways are known to have critical roles in astrogenesis during
normal neural development and in astrogliosis under patholog-
ical conditions (Schachtrup et al. 2010; Benner et al. 2013;
Choi et al. 2013; Wanner et al. 2013; LeComte et al. 2015; Yang
et al. 2016). For example, MMD2 directly regulates ERK phos-
phorylation and plays a key role in astrogliosis (Jin et al. 2012;
Kang et al. 2012). WNT7a, a principle upstream factor activating
beta-catenin, is highly expressed in astrocytes and critical for
cell proliferation (Chen , Guan, Liu et al. 2012; Chen , Guan,
Zhang et al. 2012). AKT2 and AKT3 are key components of PI3K/
AKT and MAPK pathway, which regulates the expression of
EGFR and interact with PTEN signaling, and play essential roles
in regulating astrogliosis (Endersby et al. 2011; Choi et al. 2013;
Xie et al. 2016). NR2E1 (also known as TLX) is enriched in adult
neural stem cells and astrocytes in the adult brain with impor-
tant roles in astrogliosis through regulation of the BMP signal-
ing (Shi et al. 2004; Niu et al. 2011; Qin et al. 2014). Interestingly,
the direct regulation of NR2E1 by SOX2 was previously con-
ﬁrmed by enhancer analysis both in cell culture and in trans-
genic mice (Shimozaki et al. 2012; Islam et al. 2015). Together,
these results indicate that SOX2 regulates astrocyte activation
by controlling the activity of multiple signaling pathways.
It is unexpected that astrocyte-speciﬁc deletion of Sox2 in
mice results in a much-reduced lesion size and signiﬁcantly
improved behavioral recovery after TBI. Emerging evidence
Figure 7. Sox2-deletion ameliorates TBI-induced functional impairments. (a) Whole brain overviews of the indicated mice at 2 months after CCI. The lesioned brain areas are
indicated by arrows. (b) Quantiﬁcation of lesion size. Coronal brain sections showing areas for quantiﬁcation (means ± S.E.M.; n = 5 mice for each genotype; ***P < 0.001 by t-
test). Scale bars: 1 mm. (c) Quantiﬁcation of cortical areas with reactive astrogliosis. Coronal brain sections with GFAP staining showing areas for quantiﬁcation. The regions
with reactive gliosis are outlined by the dashed lines (means ± S.E.M.; n = 6 mice for each genotype; **P = 0.0098 by t-test). Scale bars: 100 μm. (d) mNSS showing TBI-induced
overall neurological impairments (means ± S.E.M.; n = 12 and 11 for WT and cKO mice, respectively). Data were analyzed by two-way ANOVA and post hoc Tukey’s test
(genotype effect: F = 40.44, P < 0.0001; time effect: F = 8.758, P < 0.0001; effect of genotype × time, F = 2.721, P = 0.033; **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001). (e) Tail suspension test to
examine depression-like behavior (means ± S.E.M.; n = 12 and 11 for WT and cKO mice, respectively; ****P < 0.0001 by t-test). (f) Elevated plus maze test to examine risk-
taking irrational behavior (means ± S.E.M.; n = 12 and 11 for WT and cKO mice, respectively; *P = 0.02 by t-test; n.s., not signiﬁcant).
SOX2-Deletion Improves Recovery After Brain Injury
Chen et al.
|
65
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

shows that reactive astrocytes are critical for restricting inﬂam-
mation and preserving tissue and function (Faulkner et al. 2004;
Rolls et al. 2009; Burda et al. 2016). For example, preventing
astrocyte scar formation impedes recovery after spinal cord
injury (Anderson et al. 2016). Ablation of proliferating reactive
astrocytes leads to increased neuronal degeneration, inﬂamma-
tion, and tissue loss in mouse TBI models that are induced by
either CCI or stab wound (Bush et al. 1999; Myer et al. 2006).
Nonetheless, some studies also reveal that reactive astrogliosis
contributes to secondary tissue loss, impaired regeneration, and
functional disabilities (McGraw et al. 2001; Raghupathi 2004).
Glial scars formed by reactive astrocytes constitute a major
inhibitory environment for axonal and cellular regeneration
postinjury (Bush et al. 1999; Silver and Miller 2004). For example,
reducing astrogliosis and astroglial scar formation through
either cell-cycle inhibition or expression of an anti-glial-scar
factor increases nerve ﬁber growth in the core area of the injury
site, and improves axonal regeneration and functional recovery
after TBI or SCI (Di Giovanni et al. 2005; Jeong et al. 2012). These
reported different roles of reactive astrocytes may depend on
the type of injuries and very likely on the methods to manipu-
late the fate of reactive astrocytes. The outcome for cell-
ablation-based methods may be understandably different from
outcomes based on gene expression and cell-cycle regulation.
TBI results in damages to the lesion core, and molecular and
cellular dysfunctions in the penumbra, which ultimately lead
to behavior impairments. The mNSS measures performances of
several behaviors and is generally used to evaluate neurological
deﬁcits after stroke or TBI (Chen et al. 2005; Schwarzbold et al.
2010; Ge et al. 2014). A time-course analysis of mNSS showed
that Sox2-cKO mice recovered signiﬁcantly better than controls.
Emotional behaviors associated with the prefrontal cortex,
which are frequently impaired in animals with TBI-induced
cortical injuries (Schwarzbold et al. 2010; Washington et al.
2012; Huang et al. 2013), can be assessed through elevated plus
maze and tail suspension tests (Schwarzbold et al. 2010;
Adhikari et al. 2011). In both of these paradigms, Sox2-cKO mice
were less impaired. In contrast, Sox2-deletion has no signiﬁcant
effect on hippocampus-dependent learning and memory mea-
sured by MWM tests. Together, these data indicate that SOX2-
mediated response in astrocytes exacerbates certain functional
deﬁcits after cortical injury.
In summary, our results reveal that SOX2 plays an impor-
tant role in TBI-induced reactive gliosis and behavioral deﬁcits.
They further suggest that the SOX2-dependent pathways may
be speciﬁcally targeted for recovery after TBI.
Supplementary Material
Supplementary data is available at Cerebral Cortex online.
Authors’ Contributions
C.C., S.Q., and C.-L.Z. conceived and designed the experiments.
C.C., X.Z., D.K.S., W.T., J.Y., J.S., and S.Q. performed the experi-
ments and analyzed the data. L.-L.W. provided critical reagents
and scientiﬁc inputs. Y.Z. maintained mouse colonies. C.C., X.Z.,
S.Q., and C.-L.Z prepared the article. All authors reviewed and
approved the article.
Funding
The work in the Zhang laboratory was supported by Welch
Foundation (I-1724), Texas Institute for Brain Injury and Repair,
Decherd Foundation, Kent Waldrep Foundation Center for Basic
Research
on
Nerve
Growth
and
Regeneration,
Mobility
Foundation, National Institutes of Health (NS070981, NS099073,
NS088095,
NS092616,
and
NS093502)
and
National
Natural
Science Foundation of China (No.81528006). The work in the Qin
laboratory was supported by grants from National Key Basic
Research Program of China (973 Program, No.2014CB965001),
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.81528006),
and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
(No. 1501219100).
Notes
We thank members of the Zhang laboratory for discussions
and reagents and Dr Shari Birnbaum at the Rodent Behavior
Core Facility at UT Southwestern for behavior analysis. C-.L.Z.
is a W. W. Caruth, Jr Scholar in Biomedical Research. Conﬂict of
Interest: None declared.
References
Adhikari A, Topiwala MA, Gordon JA. 2011. Single units in the
medial prefrontal cortex with anxiety-related ﬁring patterns
are preferentially inﬂuenced by ventral hippocampal activ-
ity. Neuron. 71:898–910.
Anderson MA, Burda JE, Ren Y, Ao Y, O’Shea TM, Kawaguchi R,
Coppola G, Khakh BS, Deming TJ, Sofroniew MV. 2016.
Astrocyte scar formation aids central nervous system axon
regeneration. Nature. 532:195–200.
Avilion AA, Nicolis SK, Pevny LH, Perez L, Vivian N, Lovell-
Badge R. 2003. Multipotent cell lineages in early mouse
development depend on SOX2 function. Genes Dev. 17:
126–140.
Bani-Yaghoub M, Tremblay RG, Lei JX, Zhang D, Zurakowski B,
Sandhu JK, Smith B, Ribecco-Lutkiewicz M, Kennedy J,
Walker PR, et al. 2006. Role of Sox2 in the development of
the mouse neocortex. Dev Biol. 295:52–66.
Benner EJ, Luciano D, Jo R, Abdi K, Paez-Gonzalez P, Sheng H,
Warner DS, Liu C, Eroglu C, Kuo CT. 2013. Protective astro-
genesis from the SVZ niche after injury is controlled by
Notch modulator Thbs4. Nature. 497:369–373.
Buffo A, Rolando C, Ceruti S. 2010. Astrocytes in the damaged
brain: molecular and cellular insights into their reactive
response and healing potential. Biochem Pharmacol. 79:
77–89.
Burda JE, Bernstein AM, Sofroniew MV. 2016. Astrocyte roles in
traumatic brain injury. Exp Neurol. 275(Pt 3):305–315.
Burda JE, Sofroniew MV. 2014. Reactive gliosis and the multicel-
lular response to CNS damage and disease. Neuron. 81:
229–248.
Bush TG, Puvanachandra N, Horner CH, Polito A, Ostenfeld T,
Svendsen CN, Mucke L, Johnson MH, Sofroniew MV. 1999.
Leukocyte inﬁltration, neuronal degeneration, and neurite
outgrowth after ablation of scar-forming, reactive astrocytes
in adult transgenic mice. Neuron. 23:297–308.
Bylund M, Andersson E, Novitch BG, Muhr J. 2003. Vertebrate
neurogenesis
is
counteracted
by
Sox1-3
activity.
Nat
Neurosci. 6:1162–1168.
Can A, Dao DT, Terrillion CE, Piantadosi SC, Bhat S, Gould TD.
2012. The tail suspension test. J Vis Exp. 59:e3769.
Chen J, Zhang C, Jiang H, Li Y, Zhang L, Robin A, Katakowski M,
Lu M, Chopp M. 2005. Atorvastatin induction of VEGF and
BDNF promotes brain plasticity after stroke in mice. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab. 25:281–290.
66
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2019, Vol. 29, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

Chen Y, Guan Y, Liu H, Wu X, Yu L, Wang S, Zhao C, Du H,
Wang X. 2012. Activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
pathway is associated with glial proliferation in the adult
spinal cord of ALS transgenic mice. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 420:397–403.
Chen Y, Guan Y, Zhang Z, Liu H, Wang S, Yu L, Wu X, Wang X.
2012. Wnt signaling pathway is involved in the pathogenesis
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in adult transgenic mice.
Neurol Res. 34:390–399.
Choi I, Kim J, Jeong HK, Kim B, Jou I, Park SM, Chen L, Kang UJ,
Zhuang X, Joe EH. 2013. PINK1 deﬁciency attenuates astro-
cyte
proliferation
through
mitochondrial
dysfunction,
reduced AKT and increased p38 MAPK activation, and
downregulation of EGFR. Glia. 61:800–812.
Clausen F, Hanell A, Israelsson C, Hedin J, Ebendal T, Mir AK,
Gram H, Marklund N. 2011. Neutralization of interleukin-
1beta reduces cerebral edema and tissue loss and improves
late cognitive outcome following traumatic brain injury in
mice. Eur J Neurosci. 34:110–123.
Di Giovanni S, Movsesyan V, Ahmed F, Cernak I, Schinelli S,
Stoica B, Faden AI. 2005. Cell cycle inhibition provides neu-
roprotection and reduces glial proliferation and scar forma-
tion after traumatic brain injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
102:8333–8338.
Endersby
R,
Zhu
X,
Hay
N,
Ellison
DW,
Baker
SJ.
2011.
Nonredundant
functions
for
Akt
isoforms
in
astrocyte
growth and gliomagenesis in an orthotopic transplantation
model. Cancer Res. 71:4106–4116.
Episkopou V. 2005. SOX2 functions in adult neural stem cells.
Trends Neurosci. 28:219–221.
Faulkner JR, Herrmann JE, Woo MJ, Tansey KE, Doan NB,
Sofroniew MV. 2004. Reactive astrocytes protect tissue and
preserve function after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci. 24:
2143–2155.
Ferri AL, Cavallaro M, Braida D, Di Cristofano A, Canta A,
Vezzani A, Ottolenghi S, PandolﬁPP, Sala M, DeBiasi S, et al.
2004.
Sox2
deﬁciency
causes
neurodegeneration
and
impaired
neurogenesis
in
the
adult
mouse
brain.
Development. 131:3805–3819.
Ganat YM, Silbereis J, Cave C, Ngu H, Anderson GM, Ohkubo Y,
Ment LR, Vaccarino FM. 2006. Early postnatal astroglial cells
produce multilineage precursors and neural stem cells
in vivo. J Neurosci. 26:8609–8621.
Ge XT, Lei P, Wang HC, Zhang AL, Han ZL, Chen X, Li SH, Jiang
RC, Kang CS, Zhang JN. 2014. miR-21 improves the neurolog-
ical outcome after traumatic brain injury in rats. Sci Rep. 4:
6718.
Gong S, Zheng C, Doughty ML, Losos K, Didkovsky N, Schambra
UB, Nowak NJ, Joyner A, Leblanc G, Hatten ME, et al. 2003. A
gene expression atlas of the central nervous system based
on bacterial artiﬁcial chromosomes. Nature. 425:917–925.
Graham V, Khudyakov J, Ellis P, Pevny L. 2003. SOX2 func-
tions to maintain neural progenitor identity. Neuron. 39:
749–765.
Gregorian C, Nakashima J, Le Belle J, Ohab J, Kim R, Liu A, Smith
KB, Groszer M, Garcia AD, Sofroniew MV, et al. 2009. Pten
deletion in adult neural stem/progenitor cells enhances con-
stitutive neurogenesis. J Neurosci. 29:1874–1886.
Gubbay J, Collignon J, Koopman P, Capel B, Economou A,
Munsterberg A, Vivian N, Goodfellow P, Lovell-Badge R.
1990. A gene mapping to the sex-determining region of the
mouse Y chromosome is a member of a novel family of
embryonically expressed genes. Nature. 346:245–250.
Guo F, Maeda Y, Ma J, Delgado M, Sohn J, Miers L, Ko EM,
Bannerman P, Xu J, Wang Y, et al. 2011. Macroglial plasticity
and the origins of reactive astroglia in experimental autoim-
mune encephalomyelitis. J Neurosci. 31:11914–11928.
Hall ED, Sullivan PG, Gibson TR, Pavel KM, Thompson BM,
Scheff SW. 2005. Spatial and temporal characteristics of
neurodegeneration after controlled cortical impact in mice:
more than a focal brain injury. J Neurotrauma. 22:252–265.
Heinrich C, Bergami M, Gascon S, Lepier A, Vigano F, Dimou L,
Sutor B, Berninger B, Gotz M. 2014. Sox2-mediated conver-
sion of NG2 glia into induced neurons in the injured adult
cerebral cortex. Stem Cell Rep. 3:1000–1014.
Huang XT, Zhang YQ, Li SJ, Li SH, Tang Q, Wang ZT, Dong JF,
Zhang JN. 2013. Intracerebroventricular transplantation of
ex vivo expanded endothelial colony-forming cells restores
blood-brain barrier integrity and promotes angiogenesis of
mice with traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma. 30:
2080–2088.
Islam MM, Smith DK, Niu W, Fang S, Iqbal N, Sun G, Shi Y,
Zhang CL. 2015. Enhancer analysis unveils genetic interac-
tions between TLX and SOX2 in neural stem cells and
in vivo reprogramming. Stem Cell Rep. 5:805–815.
Jeong SR, Kwon MJ, Lee HG, Joe EH, Lee JH, Kim SS, Suh-Kim H,
Kim BG. 2012. Hepatocyte growth factor reduces astrocytic
scar formation and promotes axonal growth beyond glial
scars after spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol. 233:312–322.
Jin T, Ding Q, Huang H, Xu D, Jiang Y, Zhou B, Li Z, Jiang X, He J,
Liu W, et al. 2012. PAQR10 and PAQR11 mediate Ras signal-
ing in the Golgi apparatus. Cell Res. 22:661–676.
Kang P, Lee HK, Glasgow SM, Finley M, Donti T, Gaber ZB,
Graham BH, Foster AE, Novitch BG, Gronostajski RM, et al.
2012. Sox9 and NFIA coordinate a transcriptional regulatory
cascade during the initiation of gliogenesis. Neuron. 74:
79–94.
Kang W, Balordi F, Su N, Chen L, Fishell G, Hebert JM. 2014.
Astrocyte activation is suppressed in both normal and
injured brain by FGF signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 111:
E2987–E2995.
Kernie SG, Erwin TM, Parada LF. 2001. Brain remodeling due to
neuronal and astrocytic proliferation after controlled corti-
cal injury in mice. J Neurosci Res. 66:317–326.
Kondo A, Shahpasand K, Mannix R, Qiu J, Moncaster J, Chen
CH, Yao Y, Lin YM, Driver JA, Sun Y, et al. 2015. Antibody
against early driver of neurodegeneration cis P-tau blocks
brain injury and tauopathy. Nature. 523:431–436.
Lang H, Li M, Kilpatrick LA, Zhu J, Samuvel DJ, Krug EL, Goddard
JC. 2011. Sox2 up-regulation and glial cell proliferation fol-
lowing degeneration of spiral ganglion neurons in the adult
mouse inner ear. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 12:151–171.
Lang H, Xing Y, Brown LN, Samuvel DJ, Panganiban CH, Havens
LT, Balasubramanian S, Wegner M, Krug EL, Barth JL. 2015.
Neural stem/progenitor cell properties of glial cells in the
adult mouse auditory nerve. Sci Rep. 5:13383.
LeComte MD, Shimada IS, Sherwin C, Spees JL. 2015. Notch1-
STAT3-ETBR signaling axis controls reactive astrocyte prolif-
eration after brain injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 112:
8726–8731.
Lee HJ, Wu J, Chung J, Wrathall JR. 2013. SOX2 expression is
upregulated in adult spinal cord after contusion injury in
both
oligodendrocyte
lineage
and
ependymal
cells.
J Neurosci Res. 91:196–210.
Luukkainen S, Riala K, Laukkanen M, Hakko H, Rasanen P. 2012.
Association of traumatic brain injury with criminality in
SOX2-Deletion Improves Recovery After Brain Injury
Chen et al.
|
67
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

adolescent psychiatric inpatients from Northern Finland.
Psychiatry Res. 200:767–772.
Madisen L, Zwingman TA, Sunkin SM, Oh SW, Zariwala HA, Gu H,
Ng LL, Palmiter RD, Hawrylycz MJ, Jones AR, et al. 2010. A
robust and high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization
system for the whole mouse brain. Nat Neurosci. 13:133–140.
McGraw J, Hiebert GW, Steeves JD. 2001. Modulating astrogliosis
after neurotrauma. J Neurosci Res. 63:109–115.
Myer DJ, Gurkoff GG, Lee SM, Hovda DA, Sofroniew MV. 2006.
Essential protective roles of reactive astrocytes in traumatic
brain injury. Brain. 129:2761–2772.
Niu W, Zang T, Smith DK, Vue TY, Zou Y, Bachoo R, Johnson JE,
Zhang CL. 2015. SOX2 reprograms resident astrocytes into
neural progenitors in the adult brain. Stem Cell Rep. 4:
780–794.
Niu W, Zang T, Zou Y, Fang S, Smith DK, Bachoo R, Zhang CL.
2013. In vivo reprogramming of astrocytes to neuroblasts in
the adult brain. Nat Cell Biol. 15:1164–1175.
Niu W, Zou Y, Shen C, Zhang CL. 2011. Activation of postnatal
neural stem cells requires nuclear receptor TLX. J Neurosci.
31:13816–13828.
Pardo L, Schluter A, Valor LM, Barco A, Giralt M, Golbano A,
Hidalgo J, Jia P, Zhao Z, Jove M, et al. 2016. Targeted activa-
tion of CREB in reactive astrocytes is neuroprotective in
focal acute cortical injury. Glia. 64:853–874.
Pekny M, Pekna M. 2014. Astrocyte reactivity and reactive astro-
gliosis: costs and beneﬁts. Physiol Rev. 94:1077–1098.
Pevny LH, Nicolis SK. 2010. Sox2 roles in neural stem cells. Int J
Biochem Cell Biol. 42:421–424.
Qin S, Niu W, Iqbal N, Smith DK, Zhang CL. 2014. Orphan
nuclear receptor TLX regulates astrogenesis by modulating
BMP signaling. Front Neurosci. 8:74.
Raghupathi R. 2004. Cell death mechanisms following trau-
matic brain injury. Brain Pathol. 14:215–222.
Ridet JL, Malhotra SK, Privat A, Gage FH. 1997. Reactive astro-
cytes: cellular and molecular cues to biological function.
Trends Neurosci. 20:570–577.
Rolls A, Shechter R, Schwartz M. 2009. The bright side of the
glial scar in CNS repair. Nat Rev Neurosci. 10:235–241.
Schachtrup C, Ryu JK, Helmrick MJ, Vagena E, Galanakis DK,
Degen JL, Margolis RU, Akassoglou K. 2010. Fibrinogen trig-
gers astrocyte scar formation by promoting the availability
of active TGF-beta after vascular damage. J Neurosci. 30:
5843–5854.
Schildge S, Bohrer C, Beck K, Schachtrup C. 2013. Isolation and
culture of mouse cortical astrocytes. J Vis Exp. 71:e50079.
Schwarzbold ML, Rial D, De Bem T, Machado DG, Cunha MP,
dos Santos AA, dos Santos DB, Figueiredo CP, Farina M,
Goldfeder EM, et al. 2010. Effects of traumatic brain injury of
different severities on emotional, cognitive, and oxidative
stress-related
parameters
in
mice.
J
Neurotrauma.
27:
1883–1893.
Shaham O, Smith AN, Robinson ML, Taketo MM, Lang RA,
Ashery-Padan R. 2009. Pax6 is essential for lens ﬁber cell dif-
ferentiation. Development. 136:2567–2578.
Shi Y, Chichung Lie D, Taupin P, Nakashima K, Ray J, Yu RT,
Gage FH, Evans RM. 2004. Expression and function of orphan
nuclear receptor TLX in adult neural stem cells. Nature. 427:
78–83.
Shimozaki K, Zhang CL, Suh H, Denli AM, Evans RM, Gage FH.
2012.
SRY-box-containing
gene
2
regulation
of
nuclear
receptor tailless (Tlx) transcription in adult neural stem
cells. J Biol Chem. 287:5969–5978.
Silver J, Miller JH. 2004. Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat
Rev Neurosci. 5:146–156.
Sofroniew
MV.
2009.
Molecular
dissection
of
reactive
astrogliosis and glial scar formation. Trends Neurosci.
32:638–647.
Sofroniew
MV,
Vinters
HV.
2010.
Astrocytes:
biology
and
pathology. Acta Neuropathol. 119:7–35.
Srinivas S, Watanabe T, Lin CS, William CM, Tanabe Y, Jessell
TM, Costantini F. 2001. Cre reporter strains produced by tar-
geted insertion of EYFP and ECFP into the ROSA26 locus.
BMC Dev Biol. 1:4.
Srinivasan K, Friedman BA, Larson JL, Lauffer BE, Goldstein LD,
Appling LL, Borneo J, Poon C, Ho T, Cai F, et al. 2016.
Untangling the brain’s neuroinﬂammatory and neurodegen-
erative transcriptional responses. Nat Commun. 7:11295.
Su Z, Niu W, Liu ML, Zou Y, Zhang CL. 2014. In vivo conversion
of astrocytes to neurons in the injured adult spinal cord.
Nat Commun. 5:3338.
Suh H, Consiglio A, Ray J, Sawai T, D’Amour KA, Gage FH. 2007.
In vivo fate analysis reveals the multipotent and self-
renewal capacities of Sox2+ neural stem cells in the adult
hippocampus. Cell Stem Cell. 1:515–528.
Susarla BT, Villapol S, Yi JH, Geller HM, Symes AJ. 2014.
Temporal patterns of cortical proliferation of glial cell popu-
lations after traumatic brain injury in mice. ASN Neuro. 6:
159–170.
Tanaka S, Kamachi Y, Tanouchi A, Hamada H, Jing N, Kondoh
H. 2004. Interplay of SOX and POU factors in regulation of
the Nestin gene in neural primordial cells. Mol Cell Biol. 24:
8834–8846.
Tsai HH, Li H, Fuentealba LC, Molofsky AV, Taveira-Marques R,
Zhuang H, Tenney A, Murnen AT, Fancy SP, Merkle F, et al.
2012. Regional astrocyte allocation regulates CNS synapto-
genesis and repair. Science. 337:358–362.
Tweedie D, Rachmany L, Rubovitch V, Zhang Y, Becker KG,
Perez E, Hoffer BJ, Pick CG, Greig NH. 2013. Changes in
mouse
cognition
and
hippocampal
gene
expression
observed in a mild physical- and blast-traumatic brain
injury. Neurobiol Dis. 54:1–11.
Walf AA, Frye CA. 2007. The use of the elevated plus maze as
an assay of anxiety-related behavior in rodents. Nat Protoc.
2:322–328.
Wang LL, Su Z, Tai W, Zou Y, Xu XM, Zhang CL. 2016. The p53
pathway controls SOX2-mediated reprogramming in the
adult mouse spinal cord. Cell Rep. 17:891–903.
Wang TW, Stromberg GP, Whitney JT, Brower NW, Klymkowsky
MW, Parent JM. 2006. Sox3 expression identiﬁes neural pro-
genitors in persistent neonatal and adult mouse forebrain
germinative zones. J Comp Neurol. 497:88–100.
Wanner IB, Anderson MA, Song B, Levine J, Fernandez A, Gray-
Thompson Z, Ao Y, Sofroniew MV. 2013. Glial scar borders
are formed by newly proliferated, elongated astrocytes that
interact to corral inﬂammatory and ﬁbrotic cells via STAT3-
dependent mechanisms after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci.
33:12870–12886.
Washington PM, Forcelli PA, Wilkins T, Zapple DN, Parsadanian
M, Burns MP. 2012. The effect of injury severity on behavior:
a phenotypic study of cognitive and emotional deﬁcits after
mild, moderate, and severe controlled cortical impact injury
in mice. J Neurotrauma. 29:2283–2296.
Xie ZF, Xin G, Xu YX, Su Y, Li KS. 2016. LPS-primed release of
HMGB-1 from cortical astrocytes is modulated through PI3K/
AKT pathway. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 36:93–102.
68
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2019, Vol. 29, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

Xiong Y, Mahmood A, Chopp M. 2013. Animal models of trau-
matic brain injury. Nat Rev Neurosci. 14:128–142.
Yang CC, Hua MS, Lin WC, Tsai YH, Huang SJ. 2012. Irritability
following traumatic brain injury: divergent manifestations
of annoyance and verbal aggression. Brain Inj. 26:1185–1191.
Yang J, Zhang X, Wu Y, Zhao B, Liu X, Pan Y, Liu Y, Ding Y, Qiu M,
Wang YZ, et al. 2016. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling mediates the
seizure-facilitating effect of postischemic reactive astrocytes
after pentylenetetrazole-kindling. Glia. 64:1083–1091.
Zhang CL, Zou Y, He W, Gage FH, Evans RM. 2008. A role for
adult TLX-positive neural stem cells in learning and behav-
iour. Nature. 451:1004–1007.
Zhao C, Ma D, Zawadzka M, Fancy SP, Elis-Williams L, Bouvier G,
Stockley JH, de Castro GM, Wang B, Jacobs S, Casaccia P, et al.
2015. Sox2 sustains recruitment of oligodendrocyte pro-
genitor cells following CNS demyelination and primes
them for differentiation during remyelination. J Neurosci.
35:11482–11499.
SOX2-Deletion Improves Recovery After Brain Injury
Chen et al.
|
69
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article/29/1/54/4637599 by guest on 15 August 2021

===== Cheriyan2014_SpinalCord_SCI-review =====
REVIEW
Spinal cord injury models: a review
T Cheriyan1, DJ Ryan1, JH Weinreb1, J Cheriyan2, JC Paul1, V Lafage1, T Kirsch1 and TJ Errico1
Background:
Animal spinal cord injury (SCI) models have proved invaluable in better understanding the mechanisms involved in
traumatic SCI and evaluating the effectiveness of experimental therapeutic interventions. Over the past 25 years, substantial gains
have been made in developing consistent, reproducible and reliable animal SCI models.
Study design:
Review.
Objective:
The objective of this review was to consolidate current knowledge on SCI models and introduce newer paradigms that are
currently being developed.
Results:
SCI models are categorized based on the mechanism of injury into contusion, compression, distraction, dislocation,
transection or chemical models. Contusion devices inﬂict a transient, acute injury to the spinal cord using a weight-drop technique,
electromagnetic impactor or air pressure. Compression devices compress the cord at speciﬁc force and duration to cause SCI.
Distraction SCI devices inﬂict graded injury by controlled stretching of the cord. Mechanical displacement of the vertebrae is utilized
to produce dislocation-type SCI. Surgical transection of the cord, partial or complete, is particularly useful in regenerative medicine.
Finally, chemically induced SCI replicates select components of the secondary injury cascade. Although rodents remain the most
commonly used species and are best suited for preliminary SCI studies, large animal and nonhuman primate experiments better
approximate human SCI.
Conclusion:
All SCI models aim to replicate SCI in humans as closely as possible. Given the recent improvements in commonly used
models and development of newer paradigms, much progress is anticipated in the coming years.
Spinal Cord (2014) 52, 588–595; doi:10.1038/sc.2014.91; published online 10 June 2014
INTRODUCTION
Spinal cord injury (SCI) models have proved indispensible not only
for investigating the efﬁcacy of therapeutic interventions but also for
better understanding the molecular pathways involved. SCI models
have evolved signiﬁcantly over the past century since Allen developed
the ﬁrst weight-drop contusion model in 1911.1 SCI models aim to
recreate features of human SCI as closely as possible. These models
vary in terms of the animal utilized, site of injury inﬂiction and injury
mechanism.
Rats are used most commonly in preliminary studies as they are
relatively inexpensive, readily available and have demonstrated similar
functional, electrophysiological, and morphological outcomes to
humans following SCI.2 Mice are particularly useful for genetic
studies.3 Nonhuman primate SCI models—including marmosets,
macaques and squirrel monkeys—better approximate human SCI
than rodent models, and they accommodate assessment of multiple
recovery variables and rehabilitative therapy.4 New world primates
like marmosets confer advantages over old world primates as they are
smaller, easier to handle, have a higher breeding efﬁciency and can be
bred in experimental colonies. SCI models that incorporate large
animals—such as pigs or dogs—can also be used when it is important
for further validation of experiments.
Though most studies have induced a thoracic-level injury, recent
research has also focused on cervical-level injury models because of
their clinical relevance.5 Human SCIs commonly occur at the cervical
level, especially following nonpenetrating trauma such as sport injury
and motor vehicle accident. These models result in distinct neural
deﬁcits than thoracic injuries and should be considered in terms of
therapeutic approaches.5 Lumbar-level SCI models have also been
described, although less commonly.6
Based on the mechanism of injury, SCI models can be classiﬁed
as contusion, compression, distraction, dislocation, transection or
chemical. Contusion models, in which a transient force is applied to
displace and damage the spinal cord, include weight-drop, electro-
magnetic and air pressure devices. Compression models are char-
acterized by compression of the spinal cord over an extended period
of time. Distraction models apply opposing traction forces to stretch
the spinal cord, whereas dislocation models inﬂict injury by lateral
displacement of vertebra. Transection involves partial or complete
severing of the spinal cord at a particular level. Finally, chemical-
mediated SCI models investigate speciﬁc aspects of the secondary
damage sequence. This review provides an overview of current in vivo
animal SCI models and recent developments in the ﬁeld.
CONTUSION MODELS
Contusion devices are designed to inﬂict a transient, acute injury to
the spinal cord. The category includes weight-drop apparatuses,
1Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Hospital for Joint Diseases, New York Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, USA and 2Department of General Surgery, University of Texas
Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA
Correspondence: Dr T Cheriyan, Spine Research Institute, 306 East, 15th Street, New York, NY 1003, USA.
E-mail: thomascheriyan@gmail.com
Received 8 September 2013; revised 23 April 2014; accepted 5 May 2014; published online 10 June 2014
Spinal Cord (2014) 52, 588–595
& 2014 International Spinal Cord Society All rights reserved 1362-4393/14
www.nature.com/sc

electromagnetic impactors and a recently described air gun device
(Figure 1).
New York University (NYU)/Multicenter Animal Spinal Cord
Injury Study (MASCIS) impactor
The NYU impactor was ﬁrst developed and described by Gruner in
1992.7 The injury procedure involves performing a laminectomy at
the targeted level and stabilization of the spinal cord by means of
clamps. A rod of speciﬁc weight, usually 10g, is dropped from
a precise height above the surface of the cord to induce SCI of deﬁned
severity. Key parameters such as height, time, velocity upon impact
and cord compression are recorded digitally that enable experiments
to be analyzed and discarded if out of desired range.
The NYU impactor was adopted for use in the MASCIS, and
renamed the MASCIS impactor. This study group recommended
standardization of conditions that included the use of Long Evans rats
that are 77±1 days old, a pentobarbital dosage of 45 and 60mg kg1
for females and males, respectively, and inﬂiction of injury 60±1 min
after induction of anesthesia.8 Because of practical considerations,
however, strict adherence to these recommendations is challenging.
Two newer versions of the MASCIS impactor have been intro-
duced. The MASCIS II incorporates an electromagnetic push-button
weight release mechanism. However, the MASCIS II does not inter-
face with the computer, and hence digital recording of parameters is
not possible. The MASCIS III, introduced in 2012, combines aspects
of the two prior iterations of the device, including digital data
recording and electromagnetic weight release. The improved vertebral
clamping system of the MASCIS III also helps minimize movements.
The MASCIS impactor was originally described using rats, but has
been modiﬁed for use in mice and marmosets.4,8 Although most of
the literature involves thoracic-level injuries, the MASCIS impactor
has been used to generate injury in the cervical spine in a rat model.5
Weight-drop methods in the pig and dog that rely on similar
principles as the MASCIS devices have recently been described.9,10
The MASCIS impactor is widely used and produces a validated and
reproducible contusion injury in rat models. However, variability due
to bouncing of the impactor rod on the spinal cord after initial drop
‘weight bounce’, resulting in multiple impacts, has been of concern.
Furthermore, duration of impact is not precisely controlled. As with
all mechanical models, it is challenging to accurately control
biomechanics to produce consistent and reproducible SCI.
Inﬁnite horizon (IH) impactor
The IH device utilizes a force-controlled impact instead of weight-
drop height or tissue displacement to inﬂict injury. A stepping motor
interfaces with an external computer to apply a controlled impact.
After laminectomy at desired injury site, a metal impounder inﬂicts
injury, and an attached sensor directly measures the force between the
impactor and the spinal cord tissue. This minimizes error introduced
by specimen movement. When the predetermined force threshold is
reached, the tip is automatically and immediately withdrawn, and
the exact force transmitted is displayed. Thus, weight bounce
phenomenon is not encountered.
Three different injury severities (100, 150 and 200 kdyn) in the rat,
inﬂicting injury at the T10 level, were ﬁrst described.11 The IH
impactor has also been utilized to generate SCI in the cervical spine,
Figure 1 (a) Photograph of inﬂiction of a contusion-type SCI on a rat model using MASCIS Impactor. After laminectomy is performed at selected level, the
spinal column is stabilized using a clamp system and an impactor is used to apply injury of desired severity. (b) Representative photomicrographs of cross-
section of spinal cord stained with hematoxylin and eosin, Mac-1 immunohistochemisty and luxol blue stain at 28 days after injury. With increasing severity
of injury, there is evidently increasing cell damage, macrophage/microglial reactivity and myelin loss (reprinted with permission from Ghasemlou et al.
Tissue displacement and impact force are important contributors to outcome after spinal cord contusion injury. Exp Neurol 196, 9–17; 2005)
(c) Progressive gross histological changes seen after spinal cord injury at days 1, 3, 8 and 21, and 14 weeks. At day 1, hemorrhage appears and extends
from the epicenter rostrally. Injury area becomes progressively more deﬁned with the formation of a cavity and cyst with time (reprinted with permission
from Hill CE et al. Degeneration and sprouting of identiﬁed descending supraspinal axons after contusive spinal cord injury in rat. Exp Neurol 171, 153–
169; 2011).
Spinal cord injury models
T Cheriyan et al
589
Spinal Cord

and the device can be modiﬁed for usage with smaller rodents such as
mice by simply replacing the impacting tip with a smaller one.12
A limitation observed is the variability in ﬁrmly holding the spinal
column using the clamps provided with the IH device, and some
researchers have developed custom-built clamping systems to over-
come this.13 Although subtle movements should not theoretically
inﬂuence
injury
mechanics
of
the
force-controlled
impactor,
inconsistent parenchymal injury and functional deﬁcits do occur.
Ohio State University (OSU) impactor
Originally developed in 1987 in the rat model, the OSU impactor was
reﬁned in 1992 to improve injury reproducibility.14 The procedure
involves laminectomy at the target level and spine stabilization using
clamping. Similar to the IH impactor, the OSU device uses a
computer
feedback-controlled
electromagnetic
impactor.
When
triggered, a probe contacts and displaces the cord 30mm to provide
a replicable starting point. Then, the instrument compresses the cord
a predetermined distance, generally between 0.8 and 1.1 mm, for a set
amount of time, B4 to 5 ms. The OSU device avoids multiple strikes,
as the impounder is actively withdrawn.
The OSU impactor measures force transmitted to the spinal cord
and cord displacement, which allows for exclusion of suboptimal
injuries. The device was modiﬁed in 2000 to study SCI in a mouse
model.3 As with the MASCIS and IH devices, the OSU impactor has
recently been used to induce injury in the cervical spine of the rat.15
A limitation of the device is that it is sometimes challenging to
determine the zero distance for the impactor as the spinal cord and
cerebrospinal ﬂuid is displaced slightly when initially loaded.
Air gun impactor
The air gun impactor is a new contusion device that was developed in
2012 as a rat model.16 It produces SCI using a precisely directed high-
pressure stream of air. The T10 vertebra is stabilized by afﬁxing
clamps to the adjacent vertebrae. A dental drill is then used to make a
2 mm diameter hole in the vertebral arch of target vertebra, through
which the injector is inserted and positioned so that it touches, but
does not put pressure on, the dura. The air ‘shot’ is then delivered.
The pilot study created three experimental groups using 0.1 s shots of
three different pressures, but the device also allows for a range
of exposure times (up to 15min).
The results of SCI were analyzed using magnetic resonance
imaging, histology and multiple behavioral assessments. For the most
part, graded injury was successfully produced. However, one notable
exception was in the locomotor assessment: the differences between
the moderate injury and severe injury groups and the control and
mild injury groups were not statistically signiﬁcant. Lack of precise
injury quantiﬁcation will require further validation on the reliability,
and reproducibility of the model.
COMPRESSION MODELS
Compression models are distinct from contusion models in that they
involve prolonged cord compression. Some of these models are, in
fact, contusion–compression models that involve an acute impact
followed by persisting compression of the cord. This mechanism is
seen in SCI because of fracture dislocations and burst fractures.
Clip compression
The use of a modiﬁed aneurysm clip (Figure 2A) to generate SCI was
ﬁrst described in rats in 1978.17 The procedure involves performing a
laminectomy at the desired level of the spine. The clip is closed at
speciﬁc force around the spinal cord, producing an acute injury, and
is then left to compress the cord for a select amount of time, usually
for at least 1 min, to produce an injury. Clips with a wide range of
closing force are available, generating varying closure forces and
therefore injury severities in the animal. A force of 50 and 35g is used
to produce a severe and moderate injury, respectively. The duration of
clip application can also be varied to produce injuries of varying
severity.
In rats, it has been shown to produce graded injuries in the thoracic
spine in terms of both functional and histological outcomes.18 In
addition, the model has been used in the cervical and lumbar spine of
the rat and also been adapted for use in the mouse.19 In the murine
model, a smaller aneurysm clip was utilized to produce injury in the
thoracic spine that varied in grade with respect to both behavioral and
histological outcomes.20 Use of a modiﬁed vascular clip in the mouse
was also recently shown to be effective.21 A spring-loaded clip has also
been utilized to induce injury in the thoracic spine of pigs.22
The advantages of clip compression are that it provides a
compression–contusion model that is relatively inexpensive, generates
SCI of varying severity and is adaptable for use in all regions of the
spine. Although simplicity allows for adaptability, the only injury
parameters that are obtained are the calibrated closing force of the
clip and the duration of compression. Thus, velocity of the clip upon
contact with the cord, actual force delivered and extent of cord
compression are not accounted for.
A clip compression technique can also be used to occlude the blood
supply to a speciﬁc cord segment for a speciﬁc length of time to inﬂict
ischemia/reperfusion-type SCI. Clinically, the model approximates
iatrogenic SCI that may occur during surgeries like those on the
thoracic aorta. The model can also be created using a balloon
inﬂation technique and direct ligation of the vessel.23,24
Calibrated forceps compression
Forceps compression was developed to circumvent some of the
biomechanical issues associated with contusion models to produce
a reliable model. The use of calibrated forceps (Figure 2B) to deliver
SCI was ﬁrst described in 1991 in the guinea pig.25 Following
laminectomy at the T13 level, a pair of forceps is compressed
around the spinal cord to a speciﬁc width, using a spacer, for a
select duration. A similar method has been used in rats, also in the
lower thoracic spine, and injuries of a range of severities were inﬂicted
by using different compression widths. The technique was adapted for
use in mice, and has shown to be capable of producing graded SCI.26
Although forceps technique is a simple and inexpensive SCI model,
it lacks the acute impact component that clip compression and
contusion paradigms possess. Forceps compression therefore does not
simulate an important aspect of the most common human SCI
mechanisms and this makes it much less common than other injury
models.
Balloon compression
This method was ﬁrst described in 1953 in dogs.27 Generally, balloon
compression involves the insertion of a catheter with a small,
inﬂatable balloon afﬁxed to its end (Figure 2C) into the epidural or
subdural space.28 The balloon is then ﬁlled with saline or air to a ﬁxed
volume that compresses the spinal cord. The balloon is deﬂated after a
speciﬁc duration. Preparation may involve laminectomy at the desired
lesion site, or merely laminotomy at a location caudal to this site.
Injury can be graded by varying the inﬂation volume, duration of
compression or both.
Though rat models have been used extensively, the procedure has
been reﬁned in dogs, rabbits and primates.29–31 The advantages of the
Spinal cord injury models
T Cheriyan et al
590
Spinal Cord

model are that it is relatively inexpensive and requires minimal
surgical preparation. However, like the forceps compression model,
balloon compression typically lacks the acute component of SCI.
Rapid inﬂation of the balloon may add some level of this type of
trauma; however, with no monitoring of velocity or force delivered, it
would be difﬁcult to standardize the initial impact. The balloon
compression model is less commonly used than the contusion or clip
compression models.
Spinal cord strapping
Spinal cord strapping is a novel SCI technique that uses a mechanical
device that the developers have termed SC-STRAPPER(Figure 2D).32
The procedure involves the insertion of a curved surgical needle with
suture attached into one side of the animal. The suture is then
wrapped around a particular level of spinal cord in the epidural space
and brought back through the skin on the other side of the rat. One
end of the suture is afﬁxed to the wall of the experimental device and
the other is attached to a suspended mass via a simple pulley. When
the mass is allowed to drop, compression is initiated, and it is allowed
to continue for 1 min. The investigators utilized three different masses
to inﬂict mild, moderate and severe injuries in the rats. Results
showed the injuries to be graded in terms of both functional and
histological outcomes.32
The technique is advantageous in that it is a comparatively
noninvasive method that does not require laminectomy or cause
bleeding, and it has reported a 100% survival rate.32 The device also
provides compression on all sides of the cord, not just in the
dorsoventral or lateral direction, and is capable of producing
graded injury pattern.
However, the consistent reproducibility of injury at precise site and
extend are still to be proven. Although the force of compression can
be estimated based on the weight of the mass, other parameters
related to the injury can neither be measured nor controlled.
DISTRACTION MODELS
Distraction models of SCI involve controlled stretching of the cord
aiming to simulate the tension forces experienced by the cord in
SCI.33 Injuries of this type have been investigated in cats, dogs,
monkeys and pigs. However, sophisticated and reproducible modeling
of this process has been developed only recently and is an area of
active research.
Harrington distractor
In 2004, Dabney et al.34 detailed the use of this device to inﬂict
thoracic SCI in rats. The procedure involves laminectomy at the
intended injury location, followed by the placement of modiﬁed
Harrington hooks under the laminae of the vertebrae one level caudal
and one level rostral to the injury target. These hooks are connected
to a computer-controlled stepping motor that is used to control the
length, speed and duration of distraction. Distraction length of 3, 5
and 7 mm produced mild, moderate and severe SCI when the facet
capsular ligament was severed. However, a major limitation in this
Figure 2 (A) Photograph of modiﬁed aneurysm clip used for spinal cord injury clip-compression model (courtesy: Charles Tator, University of Toronto,
Toronto Western Hospital, Canada). After laminectomy at the desired level of the spine, the clip is closed at speciﬁc force around the spinal cord to produce
an acute injury. The force of clip closure and duration of application can be varied to produce injury of varying severity. (B) Schematic diagram of calibrated
compression forceps with spacer. Following laminectomy, a pair of forceps is compressed around the spinal cord to a speciﬁc width, using a spacer, for a
select duration to produce spinal cord injury. The width and duration of compression can be modiﬁed to inﬂict to generate desired injury severity.
(C) Balloon compression involves the insertion of a catheter with a small, inﬂatable balloon afﬁxed to its end passed through a laminectomy or laminotomy
caudal to the injury site. Injury can be graded by varying the inﬂation volume, duration of compression or both. (D) Schematic diagram of spinal cord
strapping technique. A curved needle is inserted through the intervertebral foramen and the epidural space to encircle the spinal cord anteriorly and then
the needle is inserted through the contralateral intervertebral foramen and back to the skin to wrap the suture around the cord. One end of the suture is
afﬁxed to the wall of the experimental device and the other is attached to a suspended mass via a simple pulley. When the weight is dropped, compression
is initiated, and allowed to continue for an extended period of time (reprinted with permission from da Costa et al.32).
Spinal cord injury models
T Cheriyan et al
591
Spinal Cord

model was the high variability within each injury grade. Furthermore,
distraction speed was limited to 1 cms 1 that may be too slow to
simulate human injuries. Thus, although the Harrington distractor
demonstrated the promise of distraction SCI models, it has not been
validated.
University of British Columbia (UBC) multimechanism device
This novel injury device, which was developed in the rat, is highly
versatile; it can inﬂict contusion, distraction and dislocation injury
(Figure 3a).35 The device is capable of providing feedback on cord
displacement or force transmitted following injury. The UBC device
uses clamps that wedge beneath the transverse processes against the
lateral masses of the vertebrae with ﬁrm support, allowing researchers
to accelerate the device components to high velocities (up to 1 m s 1)
without vertebral slippage during injury.
Aside from clamping, the UBC device’s contusion technique is
similar to that implemented by the OSU and IH impactors. For
distraction, C3 and C4 are jointly clamped and stabilized while
another clamp holding C5 and C6 is accelerated caudally, held
stationary for 1 s at maximal displacement, and returned to its initial
position. Finally, for a dislocation injury, an identical clamping
arrangement is used, but the clamp holding C5 and C6 is accelerated
dorsally instead of caudally to generate SCI. The investigators were
able to inﬂict moderate and severe SCI by manipulating displacement
as the independent variable.
The UBC device is capable of inﬂicting high-speed distraction SCI,
and creates an injury that simulates vertebral dislocation. However,
further validation studies including locomotor studies are necessary.
University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) distractor
The UTA distractor (Figure 3b)36 aimed to inﬂict a bidirectional
distraction SCI as compared with the unidirectional injury generated
by the UBC device. The UTA distractor used custom clips that are
afﬁxed securely to the vertebral body. These clamps are attached to
linear actuators that simultaneously distract two vertebrae (T9 and
T11) caudorostrally. It is relatively noninvasive, as a laminectomy is
not performed, and computer software is able to record the force
delivered to the spinal cord during the injury.36
Mild, moderate and severe injury was assessed based on a distance
distraction of 3, 5 and 7 mm, respectively. They used electrophysio-
logical, behavioral and histological outcomes to measure the grade of
injury. A limitation of the device was the high variability and
inconsistency in behavioral scoring. The UTA distractor also inﬂicts
SCI at much lower speed (1 mm s 1) than the UBC device that may
affect the extent to which it mimics human injury. The device is not
commercially available and a newer, more advanced version of the
UTA is being currently developed by the inventors.
DISLOCATION MODEL
Fiford et al.37 developed a SCI device in rats that utilized a vertebral
displacement mechanism to replicate column dislocation commonly
seen in traumatic human SCI. The device consisted of two horizontal
beams that can be attached the lateral surfaces of bodies of adjacent
vertebrae by means of adjustable sliding clamps. One beam is rigidly
ﬁxed, whereas the other beam is used to laterally displace the lower
attached vertebrae to a speciﬁed distance (1–20 mm) and speed
(50–150 mm s 1) for a time period of 1 s. The investigators showed
larger displacement resulted in greater degree of injury histologically.
Choo et al.35 described a similar procedure to produce an anterior
dislocation model where the vertebra is dislocated dorsally. The model
attempts to closely reproduce the anterior fracture-dislocation injuries
that are more commonly seen than later dislocations. The model is
advantageous in that surgical exposure of the spinal cord is not
required and the spinal column is intact. However, behavioral
studies to characterize the model have not been performed and
reproducibility of this model has yet to be proven.
TRANSECTION MODELS
Complete and partial transection models have been utilized exten-
sively, particularly in tissue engineering, to investigate neuronal
regeneration following injury (Figures 3a–c). They are beneﬁcial
for assessment of axonal regeneration and subsequent functional
recovery. However, these models are less ideal for investigating the
complex pathophysiology involved in SCI because spinal cord
transections are not common in clinical settings.
Full transection
A full transection model encompasses a complete disassociation
between the caudal and rostral segments and is advantageous in its
easy reproducibility. Following spinal cord severance, a complex
pathophysiological cascade ensues that inhibits potential axonal
regrowth
and
forms
scar
tissue
(Figures
3d–g).38
It
is
also
important to note that there is evidence to support native
locomotive abilities in animals with a fully transected spinal cord
because of inherent spinal cord circuitry.39 Thus, in order to assure
that natural or intervention-based recovery is truly determined by the
Figure 3 Schematic diagram of partial transaction of the spinal cord
through (a) the ventral horn, part of the grey matter (GM) and corticospinal
(CS) tract bilaterally; (b) unilateral ventral and dorsal spinal cord (VSC and
DSC) and (c) unilaterally through the vestibulospinal (VS) and spinothalamic
(ST) tract. (d–g) Progressive gross longitudinal histological changes at
complete transection site in rat spinal cord at 7, 14, 28 and 56 days after
injury. At 7 days after injury, there is clot (asterisk) formation that gets
replaced by scar tissue by day 14 (arrows). This is followed by formation of
cavity (arrowheads) by 28 and 56 days (reprinted with permission from
Winter et al. Injury-induced class 3 sematphorin expression in the rat spinal
cord. Exp Neurol 175: 61–75; 2002).
Spinal cord injury models
T Cheriyan et al
592
Spinal Cord

transection, the cord should be retransected to observe loss of
regained function.40 Transection models, being relatively easy to
perform, have been investigated in a variety of animals including
rats, mice, cats, dogs and primates.41
Partial transection
Partial transection, unilateral transection and hemisection of the
spinal cord all refer to the process of selectively lesioning the spinal
cord (Figures 3a–c). These models simulate an injury more likely
to be seen clinically than complete transection and provide for
comparison between injured and healthy ﬁbers in the same animal.
For instance, hemisection may be used to examine locomotor
function and recovery in different spinal tracts or to compare deﬁcits
in function when comparing contra- and ipsilateral lesions. The
technique has also recently been used to investigate nerve grafting, a
potentially promising surgical treatment for SCI.42 In addition, given
that hemisection results in a less severe injury than complete
transection, postoperative animal care is easier.40 However, it is
more difﬁcult to inﬂict a consistent injury with a partial transection
model, and it can be difﬁcult to determine whether the target tract is
completely severed. This concern can be addressed with retrograde
labeling or, more recently, somatosensory evoked potentials.43
CHEMICAL MODELS
Numerous models have been developed that use chemicals to mimic a
speciﬁc aspect of the secondary injury cascade that follows traumatic
SCI. These models are useful for investigating molecular mechanisms
involved in SCI and the effect of various therapies on speciﬁc
pathways. However, chemical models are less useful than other
models in terms of overall approximation to SCI. Other limitations
relate to the delivery and reproducibility of exact location, extend and
characterization of the injury produced.
Photochemically induced ischemia models involve injection or
direct application of a nontoxic photosensitive dye, like rose bengal
and eythrosin, followed by irradiation of the area to be injured for
select
duration
of
time.44
SCI
models
to
approximate
the
excitotoxicity secondary pathway can be produced by injection of
glutamate, aspartate, N-methyl-D-aspartate or kainate (a glutamate
receptor agonist) at desired spinal cord level using microdialysis
technique.45 The administration of reagents, such as superoxide,
hydroxyl radical and peroxynitrate,46 has been utilized to generate
reactive oxygen species (for example, free radicals) that ultimately
cause oxidative damage to lipids and proteins, thereby damaging
neurons. Inﬂammatory SCI can be induced by injection of zymosan, a
yeast particulate that activates macrophages and thereby causes
neuroinﬂammation. Injection of phospholipase A2 has also been
shown to initiate inﬂammation and cell tissue damage that are
characteristic of traumatic SCI.47
Chemical models of demyelination are useful for evaluation of
therapies directed to enhance remyelination. These models include
injection of ethidium bromide, lysolethicin, murine hepatitis virus,
or
a
cocktail
of
myelin-speciﬁc
antibodies
and
complement.
Alternatively, Cuprizone can also be introduced in the animal’s diet.
In all cases, remyelination occurs spontaneously, but at different rates
depending on the treatment.48 Syringomyelia, which is characterized
by ﬂuid-ﬁlled cavity formation, occurs in up to 20% of SCI cases.
Table 1 Summary of SCI models
Model
Mechanism
Strengths
Weakness
Animal model
MASCIS
Weight-drop contusion
Widely used, validated, reproducible,
Procedure learning curve, ‘Weight-bounce’,
imprecise duration of impact
Rodents
Inﬁnite horizon
Force-controlled
contusion
Widely used, validated, reproducible
Procedure learning curve, clamping technique
Rodents
OSU
Displacement contusion
Validated, reproducible
Procedure learning curve
Rodents
Air-gun impactor Air-pressure contusion
Less invasive
Not validated, inconsistent severity-based locomo-
tor assessment
Rats
Clip
Compression–contusion
Widely used, simple and easy procedure,
limited resources necessary, inexpensive
Velocity of force, force delivered, extend of
compression not recorded
Murine, rats
Forceps
compression
Compression
Simple, inexpensive, limited resources
necessary
Lack acute injury aspect, inability to record injury
parameters
Pig, rat
Balloon
compression
Compression–contusion
Inexpensive
Less common, injury parameters not recorded,
inconsistent injury
Dogs, rat, rabbit,
primates
Spinal cord
strapping
Compression–contusion
Less-invasive, circumferential injury
Not validated, inconsistent, injury parameters not
recorded
Rat
Harrington
distractor
Distraction
Clinical approximation
Not validated, inconsistent and variable injury,
complex procedure
Rat
UBC device
Contusion–distraction–
dislocation
Clinical SCI approximation
Not validated, inconsistent and variable injury,
complex procedure, no locomotor assessment
Rat
UTA distractor
Distraction
Bidirectional distraction
Not validated, inconsistent and variable injury,
complex procedure, no locomotor assessment
Rat
Complete
transection
Transection
Easy to perform, consistent, reliable, large
animal models
Uncommon clinical SCI type
Rodents, cats, dogs,
primates
Partial
transection
Transection
Large animal models, contralateral side
comparison
Inconsistent reproducibility
Rodents, cats, dogs,
primates
Chemical
models
Reagents
Inexpensive, simple procedure, mechanism
speciﬁc
Inconsistent reproducibility
Rodents
Abbreviations: MASCIS, Multicenter Animal Spinal Cord Injury Study; OSU, Ohio State University; SCI, spinal cord injury; UBC, University of British Columbia; UTA, University of Texas at
Arlington.
Spinal cord injury models
T Cheriyan et al
593
Spinal Cord

Chemical technique to recreate this condition has been developed in
rats and involves injection of a kaolin suspension or quisqualic acid at
different sites with the spinal cord, including the parenchyma and
central gray matter.49
CONCLUSION
Given the complexity of human SCI, no one model can encompass all
aspects of injury. Each model aims to generate a consistent, easily
reproducible and graded injury that mirrors SCI pathology in humans
as closely as possible. Substantial progress has been made in the ﬁeld
over the past 20 years for improvement and reﬁnement of existing
models and the development of novel new paradigms. The general
strengths and weakness of current SCI models have been summarized
in Table 1. Correlation between amount of axonal survival and
maintenance of motor function after injury depends on injury model,
species and method of behavioral assessment.50 Although newer SCI
models aim to better approximate human SCI in various aspects,
these models require further improvement and validation. The
optimal choice of model for a given study depends on the study
goals, speciﬁc parameters and resources of the investigation.
DATA ARCHIVING
There were no data to deposit.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
1
Allen AR. Surgery of experimental lesion of spinal cord equivalent to crush injury of
fracture dislocation of spinal column a preliminary report. J Am Med Assoc 1911; 57:
878–880.
2
Metz GAS, CURT A, van de MEENT H, KLUSMAN I, SCHWAB ME, DIETZ V. Validation
of the weight-drop contusion model in rats: a comparative study of human spinal cord
injury. J Neurotrauma 2000; 17: 1–17.
3
Jakeman LB, Guan Z, Wei P, Ponnappan R, Dzwonczyk R, Popovich PG et al. Traumatic
spinal cord injury produced by controlled contusion in mouse. J Neurotrauma 2000;
17: 299–319.
4
Iwanami A, Yamane J, Katoh H, Nakamura M, Momoshima S, Ishii H et al.
Establishment of graded spinal cord injury model in a nonhuman primate: the common
marmoset. J Neurosci Res 2005; 80: 172–181.
5
Dunham KA, Siriphorn A, Chompoopong S, Floyd CL. Characterization of a graded
cervical hemicontusion spinal cord injury model in adult male rats. J Neurotrauma
2010; 27: 2091–2106.
6
Magnuson DS, Trinder TC, Zhang YP, Burke D, Morassutti DJ, Shields CB. Comparing
deﬁcits following excitotoxic and contusion injuries in the thoracic and lumbar spinal
cord of the adult rat. Exp Neurol 1999; 156: 191–204.
7
Gruner JA. A monitored contusion model of spinal cord injury in the rat. J Neurotrauma
1992; 9: 123–128.
8
Pan JZ, Ni L, Sodhi A, Aguanno A, Young W, Hart RP. Cytokine activity contributes to
induction of inﬂammatory cytokine mRNAs in spinal cord following contusion.
J Neurosci Res 2002; 68: 315–322.
9
Hu R, Zhou J, Luo C, Lin J, Wang X, Li X et al. Glial scar and neuroregeneration:
histological, functional, and magnetic resonance imaging analysis in chronic spinal
cord injury. J Neurosurg Spine 2010; 13: 169–180.
10 Jones CF, Lee JH, Kwon BK, Cripton PA. Development of a large-animal model to
measure dynamic cerebrospinal ﬂuid pressure during spinal cord injury: Laboratory
investigation. J Neurosurg Spine 2012; 16: 624–635.
11 Scheff SW, Rabchevsky AG, Fugaccia I, Main JA, Lumpp JE Jr. Experimental modeling
of spinal cord injury: characterization of a force-deﬁned injury device. J Neurotrauma
2003; 20: 179–193.
12 Bottai D, Cigognini D, Madaschi L, Adami R, Nicora E, Menarini M et al. Embryonic
stem cells promote motor recovery and affect inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration in spinal
cord injured mice. Exp Neurol 2010; 223: 452–463.
13 Streijger F, Plunet WT, Lee JH, Liu J, Lam CK, Park S et al. Ketogenic diet improves
forelimb motor function after spinal cord injury in rodents. PLoS ONE 2013; 8:
e78765.
14 Stokes BT. Experimental spinal cord injury: a dynamic and veriﬁable injury device.
J Neurotrauma 1992; 9: 129–134.
15 Pearse D, Lo T Jr, Cho K, Lynch M, Garg M, Marcillo A et al. Histopathological and
behavioral characterization of a novel cervical spinal cord displacement contusion
injury in the rat. J Neurotrauma 2005; 22: 680–702.
16 Marcol W, Slusarczyk W, Gzik M, Larysz-Brysz M, Bobrowski M, Grynkiewicz-Bylina B
et al. Air gun impactor-a novel model of graded white matter spinal cord injury in
rodents. J Reconstr Microsurg 2012; 28: 561–568.
17 Rivlin A, Tator C. Effect of duration of acute spinal cord compression in a new acute
cord injury model in the rat. Surg Neurol 1978; 10: 38.
18 Poon PC, Gupta D, Shoichet MS, Tator CH. Clip compression model is useful for
thoracic spinal cord injuries: histologic and functional correlates. Spine 2007; 32:
2853–2859.
19 Steward O, Schauwecker PE, Guth L, Zhang Z, Fujiki M, Inman D et al. Genetic
approaches to neurotrauma research: opportunities and potential pitfalls of murine
models. Exp Neurol 1999; 157: 19–42.
20 Joshi M, Fehlings MG. Development and characterization of a novel, graded model of
clip compressive spinal cord injury in the mouse: Part 1. Clip design, behavioral
outcomes, and histopathology. J Neurotrauma 2002; 19: 175–190.
21 Marques SA, Garcez VF, Del Bel EA, Martinez AMB. A simple, inexpensive and easily
reproducible model of spinal cord injury in mice: morphological and functional
assessment. J Neurosci Methods 2009; 177: 183–193.
22 Skinner SA, Transfeldt EE. Electromyography in the detection of mechanically induced
spinal motor tract injury: observations in diverse porcine models. J Neurosurg Spine
2009; 11: 369–374.
23 Zivin JA, DeGirolami U. Spinal cord infarction: a highly reproducible stroke model.
Stroke 1980; 11: 200–202.
24 Coston A, Laville M, Baud P, Bussel B, Jalfre M. Aortic occlusion by a balloon catheter:
a method to induce hind limb rigidity in rats. Physiol Behav 1983; 30: 967–969.
25 Blight AR. Morphometric analysis of a model of spinal cord injury in guinea pigs, with
behavioral evidence of delayed secondary pathology. J Neurol Sci 1991; 103:
156–171.
26 Plemel JR, Duncan G, Chen KWK, Shannon C, Park S, Sparling JS et al. A graded
forceps crush spinal cord injury model in mice. J Neurotrauma 2008; 25: 350–370.
27 Tarlov I, Klinger H, Vitale S. Spinal cord compression studies: I. experimental
techniques to produce acute and gradual compression. Arch Neurol Psychiatry
1953; 70: 813.
28 Vanicky´ I, Urdzı´kova´ L, Saganova´ K, Cı´zkova´ D, Ga´lik J. A simple and reproducible
model of spinal cord injury induced by epidural balloon inﬂation in the rat.
J Neurotrauma 2001; 18: 1399–1407.
29 Aslan A, Cemek M, Eser O, Altunbas¸ K, Buyukokuroglu ME, Cosar M et al. Does
dexmedetomidine reduce secondary damage after spinal cord injury? An experimental
study. Eur Spine J 2009; 18: 336–344.
30 Fukuda S, Nakamura T, Kishigami Y, Endo K, Azuma T, Fujikawa T et al. New canine
spinal cord injury model free from laminectomy. Brain Res Protoc 2005; 14:
171–180.
31 Nesathurai S, Graham WA, Mansﬁeld K, Magill D, Sehgal P, Westmoreland SV et al.
Model of traumatic spinal cord injury in Macaca fascicularis: similarity of experimental
lesions created by epidural catheter to human spinal cord injury. J Med Primatol 2006;
35: 401–404.
32 da Costa ESA, Carvalho AL, Martinez AMB, De-Ary-Pires B, Pires-Neto MA,
de Ary-Pires R. Strapping the spinal cord: an innovative experimental model of CNS
injury in rats. J Neurosci Methods 2008; 170: 130–139.
33 Silberstein M, McLean K. Non-contiguous spinal injury: clinical and imaging features,
and postulated mechanism. Spinal Cord 1994; 32: 817–823.
34 Dabney KW, Ehrenshteyn M, Agresta CA, Twiss JL, Stern G, Tice L et al. A model
of experimental spinal cord trauma based on computer-controlled intervertebral
distraction: characterization of graded injury. Spine 2004; 29: 2357.
35 Choo AMT, Liu J, Liu Z, Dvorak M, Tetzlaff W, Oxland TR. Modeling spinal cord
contusion, dislocation, and distraction: characterization of vertebral clamps, injury
severities, and node of Ranvier deformations. J Neurosci Methods 2009; 181: 6–17.
36 Seifert J, Bell J, Elmer B, Sucato D, Romero M. Characterization of a novel
bidirectional distraction spinal cord injury animal model. J Neurosci Methods 2011;
197: 97–103.
37 Fiford RJ, Bilston LE, Waite P, Lu J. A vertebral dislocation model of spinal cord injury
in rats. J Neurotrauma 2004; 21: 451–458.
38 Spillmann AA, Amberger VR, Schwab ME. High molecular weight protein of
human
central
nervous
system
myelin
inhibits
neurite
outgrowth:
an
effect
which can be neutralized by the monoclonal antibody IN-1. Eur J Neurosci 2006; 9:
549–555.
39 Barbeau H, McCrea DA, O’Donovan MJ, Rossignol S, Grill WM, Lemay MA. Tapping
into spinal circuits to restore motor function. Brain Res Rev 1999; 30: 27–51.
40 Kwon BK, Oxland TR, Tetzlaff W. Animal models used in spinal cord regeneration
research. Spine 2002; 27: 1504–1510.
41 Heimburger R. Return of function after spinal cord transection. Spinal Cord 2005; 43:
438–440.
42 Alilain WJ, Horn KP, Hu H, Dick TE, Silver J. Functional regeneration of respiratory
pathways after spinal cord injury. Nature 2011; 475: 196–200.
43 Cloud BA, Ball BG, Chen B, Knight AM, Hakim JS, Ortiz AM et al. Hemisection spinal
cord injury in rat: the value of intraoperative somatosensory evoked potential
monitoring. J Neurosci Methods 2012; 211: 179–184.
44 Watson BD, Prado R, Dalton Dietrich W, Ginsberg MD, Green BA. Photochemically
induced spinal cord injury in the rat. Brain Res 1986; 367: 296–300.
45 Liu D, Xu GY, Pan E, McAdoo D. Neurotoxicity of glutamate at the concentration
released upon spinal cord injury. Neuroscience 1999; 93: 1383–1389.
46 Bao F, DeWitt DS, Prough DS, Liu D. Peroxynitrite generated in the rat spinal cord
induces oxidation and nitration of proteins: Reduction by Mn (III) tetrakis (4–benzoic
acid) porphyrin. J Neurosci Res 2002; 71: 220–227.
Spinal cord injury models
T Cheriyan et al
594
Spinal Cord

47 Liu NK, Zhang YP, Titsworth WL, Jiang X, Han S, Lu PH et al. A novel role of
phospholipase A2 in mediating spinal cord secondary injury. Ann Neurol 2006; 59:
606–619.
48 Jernigan SC, Zhang YP, Shields CB, Whittemore SR. Rodent spinal cord demyelination
models. In: Chen J, Xu X and Xu Z (eds) Animal Models of Acute Neurological Injuries.
Humana Press: Totowa, NJ, 2009, pp 471–478.
49 Lee GYF, Jones NR, Mayrhofer G, Brown C, Cleland L. Origin of macrophages in a
kaolin-induced model of rat syringomyelia: a study using radiation bone marrow
chimeras. Spine 2005; 30: 194–200.
50 Fehlings MG, Tator CH. The relationships among the severity of spinal cord injury,
residual neurological function, axon counts, and counts of retrogradely labeled neurons
after experimental spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol 1995; 132: 220–228.
Spinal cord injury models
T Cheriyan et al
595
Spinal Cord

===== Chernoff2018_FrontierCellNeuro_EC+XenopusAxolotl =====
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 27 February 2018
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2018.00045
Edited by:
Raúl E. Russo,
Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas
Clemente Estable (IIBCE), Uruguay
Reviewed by:
Shannon J. Odelberg,
University of Utah, United States
Ruxandra F. Sirbulescu,
Harvard Medical School,
United States
*Correspondence:
Ellen A. G. Chernoff
echernof@iupui.edu
†Present address:
Hai V. N. Salﬁty,
Department of Surgery, Indiana
University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN, United States
Received: 05 October 2017
Accepted: 02 February 2018
Published: 27 February 2018
Citation:
Chernoff EAG, Sato K, Salﬁty HVN,
Sarria DA and Belecky-Adams T
(2018) Musashi and Plasticity
of Xenopus and Axolotl Spinal Cord
Ependymal Cells.
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 12:45.
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2018.00045
Musashi and Plasticity of Xenopus
and Axolotl Spinal Cord Ependymal
Cells
Ellen A. G. Chernoff*, Kazuna Sato, Hai V. N. Salﬁty†, Deborah A. Sarria and
Teri Belecky-Adams
Department of Biology, Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN, United States
The differentiated state of spinal cord ependymal cells in regeneration-competent
amphibians varies between a constitutively active state in what is essentially a
developing organism, the tadpole of the frog Xenopus laevis, and a quiescent,
activatable state in a slowly growing adult salamander Ambystoma mexicanum, the
Axolotl. Ependymal cells are epithelial in intact spinal cord of all vertebrates. After
transection, body region ependymal epithelium in both Xenopus and the Axolotl
disorganizes for regenerative outgrowth (gap replacement). Injury-reactive ependymal
cells serve as a stem/progenitor cell population in regeneration and reconstruct the
central canal. Expression patterns of mRNA and protein for the stem/progenitor cell-
maintenance Notch signaling pathway mRNA-binding protein Musashi (msi) change
with life stage and regeneration competence. Msi-1 is missing (immunohistochemistry),
or at very low levels (polymerase chain reaction, PCR), in both intact regeneration-
competent adult Axolotl cord and intact non-regeneration-competent Xenopus tadpole
(Nieuwkoop and Faber stage 62+, NF 62+). The critical correlation for successful
regeneration is msi-1 expression/upregulation after injury in the ependymal outgrowth
and stump-region ependymal cells. msi-1 and msi-2 isoforms were cloned for the Axolotl
as well as previously unknown isoforms of Xenopus msi-2. Intact Xenopus spinal cord
ependymal cells show a loss of msi-1 expression between regeneration-competent (NF
50–53) and non-regenerating stages (NF 62+) and in post-metamorphosis froglets,
while msi-2 displays a lower molecular weight isoform in non-regenerating cord. In
the Axolotl, embryos and juveniles maintain Msi-1 expression in the intact cord. In
the adult Axolotl, Msi-1 is absent, but upregulates after injury. Msi-2 levels are more
variable among Axolotl life stages: rising between late tailbud embryos and juveniles and
decreasing in adult cord. Cultures of regeneration-competent Xenopus tadpole cord and
injury-responsive adult Axolotl cord ependymal cells showed an identical growth factor
response. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) maintains mesenchymal outgrowth in vitro,
the cells are proliferative and maintain msi-1 expression. Non-regeneration competent
Xenopus ependymal cells, NF 62+, failed to attach or grow well in EGF+ medium.
Ependymal Msi-1 expression in vivo and in vitro is a strong indicator of regeneration
competence in the amphibian spinal cord.
Keywords: ependymal cells, musashi-1, musashi-2, spinal cord regeneration, Axolotl regeneration, Xenopus
regeneration
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
1
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
INTRODUCTION
In all vertebrates, the ependymal cells (ependymoglia) that line
the central canal of the spinal cord play essential roles in normal
spinal cord structure and physiology (rev. Oksche and Ueck,
1976; Reichenbach and Wolberg, 2013; Jiménez et al., 2014;
Pannese, 2015; Moore, 2016). Ependymal cells participate in the
spinal cord lesion site response in mammals and represent a
clinical target in treating spinal cord injury (SCI) (Mothe and
Tator, 2005; Horky et al., 2006; Meletis et al., 2008; Barnabé-
Heider et al., 2010; rev. Panayiotou and Malas, 2013; Lacroix
et al., 2014; Li et al., 2016). However, the ependymal response in
amphibians is more complete and beneﬁcial after SCI.
The ependymal response, and the extent and mechanism
of regeneration, is not uniform across all amphibians and
all stages of life. There are strong diﬀerences in ependymal
behavior and regeneration capacity between anuran amphibians
(frogs, toads) and urodele/caudate amphibians (salamanders,
newts). Anurans regenerate only as young tadpoles while
urodeles are strong cord regenerators through adulthood (Dent,
1962; Mitashov and Maliovanova, 1982). In addition, the
ependymal response changes with life stage even in urodele
amphibians (rev. Chernoﬀet al., 2003; Becker and Becker,
2015). The present paper will compare Xenopus laevis (the
African Clawed Frog) tadpoles stages NF 50–54 (Nieuwkoop and
Faber, 1956; regeneration competent) vs. NF 60–64 (regeneration
incompetent) and embryonic, juvenile and adult salamanders of
the species Ambystoma mexicanum (the Mexican Salamander
or Axolotl). Figure 1 shows a cartoon representation of the
cellular outgrowth phase of gap regeneration (regeneration
between stumps of transected cord) emphasizing the bulb-like
nature of ependymal outgrowth in Xenopus (Figure 1A) and the
mesenchymal ependymal outgrowth in the Axolotl (Figure 1B).
The extent to which ependymal epithelium disorganizes during
regeneration is species and location speciﬁc (Clarke and Ferretti,
1998; Chernoﬀet al., 2003; Gargioli and Slack, 2004; Zukor et al.,
2011).
In anuran amphibians, such as Xenopus, regenerative capacity
in the central nervous system (CNS) is one of many processes
aﬀected by progress toward and through metamorphosis (Shi,
2000). The spinal cord will regenerate when it is transected
in young tadpoles, a stage of life in which the animals
are still developing rapidly (Holder et al., 1989; Beattie
et al., 1990; rev. Diaz Quiroz and Echeverri, 2013; Lee-
Liu et al., 2013; Becker and Becker, 2015). Aside from a
transient refractory period at stages NF 45–47, it is generally
agreed that Xenopus regeneration fails permanently when the
spinal cords of frogs and toads are lesioned at the end of
metamorphic climax and that tadpoles lesioned during the
period permissive for regeneration must continue to grow and
progress toward metamorphosis in order to achieve complete
regeneration (Forehand and Farel, 1982; Beattie et al., 1990;
Beck et al., 2003). The precise stage at which anuran spinal
cord regeneration fails depends on the species, the location and
type of lesion, and the axonal tracts examined (Forehand and
Farel, 1982; Clarke et al., 1986; Holder et al., 1989; Beattie et al.,
1990).
Urodele amphibians, such as the Axolotl, can regenerate
lesioned spinal cord through axonal sprouting from uninjured
neurons, and regrowth of axons is associated with ependymal
processes/channels and the basal lamina produced by the endfeet
of ependymal cell processes. Neurons can be recruited into
the regenerating cord from regions adjacent to the lesion
site, and new neurogenesis from ependymal cells with neural
stem cell properties also occurs (Egar and Singer, 1972;
Chernoﬀet al., 2002, 2003; Ferretti et al., 2003; Mchedlishvili
et al., 2007; Becker and Becker, 2015). Additional ependymal
roles in cord regeneration include the interaction of reactive
ependymal cells with the reactive meningeal connective tissue to
prevent ﬁbrotic/meningeal scar formation, including production
of matrix metalloproteinases to remove extracellular matrix
material (Chernoﬀet al., 2000; Zukor et al., 2011). Not all of
these regenerative processes have been documented at every
stage of the urodele life cycle. The reactive body region/non-
tail ependymal cells grow into the lesion site as either an
epithelioid bulb (newts) or a mesenchymal mass (Axolotl)
(Chernoﬀet al., 2003; rev. Zukor et al., 2011). In Axolotls,
as in Xenopus tadpoles (shown histologically Muñoz et al.,
2015), regeneration in the larval stage reﬂects the ongoing
rapid development of the animal and there are signiﬁcant
diﬀerences between juveniles and adults, as well (rev. Chernoﬀ
et al., 2003). Axolotls are aquatic, neotenic animals (they fail
to undergo complete metamorphosis), but CNS regeneration
in the Axolotl and other urodeles is not dependent on
the neotenic state (Chernoﬀet al., 2003; Amamoto et al.,
2016).
While it is recognized that amphibian ependymal cells can
act as neural stem cells, there are no unique neural stem cell
markers in any species that are not present in other tissues and
used for other biological processes. Combinations of markers,
such as intermediate ﬁlament proteins, including nestin and
vimentin, and ciliary proteins, have been used, but their presence
and distribution in the CNS is region and species speciﬁc (rev.
in Chernoﬀet al., 2003; Ren et al., 2017). There is no clear
role for intermediate ﬁlaments in the regeneration process and,
as Ren et al. (2017) point out, there are other ciliated cells
in the CNS. The stem cell marker Sox2 has been examined
in Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration and Axolotl larva tail
regeneration. Muñoz et al. (2015) showed that neurogenesis
markers increased after injury only in regeneration-competent
tadpoles and were dependent on expression of the stem cell-
related Sox2/3 gene. CRISPR genomic deletion of Sox2 in the
Axolotl resulted in failure of ependymal cell proliferation at the
tail amputation site in larval animals (Fei et al., 2014). Some
Sox2+ ependymal cells exist in adult Axolotl cord (Tazaki et al.,
2017).
Another useful marker is Musashi (Msi), an mRNA-binding
protein which is a member of the Notch signaling pathway.
Msi expression has been identiﬁed in ventricular zone or
sub-ventricular zone neural stem cells and neural progenitor
cells in mammals (Sakakibara et al., 1996; Kaneko et al.,
2000). Disruption of Notch signaling can cause premature
diﬀerentiation of Sox-2-positive neural progenitor cells (Ehm
et al., 2010). Numb is an inhibitor of intracellular Notch
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
2
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 1 | Cartoon representing ependymal outgrowth from cranial (Left) and caudal (Right) stumps of regenerating Xenopus and Axolotl spinal cord.
(A) Regenerating NF 50–53 Xenopus tadpole cord showing gap regeneration with ciliated epithelial ependymal cells in the stump and the bulb-like ependymal
outgrowth. (B) Regenerating adult Axolotl gap regeneration with mesenchymal ependymal outgrowth and several layers (bracket) of epithelial ependymal cells in the
stump. The glia limitans, the basal lamina of the cord, is represented as a red line adjacent to ependymal endfeet. All other cell types and extracellular matrix were
omitted to simplify the representation.
processing, and Numb mRNA is bound by Msi protein, which
prevents Numb mRNA translation. Activation or maintenance
of Notch signaling by inhibition of Numb translation suppresses
premature onset of neuronal diﬀerentiation, maintaining neural
stem or progenitor status (Imai et al., 2001). Overexpression of
Msi-1 can activate Notch signaling (Imai et al., 2001). Notch
pathway roles in developing nervous system also include eﬀects
on proliferation and apoptosis (rev. Faigle and Song, 2013). These
observations make Msi, particularly Msi-1, a marker of interest in
spinal cord regeneration.
Musashi-1 and -2 were ﬁrst identiﬁed as Nrp-1 and Xrp-1,
respectively, by Peter Good’s laboratory in Xenopus ependymal
cells (Richter et al., 1990). In vertebrates those genes became
known as Musashi-1, -2 following the identiﬁcation of Drosophila
Musashi (d-msi) and that convention is followed in this paper
(Nakamura et al., 1994).
The ependymal response after SCI is not uniform between the
amphibian orders anura and urodela, in diﬀerent species within
one order, at diﬀerent stages of the life cycle, or even in tail vs.
body spinal cord within one species. The ependymal cells must
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
3
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
be physiologically functional in all amphibian cord, but their
diﬀerentiated state varies. It should not be surprising, then, that
the nature of expression of members of the Msi family of stem
cell markers varies with life stage and ependymal behavior. The
studies described here emphasize that active expression of Msi-1
is a useful marker of the plasticity necessary for participation of
amphibian ependymal cells in spinal cord regeneration.
The expression of known and newly cloned forms of Msi-1
and Msi-2 are examined here. Comparisons are made between:
intact vs. regenerating cord; developing, juvenile and adult
cord; and anuran vs. urodele cord ependymal cells. Section
in situ hybridization, RT-PCR and antibody localization are
used to follow life stage and regeneration-related changes in
expression of Msi-1 and Msi-2. Msi-1 expression is viewed
along with that of the dorsal-ventral axis (DV) patterning gene
sonic hedgehog (Shh) in Xenopus and the Axolotl in order to
indicate the relationship of the expression of this stem/progenitor
cell with cord DV axis maintenance or repatterning studied
by others. Disrupting either Notch signaling or DV patterning
genes like Shh or bone morphogenetic proteins inhibits larval
or tadpole regeneration, respectively, though DV patterning
genes may act upstream of Notch (Beck et al., 2003; Schnapp
et al., 2005). In the adult Axolotl, where Msi-1 must be
re-activated, the Msi-1 expression pattern is further compared
with the presence and loss of the intermediate ﬁlament protein
glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP), as an indicator of the
organizational changes that accompany tissue reorganization
and Msi-1 reexpression. Antibody localization of proliferative
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) is used in analysis of proliferative
capacity in vivo and is compared with regeneration-competence
and Msi-1 expression.
Despite diﬀerences in the initial presence or absence of Msi-
1 at the time of injury, or the extent of tissue reorganization
in vivo, regeneration-competent Xenopus tadpole and adult
Axolotl ependymal cells share common aspects of cell behavior.
In vitro studies presented here suggest that there are common
features in growth and trophic factor responses in cell outgrowth
and reformation of an ependymal epithelium. Epidermal
growth factor (EGF) is known to maintain injury-reactive
Axolotl ependymal cells in a mesenchymal state in vitro, and
EGF-containing deﬁned medium is shown here to support
mesenchymal growth from Xenopus ependymal cells, as well
(Chernoﬀet al., 1990; O’Hara and Chernoﬀ, 1994).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Surgical Methods
Xenopus: Animals and Surgery
Animals were obtained from Xenopus Express or Nasco (US
locations). Tadpoles were anesthetized in 0.5 g/L concentration
of Finquel (tricaine methanesulfonate; Western Chemical, Inc),
with 0.2% thimerosal (Sigma), for disinfection, at a sodium
bicarbonate-adjusted pH between 7.2 and 7.4. Spinal cord tissue
was removed from the dorsal portion of appropriately staged
tadpoles with ﬁne forceps and syringe needles and transferred
through a series of 73% Leibovitz L-15 medium rinse solutions
on ice. Tissue was then either processed for mRNA isolation,
sectioning or cell culture as described in subsequent sections.
Axolotls: Animals and Surgery
Axolotls were obtained from the Ambystoma Genetic Stock
Center, University of Kentucky or bred in our vivarium. Animals
were maintained at 23◦C in 20% Holtfreter’s salts solution. The
transdermal anesthetic Finquel was used in 20% Holtfreter’s,
adjusted to pH 7.4 with sodium bicarbonate. Animals were
anesthetized in 0.1% Finquel (for adult; >20 cm, 2∼3 years
old), 0.025% Finquel (for juveniles; 10∼15 cm, 6 months old).
The lesioning procedure is described in detail in Chernoﬀet al.
(1990). Brieﬂy, a skin ﬂap was cut and reﬂected back. Muscle
was removed and a slot cut in the left side of the vertebral arch.
Iridectomy scissors were used to transect the cord. The skin ﬂap
was replaced and allowed to clot in place. Post-surgically, the
lesioned-cord animals were treated in 20% Holtfreter’s solution
at 12◦C in a BOD incubator for 2 days and kept at 23◦C in
the vivarium through the regeneration process. All husbandry,
surgery, analgesia, and euthanasia was performed following our
IUPUI School of Science IACUC approved protocols.
Molecular Biology Techniques
Cloning
Total
RNA
was
isolated
with
Trizol
according
to
the
manufacturer’s
instructions
(Roche,
Indianapolis,
IN,
United States) and 1 µg of total RNA was used as a template
and reverse transcribed with SuperScript III (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, United States) and oligo dT20 primers. PCR
of the Msi-1 partial coding sequence was performed using
Platinum Taq polymerase High Fidelity (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA, United States). The following primers were used.
GCAGCTATATCAGTGCAGCAAG Xenopus nrp-1a (Msi-
1) isoform forward
CAGGAACACAAGGTGAGGTACAG
Xenopus
nrp-1a
(Msi-1) isoform reverse
ACGCGGGGCCCCTCTCCCTGCTCCTCT Axolotl Msi-1
Full-1 forward
CCAGTCGGAGGTTTCTCCTTCTAGAGT Axolotl Msi-1
Full-1 reverse
CGACTCGTGCTGGAGGATTTCTA
Axolotl
Msi-1
isoform forward
GGAGTGAGCTGCTCTCCTGACAA
Axolotl
Msi-1
isoform reverse
GAGCCGCCATGGAGGCAGACGGAATT Axolotl Msi2
Full forward
GCAAGTTGAGGGACATCCGATTT Axolotl Msi2 Full
reverse
gccgccATGGAGGCAGACGGAATT Axolotl Msi2S ORF-
5′ forward
gagCTACTTTTGGCTCCACAGGCC Axolotl Msi2S ORF
3′ reverse
The product was ampliﬁed by PCR. The amplimer was
directionally cloned into pCR-BluntII-TOPO plasmid vector
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, United States) and all clones were
sequenced to verify their identity prior to analyzing expression
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
4
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
patterns. Open reading frames and protein sequences were
identiﬁed and aligned with human, mouse, and Xenopus laevis
coding sequences using ClustalX1.
Genbank Accession Information
musashi-like protein 2L [Ambystoma mexicanum]
GenBank: ACS92717.1 Sato, K and Chernoﬀ, EAG
musashi-like protein 2S [Ambystoma mexicanum]
GenBank: ACS92718.1 Sato, K and Chernoﬀ. EAG
Semi-Quantitative RT-PCR
Semi-quantitative Reverse Transcription-PCR was performed as
deﬁned by Ferre (1992). The length of the transcript, GC content
of the primers and transcript deﬁne this method. The transcript
was examined every ﬁve cycles and the resulting ampliﬁcation
curve kinetics were used to determine number of replication
cycles. Duplicate sets of tissue from 5 to 6 Axolotls was used
per experiment (total = 10 to 12 per experiment). Total RNA
was extracted with Trizol (Roche), and treated by RQ-1 RNase-
free DNase (Promega). Aliquots of 1 µg total RNA were used as
reverse-transcription (RT) templates. Reverse transcription was
performed using Super Script III RT (Invitrogen) and oligo dT20
primers. PCR was performed using Platinum Taq polymerase.
Primers RT-PCR were as follows:
Axolotl Musashi-1 (Forward; 5′- CAGGCTGGTGTGGA
CAAGGTTCTGG-3′,
Reverse; 5′- GGGGACATGACCTCCTTTGGCTGAG-3′;
365 bp) at 30 cycles,
Axolotl Musashi-2 (Forward; 5′- CCTGAGCTGGCAGA
CCTCACCAGATA-3′,
Reverse; 5′- CTTAGGCTGTGCTCTTCGCGGAAAC-3′;
232 bp) at 33 cycles,
Axolotl Shh (Forward; 5′-GCTCTGTGAAAGCAGAGAA
CTCG-3′,
Reverse; 5′-CGCTCCGTCTCTATCACGTAGAA-3′ 229
bp, at 30 cycles;
Axolotl GAPDH (Forward; 5′- GCTAAGCGTGTGATC
ATCTCTG-3′,
Reverse; 5′- GTCATGAGACCCTCCACAATG-3′; 182 bp)
at 30 cycles.
Section and Dish in Situ Hybridization
Section in situ hybridization was performed as in Sato and Yasugi
(1997), a modiﬁcation of Wilkinson (1992, 1993). Tissues were
ﬁxed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS at 4◦C, rinsed
and inﬁltrated with sucrose to 30% at 4◦C, embedded in OCT
and cryosectioned. Samples were stored at −80◦C. The tissue was
cryosectioned and 12 µm sections attached to Vectabond-coated
slides (Vector Labs) and dried. Sections were rehydrated in PBS
plus 0.01% Tween-20 (PBT) for 5 min, treated with 1 µg/ml
proteinase K (Sigma Chemical Company) at 37◦C for 5–10 min.
Samples were washed three times with PBT, 1 min each, then
post-ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 min. After
post-ﬁxation the sections/samples were rinsed 2× with PBT,
1 min each. Sections were hybridized with digoxigenin-labeled
1www.clustal.org
RNA probes (0.3–3 mg/ml) in hybridization buﬀer (5× SSC, pH
4.5 with 50% formamide, 50 µg/ml yeast total RNA, 50 µg/ml
heparin and 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) overnight in a
humidiﬁed box at 70◦C. Riboprobes were prepared using full-
length cDNA sequence. Hybridized sections were washed twice
with 5× SSC (pH 4.5) with 50% formamide and 1% SDS, for
30 min each at 65◦C. Samples were then washed three times in
2× SSC (pH 4.5) with 50% formamide for 30 min at 65◦C. Three
washes were performed with Tris–HCl buﬀered saline containing
0.05% Tween-20 (TBST) and sections were incubated with
1% blocking reagent (DIG Nucleic Acid Detection Kit: Roche)
in TBST. The samples were incubated overnight at 4◦C with
pre-absorbed alkaline phosphatase conjugated anti-digoxigenin
antibody Fab fragment (diluted 1:2000 with 1% heat-inactivated
sheep serum in TBST), then washed three times in TBST with
2 nM Levamisole for 20 min each. Samples were incubated
for 5 min in NTMT buﬀer (100 mM Tris–HCL [pH 9.5],
100 mM NaCl, 50 mM MgCl2, and 0.1% Tween-20 plus 2 mM
Levamisole). Color development was performed in coloring
solution NTMT buﬀer with 0.45 µl/ml nitro blue tetrazolium
(NBT, Roche), 3.5 µl/ml 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-phosphate
(BCIP, Roche and 2 mM Levamisole) in the dark, with periodic
microscope examination, until the desired reaction product
intensity was obtained. The reaction was stopped by rinsing
in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS several times for 10 min.
Samples were mounted in glycerol and coverslipped. For the
Xenopus dish in situ hybridization, the cultures were ﬁxed in 4%
paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buﬀer, pH 7.4 at 4◦C for
2 h, washed in PBS twice, 15 min each rinse, at 4◦C. Section and
dish in situ samples were mounted in glycerol and coverslipped.
Digital photomicrographs were captured using a Nikon E-800
ﬂuorescence/DIC microscope for sections or a Nikon TE-2000
inverted optics microscope for cell cultures, both with a DXM-
1200F digital camera (Nikon; Japan).
Immunohistochemistry
Dissected tissues were ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.7×
(Xenopus) or 1× (Axolotl) PBS at 4◦C for at least 1 h. Samples
from at least ﬁve Xenopus and three Axolotls at each stage
studied were ﬁxed, embedded, sectioned, and examined. The
diﬀerence in numbers between species reﬂects the small animal
size and small amount of cell outgrowth in Xenopus, requiring
more samples. The ﬁxative was removed, samples rinsed in PBS
and dehydrated in a graded ethanol series. Alcohol dehydration
was followed by two xylene rinses, paraﬃn penetration and
paraﬃn embedding. The sections were cut to 10 µm thickness by
microtome and “baked” onto Superfrost/Plus Microscope slide
glass (Fisher) at 50◦C for 5 h. After deparaﬃnizing and rinsing
with PBT (phosphate-buﬀered saline, PBS, plus 0.1% Tween-20),
the sections were boiled in a microwave in 0.01 M citrate buﬀer
(pH 6.0) for ∼1 min, for post-ﬁxation antigen recovery, unless
otherwise noted. The sections were then treated with a blocking
buﬀer as follows: PBT with 10% normal goat serum (NGS),
diluted 1:1 with Superblock (Pierce Chemical) for proliferating
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), 10% normal donkey serum in
PBT buﬀer, diluted 1:1 in Superblock for Musashi-1 (Msi-1)
antibody and 0.5% Blocking Reagent (Roche) in Tris Buﬀered
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
5
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
Saline and Tween (TBST) with 10% NGS (GFAP). The primary
antibodies were added in the Tris Buﬀered Saline (pH 7.5) and
incubated overnight at 4◦C. After washing with the matching
PBST (see blocking step), sections were incubated with Alexa
Fluor 594 secondary antibody (1:2000, Invitrogen) for 2 h at room
temperature. Msi-1 antibody (R&D Systems) was diluted 1:25,
no citrate treatment. PCNA (PC10 clone) monoclonal antibody
(Sigma) was diluted 1:3000. Glial Fibrillary Acid Protein (GFAP)
rabbit polyclonal (DAKO) was diluted 1:500. After washing with
PBT twice, sections were mounted in SlowFade Gold antifade
reagent with DAPI as the nuclear counterstain (Invitrogen) and
coverslipped. The specimens were observed with a ﬂuorescence
microscope.
Cell Culture
Xenopus Tissue Isolation for Cell Culture
Tissue was isolated as described in Xenopus: Animals and
Surgery. The tissue rinse solution contained the following
antibiotics
at
a
1%
concentration:
Pen-Strep,
Fungizone,
gentamicin, and amikacin (Sigma). The pH of the tissue rinsing
solution was readjusted using 0.1 N NaOH to pH 7.4. When
necessary, the tissue was cut into smaller pieces using micro-
scissors before transferring to a conical vial for dissociation in
0.5 ml aliquots of 73% Xenopus medium. Tissue was dissociated
using a ﬂame-narrowed glass pipette. After each dissociation, the
cells were examined microscopically and aliquots were combined.
Cells were counted on a hemocytometer and seeded at a density
of ∼200,000 per 35 mm dish.
Xenopus: Removal of Non-ependymal Cells from
Cultures
Spinal cords were removed from sets of 10–12 tadpoles for
each set of cultures. Dissociated cells were evenly divided
among three 35 mm culture dishes, and placed in a BOD
incubator at 21◦C for at least 1 h to allow for maximal cell
adhesion. Medium containing unattached cells and debris was
drawn oﬀand a 1% antibiotic solution was added to prevent
contamination of the cultures. To remove neurons the dish was
incubated in calcium/magnesium-free (CMF) Hanks’ Balanced
Salts Solution (HBSS, Fisher Scientiﬁc) at room temperature for
10 min. The neurons were removed by gentle pipetting under a
stereomicroscope, and the result examined on an inverted phase
contrast microscope. The CMF-HBSS was replaced with L-15-
based medium described above and returned to the incubator.
After the ﬁrst 2 days, antibiotic-free Xenopus medium was used.
This medium was then changed every other day. Once culture
conditions were standardized each experiment/stage studied was
repeated three times.
Xenopus Culture Medium
Xenopus culture medium was prepared using a base of 73%
Leibovitz L-15 medium (GIBCO) with 10 mM HEPES (4-(2-
hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid). The following
components were then added: glucose 10 mM, CaCl2 1 mM, EGF
20 and 5 ng/ml and progesterone 20 nM. Finally a stock solution
containing 5 µg/ml insulin, 100 µg/ml transferrin, 100 µM
putrescine, and 30 nM selenium was added (Sigma Chemical).
The pH of the solution was then adjusted to 7.6 with 1.0 N NaOH.
The medium was ﬁlter sterilized and stored at 4◦C. All medium
additives were from Sigma Chemical Inc.
Axolotl Tissue Culture
For these experiments sets of four or ﬁve animals, matched
in age, were lesioned. Explants were isolated following the
procedure described in Chernoﬀet al. (1990) and O’Hara and
Chernoﬀ(1994). Two week outgrowth was isolated, freed of
clinging meninges and cultured on poly-D-lysine/ﬁbronectin-
coated dishes. Explants were divided among three dishes. Each
experiment was repeated three times. Culture medium consisted
of 97% Leibovitz L-15 medium and the same additives described
above for Xenopus.
Culture Dish Preparation
Thirty-ﬁve millimeter polystyrene culture dishes were coated
with 100 µg/ml poly-D-lysine made up in HEPES-buﬀered saline
solution, pH 7.4. The dishes were incubated at 37◦C for at least
30 min and then rinsed twice with HEPES buﬀer. Fibronectin
(75 µg/ml) was subsequently added to each dish and incubated
again at 37◦C for an additional 30 min to 1 h and rinsed with
HEPES buﬀer. HEPES buﬀer solution contained 0.01 M HEPES,
0.01 M KCl and 0.013 M NaCl in water, adjusted to pH 7.4 with
1 N NaOH. The dishes were rinsed with medium prior to addition
of cell-containing supernate from the tissue dissociation.
RESULTS
Cloning
Msi-1 Alignment
Axolotl Msi-1 and Msi-2 were cloned as described in the Section
“Materials and Methods”. Sequence analysis showed Xenopus
Msi-1 to be identical to nrp-1 as reported by Richter et al.
(1990). A multispecies alignment for Msi-1 is shown at the
amino acid (a.a) level in Figure 2. Xenopus Musashi (published
as nrp-1 in Richter et al., 1990), and Axolotl Msi-1 are presented
along with mammalian, and invertebrate forms. Homology of
the mRNA recognition motifs (RRMs) was high among Xenopus,
Axolotl, mouse, and human. Both RRM1 and RRM2 were 73
amino acids (deduced a.a. sequences). Between Xenopus and
mouse or human RRM1 was 93.2% identical and RRM2 was
95.9% identical. Between Axolotl and mouse or human RRM1
homology was 97.3% identical and RRM2 was 98.6% identical.
Between Xenopus and Axolotl, RRM1 was 93.2% identical and
RRM2 was 95.9% identical; the percentage deduced amino acid
sequence diﬀerence between Xenopus and Axolotl is the same as
that between Xenopus and mouse or human (Axolotl has fewer
a.a. diﬀerences with mammalian species than with Xenopus).
Vertebrate Msi-1 is very highly conserved in general at the amino
acid level.
Msi-2 Isoforms
Both Xenopus and Axolotl produce long and short transcripts of
Msi-2 (Figures 3, 4). Cloning and sequencing of the Xenopus
Msi-2 transcripts showed the existence of a lower molecular
weight, alternatively spliced, form (Figure 4) in addition to
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
6
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 2 | Msi-1 alignment, deduced amino acid sequences. A multispecies alignment including both Xenopus and Axolotl is shown. The RNA recognition motifs
(RRMs), also known as mRNA-binding domains, are indicated by the boxed areas labeled RRM1 or RRM2. The RRMs are located near the amino terminus of the
protein. A 16 amino acid linking region between RRM1 and RRM2 is identical in Xenopus, Axolotl, mouse, and human. Amphibian and mammalian RRM sequences
all have greater than 90% homology at the amino acid level, details in the Section “Results.”
the longer form reported by Good et al. (1993) as xrp-1. Both
Xenopus Msi-2 isoforms contained complete mRNA-binding
motifs. The deduced amino acid sequences in Figure 4 show the
region containing the splice (Figures 2, 4A1) and the schematic
(Figure 4B) illustrates the proximity of the splice to the carboxy
terminus.
As in Xenopus, a short isoform of Msi-2 was found in the
Axolotl. However, the Axolotl short form contained a truncation
of RRM2 that could aﬀect mRNA-binding. The comparative
amino acid alignment is shown in Figure 3. The truncation
ended with a diﬀerent 9 amino acid segment than is found in the
Axolotl long form and in other species: ASVGLWSQK instead of
GFGFVTFEI. Five of the 9 amino acids were non-conservative
substitutions (Henikoﬀand Henikoﬀ, 1992). Twenty amino acids
of the Axolotl Msi-2 RRM2 were missing and the transcript was
truncated at the end of the substitution. Both isoforms were
included in the RT-PCR Axolotl Msi-2 band shown in Figure 6
and were only detected by subcloning. Msi-2 expression in intact
and regenerating adult cord is relatively weak (Figure 6).
Semi-Quantitative RT-PCR
Xenopus RT-PCR Results
Semi-quantitative RT-PCR gel results in Figure 5 showed a
reduction in Msi-1 between the regeneration competent and
incompetent stages in Xenopus. Xenopus Msi-1 was strongly
expressed in spinal cord at NF 50–54, as described by Richter
et al. (1990) and Good et al. (1993). Msi1 was expressed in
the regenerating spinal cord after transection at NF 50, but
did not show an increase between the intact (NF 50) and
regenerating (5 days post-transected) spinal cord (Figure 5). Msi-
1 expression was greatly reduced in NF 62 tadpoles (just prior to
tail resorption) and adult frog spinal cord had equally weak levels
of expression of Msi-1 (Figure 5).
On the other hand, Xenopus Msi-2 showed a diﬀerent RT-PCR
pattern. Msi-2 presented as two alternatively spliced transcripts.
The larger isoform (Figure 5 upper arrowhead) was equally
expressed in NF 52, NF 62 and adult Xenopus spinal cord. The
smaller isoform (Figure 5 lower arrowhead) appeared only in
non-regenerating NF 62 tadpoles and adult frogs.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
7
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 3 | Msi-2 multispecies alignment, deduced amino acid sequences including Xenopus and Axolotl results. The RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) are indicated
by the boxed areas labeled RRM1 or RRM2. Subcloning of Axolotl Msi-2 transcripts showed the presence of a shortened isoform ending with a truncated RRM2 as
well as the long and short Xenopus Msi-2 isoforms described in Figure 4. For Xenopus, the original Msi-2 sequence is labeled xrp-1 as originally published.
The C-terminal end is not shown for some species.
Axolotl RT-PCR Results
Semi-quantitative
RT-PCR
was
performed
across
unique
nucleotide sequence zones outside of the Axolotl Msi mRNA-
binding
domains
to
avoid
cross-reaction
between
Msi-1
and Msi-2 (Figure 6). Msi-1 was strongly expressed in pre-
hatching/late tailbud stage embryos BD 42–44 (Bordzilovskaya
and DettlaﬀAxolotl staging series; Bordzilovskaya et al., 1989)
and in juvenile Axolotl brain and spinal cord. Embryonic
expression was weaker than in the juvenile CNS tissue, perhaps
due to inclusion of some surrounding non-CNS tissue in
the dissection while juvenile and adult cord are more easily
removed from fully formed spinal column. Msi-1 expression in
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
8
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 4 | (A) The nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequences are shown for segments of two isoforms of Xenopus Msi-2 detected by RT-PCR. These
isoforms were detected using one set of forward and reverse primers. The arrows under the nucleotide sequence show the position of forward
(5′-CTCTATGGAACTGCCAGCCAGGA-3′) and reverse (5′-GATGCCCAAGCAAGACTGGGAG-3′) primers sequences. The longer isoform (A1) yielded a 203 bp
band, while the shorter isoform band (A2) had 145 bp. The splicing insert (underlined DNA sequence) in the long isoform (A1) occurred between the greater-than
(>>>>>) and the less-than signs (<<<<<). In the shorter isoform (A2), the region underlined in A1 was spliced out and the regions designated between the
greater-than the less-than signs, respectively, were directly joined. The bracketed numbers above some amino acids indicate the differing region, and correspond to
schematic (A). The asterisks in A1 and A2 show the terminal codons. (B) The schematic for the deduced amino acid sequence region illustrates 100% homology
from amino acid 1 to 393, between the longer and shorter band isoforms, with the alternatively spliced region from 394 to 406. The full length amino acid sequence
of both isoforms has the same 406 amino acid length. RRM1 and RRM2 indicate, respectively, RNA-recognition motif-1 and -2.
adult spinal cord (27–29 cm animals, 2+ years old) was faint.
Regenerating spinal cord Msi-1 transcript levels were greatly
increased compared with intact adult spinal cord. Unlike Msi-1,
Msi-2 was still expressed in intact adult Axolotl spinal cord, but
did not increase in the regenerating adult spinal cord.
Tissue Localization
Xenopus Musashi
Section in situ hybridization showed that Xenopus Msi-1
mRNA was strongly expressed in the ependymal zone around
the canal in NF 50 spinal cord (Figure 7A), including the
ﬂoorplate. Floorplate Msi-1 was coexpressed with the DV axis
patterning gene Shh (Figures 7A,B). Msi-1 expression also
extends in a short plume dorsally from the central canal
(Figure 7A). At the non-regenerating stage, NF 62+, Msi-1
was still expressed in the ependymal layer, but in localized
zones of cells around the central canal (Figure 7C). The
impression of reduced levels of Msi-1 at NF 62 in the in situ
localization was supported by the semi-quantitative RT-PCR
results (Figure 5).
Msi-1 was expressed in regenerating spinal cord tissue
transected at NF 50–53. One day after lumbar cord transection
at NF 52, Msi-1 was very strongly expressed in the cord,
shown in parasagittal section (Figure 7E). Five days after
lumbar transection, there was bulb-like outgrowth of tissue
from the cranial and caudal stumps in the lesion site, and
Msi-1 transcript existed in the dorsal and lateral parts of the
regenerating tissue (Figure 7F). The 5 days regenerated Msi-1
expression formed an arched pattern in the outgrowth. In situ
hybridization for Shh at 5 days of regeneration (Figure 7G),
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
9
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 5 | Xenopus Msi-1 and Msi-2 semi-quantitative RT-PCR gels show
strong expression of Msi-1 in intact, regeneration-competent NF 50 spinal
cord (gel column 1), and 5-day regenerating NF 50 spinal cord (Reg. 5D NF
50 spinal cord, gel column 3). Both Msi-1 and Msi-2 were reduced from NF
50 levels in intact NF 62 (non-regeneration-competent) and adult spinal cord
(compare gel columns 1, 2). Msi-2 speciﬁc primers showed bands
representing the two isoforms shown in the Figure 4 alignments
(arrowheads). The larger isoform was universally present. The smaller isoform
(lower arrowhead) was present only in NF 62 and adult frog (compare gel
columns 2, 4). GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase) was
used as the housekeeping control gene. The No-RT control (–RT) was
performed without reverse transcriptase using the GAPDH primers. Each
gene is shown in a separate row. All bands in each row are from one original
gel. Negative was shown as for image clarity.
in the section adjacent to the one in Figure 7F, showed
that the zone of Shh expression was roughly complementary
to the Msi-1, found below the arch of Msi-1 expression
(Figure 7G). By 10 days of regeneration, the cranial and caudal
outgrowth had fused within the lesion site and reconstructed
the central canal (Figure 7H). Figures 7H,I showed the
restoration of normal coexpression of Shh and Msi-1 in the
ﬂoorplate.
Axolotl Musashi
Tissue localization of Msi-1 in the Axolotl was performed using
antibodies because in situ hybridization in adult urodele tissue
produced unsatisfactory, intense background when compared
with embryonic or larval tissue. The distribution of Msi-1 in
the Axolotl was described in preliminary form in Sarria et al.
(2008, published abstract). Axolotl Msi-1 protein expression
FIGURE 6 | Axolotl Msi semi-quantitative RT-PCR gel. Msi-1 was strongly
expressed in the pre-hatching/late tailbud stage embryo (BD 42–44;
column 1), juvenile brain and spinal cord (gel columns 2, 3), but was absent in
intact adult spinal cord (column 4). At 3 weeks post-transection in the adult
(3 weeks regenerating adult cord) Msi-1was up-regulated (column 5). Msi-2
expression was stronger in the juvenile brain and spinal cord (columns 2, 3)
than in the BD 42–44 embryo (column 1). Msi-2 was still expressed in intact
adult spinal cord (column 4), and not up-regulated in regenerating adult cord
(column 5). GAPDH was used as the internal housekeeping gene loading
control, and (–RT) was performed without reverse transcriptase using the
GAPDH primers. Each gene is shown in a separate row. All bands in each row
are from one original gel (see Supplementary Figure 2) with limb regeneration
sample bands excised here. Negative was shown as for image clarity.
changed during the progression from embryonic to juvenile
to adult cord. In the late tailbud embryo (BD 42–44) both
the radial glial/ependymal zone (around the central canal) and
entire gray matter was positive at the mRNA and protein level
(Figures 8A,B). The ependymal layer of juvenile spinal cord
(10–15 cm, ∼6 months of age) showed strong localization
extending dorsally and ventrolaterally into the gray matter
(Figure 8C). In adult/sexually mature animals (>23 cm in length,
2+ years old) there was no detectable Msi-1 expression in the
ependymal cells of the intact spinal cord (Figure 8D), only
DAPI-labeled nuclei are present. Extensive Msi-1 expression in
the mesenchymal ependymal outgrowth was seen in parasagittal
and cross section following transection of adult Axolotl cord
(Figures 8E,F).
Axolotl Shh Expression
Examination of expression of the ventral patterning gene
Shh was performed using RT-PCR because of unsatisfactory
background in adult Axolotl cord in situ hybridization and
batch
inconsistency
of
Shh
antibodies.
Semi-quantitative
RT-PCR
showed
Shh
to
be
present
at
very
low
levels
in
intact
adult
Axolotl
cord
and
strongly
upregulated
at 3 weeks of regeneration (Figure 9). In contrast, late
tailbud embryos, juvenile spinal cord and juvenile brain
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
10
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 7 | mRNA tissue distribution of Xenopus Msi-1 in developing and regenerating spinal cord using section in situ hybridization (blue reaction product).
(A) Cross section of intact NF 50 spinal cord. Msi-1 was strongly expressed in the ependymal layer. (B) Shh mRNA localization in intact NF 50 spinal cord in the
section adjacent to the one shown in “A.” Shh is expressed in the ﬂoorplate (arrow). (C) NF 62 spinal cord cross section showed Msi-1 was still expressed in the
ependymal layer, but mostly ventrally located and weaker. (D) NF 62+ Shh mRNA is still expressed in the ventral ﬂoorplate, overlapping the Msi-1 expression (arrow).
(E) Parasagittal section of NF 52 spinal cord 1-day (1-D) post-transection showed high level of Msi-1 expression throughout the cord, lesion site and caudal stump.
(F) Cross section of NF 52 regenerating cord 5-days (5-D) post-transection showed a broad ventral arch of Msi-1 expression in the ependymal outgrowth. The dorsal
portion of the notochord is visible below the outgrowth (noto). (G) Cross section of NF 52 regenerating cord 5-days (5-D) post-transection in the section adjacent to
the one shown in “F”. Shh localization is largely in a complementary zone of outgrowth ventral to Msi-1 expression. (Combined Msi-1 and Shh expression shown in
Supplementary Figure 6.) The dorsal portion of the notochord is visible below the outgrowth (noto). (H) Cross section of lesion site in NF 52 spinal cord 10-days
(10-D) post-transection showed the reconstructed central canal with ependymal Msi-1 expression. (I) NF 52 spinal cord 10-days post-transection (10-D) in the
section adjacent to the one in “H” showed Shh expression restored to ﬂoorplate location. Differential interference contrast optics, transmitted light images.
Shh
expression
was
uniformly
high
(Figure
9).
The
upregulation of Shh during regeneration was similar to the
intact/regenerating adult tissue pattern seen for Msi-1 expression
(Figure 6).
GFAP Expression
Antibody localization was performed for GFAP, the predominant
intermediate ﬁlament protein of Axolotl radial ependymal
processes (Figure 10). These results provide tissue organization
context for the Msi-1 antibody images of juvenile vs. adult cord
and adult regeneration stages. GFAP antibody labeling shows
bundles of radial ependymal ﬁbers in sections of the intact
juvenile (Figure 10A) and adult (Figure 10B) Axolotl spinal cord.
The GFAP extends into the “cell body” closer to the central canal
in both stages. In the stump region, at 3 weeks of regeneration,
GFAP is reduced in the periphery (Figure 10C), during retraction
of radial processes. There were low levels of GFAP in the 3 weeks
regenerative outgrowth (Figure 10D), reﬂecting the gradual
breakdown of GFAP during mesenchymal ependymal outgrowth
(O’Hara et al., 1992).
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
11
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 8 | Axolotl mRNA (purple) or Msi antibody (red) tissue localization and DAPI nuclear label (blue). (A) Late tailbud embryo (BD 42–44) cross-section in situ
hybridization for Msi-1 mRNA showed localization in ependymal region around the central canal and in gray matter. Differential interference contrast image.
(B) Antibody localization in late tailbud embryo sections showed Msi-1 protein was present in the same regions as the mRNA shown in “A.” (C) Juvenile cord
maintained Msi-1 expression in the ependymal zone, extending dorsally. (D) Intact adult Axolotl cord showed no Msi-1 protein expression, only DAPI-stained nuclei
(blue). (E) Parasagittal section of 2 weeks adult regenerative outgrowth showed strong upregulation of ependymal Msi-1expression. (F) In cross section, at higher
magniﬁcation than in “E” the mesenchymal nature of the Msi-1-positive 2-week adult regenerated outgrowth is shown. Fluorescence microscope images. All images
are dorsal side up.
Proliferation
The localization of proliferative ependymal cells at NF 50
was coincident with the Msi-1 distribution (Figures 7A, 11A).
There was a dorsal plume of proliferating cells in addition to
proliferating cells surrounding the central canal. By NF 62, the
zone of proliferative cells was reduced, consistent with slower but
continuing tadpole growth. The 7 days regenerating NF 50 tissue
was densely PCNA-labeled in both cell outgrowth and adjacent
stump tissue (Figure 11C). The zone of proliferation overlapped
the area of Msi-1 labeling (Figure 7A). The change in pattern
of proliferation in Xenopus could be related to a progressive
decrease in the rate of growth of the tadpole and may not be
directly related to the loss of regenerative capacity.
The
proliferative
pattern
changed
extensively
between
juvenile and adult Axolotl cord. Localization of PCNA-positive
proliferating cells in juvenile Axolotl cord (Figure 11D)
overlapped the region of Msi-1 expression (Figure 8C), but gray
matter cell proliferation was also present. In the adult spinal cord,
PCNA-positive cells were found around the central canal and
adjacent gray matter (Figure 11E). Msi-1 was not detected in the
adult ependymal zone, though those cells were PCNA-positive
(Figure 8D). In the adult Axolotl cord, the region of proliferative
cells was much more restricted than in the juvenile. Within the
lesion site PCNA-positive cells were growing out into the lesion
site (Figure 11F).
Cell Culture Behavior
EGF Effects
NF
50
Xenopus
ependymal
cultures
formed
6–8
large
mesenchymal patches of cells on ﬁbronectin-coated dishes in
EGF-containing medium (Figure 12A, 1-day in vitro). Under the
same culture conditions NF 64 (non-regeneration-competent)
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 9 | Axolotl Shh semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Intact adult Axolotl cord
showed low levels of Shh (gel column 1). Expression was upregulated at
3 weeks regeneration (column 2). Intact late tailbud (BD 42–44) Axolotl
embryo cord, juvenile cord and brain all showed high levels of Shh expression
(columns 3–5). GAPDH was used as the internal housekeeping gene control,
and the No-RT (–RT) was performed without reverse transcriptase using the
GAPDH primers. Each gene is shown in a separate row. All bands in each row
are from one gel, but limb regeneration results were excised and only CNS
results that ﬂanked limb samples are shown (see original rows in
Supplementary Figure 3). Negative was shown as for image clarity.
ependymal cells formed 4–6, small patches that did not expand
even with extended times in culture (Figure 12B, 8 days
in vitro). Axolotl ependymal explants attached and expanded
rapidly in culture (Figure 12C), described in detail in previous
publications (Chernoﬀet al., 1990, 1998; O’Hara and Chernoﬀ,
1994). Fluorescent–phalloidin probes were used to visualize
the ependymal cell ﬁlamentous actin (F-actin) distribution in
EGF-containing Xenopus and Axolotl cultures to conﬁrm the
form of the cell outgrowth. The F-actin organization conﬁrmed
that both NF 50 Xenopus and Axolotl ependymal growth in EGF-
containing medium to be mesenchymal (Figures 12D,E). The
adhesion of the NF 64 cultures was weak: cells did not remain
substratum-attached during processing for F-actin staining.
Msi-1 and PCNA in Vitro
Msi-1 expression and proliferative capacity of Xenopus and
Axolotl ependymal cells was compared in culture. Both
regeneration-competent Xenopus and regenerating adult Axolotl
ependymal cells maintained Msi-1 expression in vitro, shown
at the mRNA and protein levels, respectively (Figures 13A,B).
PCNA antibody labeling showed that both regeneration-
competent Xenopus and Axolotl ependymal cultures also
continued to proliferate in culture (Figures 13C,D). Cultures
from NF 64 tadpoles produced small patches of cells (Figure 12B)
that did not remain attached through the PCNA antibody
labeling procedure, suggesting weak adhesion. These results
link studies of in vivo and in vitro ependymal cell behavior.
So, the ependymal culture system was used to test the growth
modulators that support mesenchymal outgrowth (EGF) and to
determine if regeneration-competent cells from amphibians with
diﬀerent modes of maturation, at diﬀerent life stages produce
similar responses to EGF as a tissue organization regulator.
Maintenance of Msi-1 during mesenchymal outgrowth in the
presence of EGF could be correlated with Notch signaling-related
plasticity of the cells in the regeneration process in vivo and
in vitro.
DISCUSSION
Why Musashi?
Neural stem cell properties are important in regeneration
(rev. Becker and Becker, 2015). The stem cell-related genes
Sox2/3 (Xenopus) and Sox2 (Axolotl) are key mediators of
neural stem cell properties in amphibian larval stages in both
tail and body region cord (Gaete et al., 2012; Fei et al.,
2014; Muñoz et al., 2015). Sox2 is downregulated in NF 66,
non-regenerating, Xenopus (Gaete et al., 2012). Why examine
Musashi, then? Conditional knock-out of RBPj (Recombination
Signal Binding Protein For Immunoglobulin Kappa J Region,
also known as RBPjkappa), which forms a transcription factor
heterodimer with the processed Notch intracellular domain,
leads to depletion of Sox2 in mammalian neural stem cells
in the brain subventricular zone. This suggests that Notch
signaling could act upstream of Sox2 in neural stem cell
behavior (Ehm et al., 2010). Notch signaling regulates neural
stem cell numbers and prevents premature onset of neuronal
diﬀerentiation (Androutsellis-Theotokis et al., 2006). Msi-1
maintains Notch signaling, so Msi is an important element of
stem cell maintenance (Imai et al., 2001; Ehm et al., 2010;
Gaete et al., 2012; Fei et al., 2014; Muñoz et al., 2015). The
connections among diﬀerent stem cell maintenance signaling
pathways and the relationship of stem cell maintenance to
regeneration are not completely understood, so the roles of all
of the important pathways and pathway members need to be
examined.
The action of Msi in maintenance of Notch signaling is a well-
described phenomenon (rev. Imai et al., 2001; Horisawa et al.,
2010). There is also literature on Msi genes and regeneration
(Richter et al., 1990; Sakakibara et al., 1996; Kaneko et al.,
2000; Imai et al., 2001; Sakakibara et al., 2001; Faigle and
Song, 2013). Musashi is likely to be involved speciﬁcally in the
ability of amphibian ependymal cells to engage in spinal cord
regeneration (rev. Chernoﬀet al., 2002; Faigle and Song, 2013).
In a comparative study of regenerating amphibians, such as this
one, Msi-1 is a good marker of the regenerative process.
Msi also plays a role in maintenance of cell cycling through
a competitive interaction with the mRNA-binding protein
HuC/D or HuD (depending on species). Msi-1 inhibits the
cell cycle regulator p21, maintaining cell cycling (Battelli
et al., 2006). The relationship between Msi-1 and the Hu
mRNA binding proteins is complicated, because HuD can
also stabilize Msi mRNA and prolong its action (Ratti
et al., 2006). The levels of Msi-1 were seen to decline
in Xenopus between the regeneration competent and non-
competent stages (Figures 5, 7). In a Supplementary Figure 7, a
Xenopus HuD analog can be seen in the hindbrain ependymal
zone. The relationship there between the two mRNA-binding
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
13
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 10 | Axolotl GFAP antibody labeling (red), with DAPI labeled nuclei (blue). GFAP labeling showed bundles of radial ependymal ﬁbers in sections of the intact
juvenile (A) and adult (B) Axolotl spinal cord. Arrow in B indicates the bundle of tanycyte radial ﬁbers extending dorsally. There was also cytoplasmic GFAP content at
both stages. In the stump region at 3 weeks of regeneration, GFAP was reduced in the radial processes (C) and was at low levels in the regenerative outgrowth (D).
Arrows indicate location of the denticulate ligaments associated with meninges surrounding the regenerative outgrowth (D). The bright red spots are red blood cell
autoﬂuorescence. Fluorescence microscope images.
proteins could be either supportive or competitive. Diﬀerential
eﬀects of Msi-1 on Notch-mediated stem cell properties
and p21-mediated cell cycling were not addressed in this
study.
Changes with Stage and State in
Xenopus and the Axolotl
Table 1 shows a summary of the expression changes of the
markers examined in this paper.
At its simplest, using Msi-1 as a marker, the major diﬀerence
reported here is between gene expression remaining active in an
intact Xenopus tadpole spinal cord as opposed to gene expression
requiring activation after adult Axolotl cord injury. Secondarily,
Msi-2 plays a diﬀerent role than Msi-1. Some form of Msi-
2 is active in the amphibian CNS throughout life, but some
isoforms, such as the lower molecular weight form of Xenopus
Msi-2 described here, may be a marker for loss of regeneration
competence.
Comparing Xenopus and Axolotl
Regeneration
There is a fundamental diﬀerence in CNS regenerative capacity
between anurans and urodeles. Both require the expression
of neural stem cell gene expression pathways, but in anurans
the stages at which CNS regeneration is successful (pre-
metamorphosis) ends well before the animal reached adulthood.
Many studies have used either anuran (frog and toad) or
urodele (salamander and newt) amphibians as a spinal cord
regeneration model. There are changes in neural stem cell
behavior for both anurans and urodeles in the course of growth
and diﬀerentiation of the CNS. There are, for example, known
qualitative diﬀerences in the formation of new neurons among
diﬀerent life stages in anuran and urodele amphibians (Detwiler,
1947; Holtzer, 1951, 1952; Butler and Ward, 1965, 1967; Stensaas,
1983; Davis et al., 1989).
The Clawed Frog Xenopus laevis and the Axolotl Ambystoma
mexicanum are widely used examples of those two orders of
Amphibia. Each species has advantages and disadvantages in
regeneration studies.
Xenopus has proven amenable to molecular biology studies.
However, the Xenopus regeneration competence period is only
pre-metamorphosis (rev. Shi, 2000). As thyroid hormone levels
rise, peak and fall during amphibian metamorphosis, gene
expression is greatly altered (Veldhoen et al., 2002).
Axolotl regeneration is not complicated by metamorphosis.
However, molecular biology studies in the Axolotl have lagged
behind Xenopus because of practical considerations: longer
development and generation times and the presence of a very
large genome. The molecular biology of the Axolotl is improving,
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
14
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 11 | Xenopus and Axolotl cell proliferation; PCNA antibody (red) and DAPI nuclear stain (blue) are used throughout. (A) PCNA staining in NF 50 spinal cord.
The ependymal layer cells are PCNA-positive. The PCNA labeled region coincides with the region of Msi-1-positive cells shown in Figure 7A. (B) NF 62 spinal cord
with PCNA antibody and DAPI staining. Some cells in the ependymal layer are still proliferating, but in a reduced area around the central canal. (C) Parasagittal
section shows regenerative outgrowth 7-days (7D) post-transection regenerating NF 50 tadpole spinal cord. The zone of outgrowth and lesion site is indicated within
the dashed line. The entire ependymal population contains proliferating cells. (D) Intact juvenile Axolotl (∼12 cm; less than 6 months old) spinal cord cross section
shows extensive ependymal and gray matter PCNA labeling. There is a substantial dorsal extension of labeled ependymal cells. (E) Intact adult Axolotl (∼25 cm;
approximately 2–3 years old) spinal cord cross section shows strong, but reduced PCNA labeling in the ependymal zone. The dorsal plume of PCNA-labeled cells no
longer exists and labeling is reduced in the gray matter laterally. (F) Parasagittal section showing PCNA-positive cells in mesenchymal ependymal outgrowth.
(Supplementary Figure 8 shows DIC image of the section with the outgrowth and stump region labeling for orientation.) Fluorescence microscope images.
however (Smith et al., 2005; Monaghan et al., 2007; Keinath
et al., 2015). The Axolotl genome has just been sequenced
and assembled (Nowoshilow et al., 2018). While the Axolotl
regenerates throughout its life, there are changes in the speed of
regeneration, cell behavior in intact vs. regenerating tissue, and
gene expression patterns among larvae, juveniles and adults (rev.
Chernoﬀet al., 2003). Larval regeneration is more rapid than
juvenile regeneration, which is more rapid than that in the adults
(rev. Piatt, 1955).
The Axolotl is also neotenic; it remains gilled and aquatic as an
adult, failing to go through most aspects of metamorphosis. For
example, the parathyroid glands remain undeveloped like those
in a larval amphibian, so its calcium regulation diﬀers, it retains
lateral line neurons and fails to develop a propulsive tongue
for capturing prey (Clarke, 1983; Feder and Burggren, 1992);
and continues growing throughout adult life. However, naturally
metamorphosed salamanders including the newts, regenerate
and experimentally metamorphosed Axolotls still regenerate
CNS as adults (Chernoﬀet al., 2003; rev. Tanaka and Ferretti,
2009; Amamoto et al., 2016). CNS regeneration appears, to
a signiﬁcant extent, to be a fundamental urodele amphibian
characteristic, not a result of neoteny. The Axolotl, like Xenopus,
also breeds relatively easily in captivity so no animals need be
collected from the wild.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
15
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 12 | Xenopus, Axolotl cell culture in EGF-containing culture medium (+EGF). (A–C) Phase contrast images. (A) Control NF 50 Xenopus ependymal cells in
+EGF, 1 day (1D) 6 to 8 large patches of cells adhere to each dish. (B) NF 64 cultures: small, islands of cells, 4–6/dish, exhibit poor attachment and growth even at
8 days (8D) in culture. (C) Control adult Axolotl 2 weeks regenerating ependymal outgrowth explants in EGF at 3 days (3D) culture, patches of cells continue to
expand in culture. (D,E) Fluorescent-Phalloidin probes are used to show the organization of F-actin in Xenopus and Axolotl +EGF cultures. (D) Alexa ﬂuor
488-Phalloidin green ﬂuorescence in a +EGF Xenopus ependymal culture shows typical mesenchymal cell F-actin organization, parallel to the long axis.
(E) Rhodamine-Phalloidin red ﬂuorescence in a +EGF Axolotl culture shows cell F-actin organization typical of mesenchymal outgrowth. DAPI nuclear stain used in
“D,E” (blue). (D,E) Fluorescence microscope images.
Larval (tadpole) Xenopus, Xenopus froglets, and Axolotls
at all life stages, are all animals with growing spinal cords
in which the ependymal cells have a role in growth that
may be separate from regeneration (Dent, 1962; Mitashov
and Maliovanova, 1982; Chernoﬀet al., 2002, 2003; Becker
and Becker, 2015). The changes that occur at diﬀerent
stages within an anuran or urodele species can be just
as critical as anuran vs. urodele diﬀerences. Life stage-
dependent diﬀerences described in this paper include changes
in expression of the stem/progenitor cell markers Msi-1 and
Msi-2, as well as proliferative behavior and growth factor
responsiveness.
Xenopus Msi-1 in Vivo
The Xenopus Musashi-1 homolog was strongly expressed in
the ventricular zone of spinal cord at NF 50 and remains
strongly expressed during the regeneration process (Figures 5, 7).
This is expected as Msi-1 expression was initially found in the
ventricular zone in the developing Xenopus brain through NF
50 (Richter et al., 1990). During regeneration, Msi-1 was highly
expressed in the cord stump tissue, as well as in the regenerative
outgrowth (Figures 7E,F), consistent with maintenance of
expression in intact cord at that stage. The Msi-1-positive cells
were localized around the central canal, which coincides with
the zone that contains neural stem cells in the mouse and
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
16
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 13 | Xenopus and Axolotl Msi-1, proliferation in vitro. (A) NF 50 Xenopus dish in situ hybridization with Msi-1 riboprobe shows Msi-1 expression is
maintained in culture. Bright ﬁeld image (B) Axolotl anti-Msi-1 antibody localization in 2 weeks regenerating mesenchymal ependymal outgrowth. Msi-1 expression is
maintained in culture. (C) Labeling with PCNA antibody showed NF 50 Xenopus ependymal cells are proliferative in culture. (D) Labeling with PCNA antibody
showed 2 weeks regenerating adult Axolotl mesenchymal ependymal outgrowth is proliferative. (B–D) Fluorescence microscope images. All of the cultures are in
EGF-containing medium.
the Sox2/3 positive zone in Xenopus (Sakakibara et al., 1996;
Muñoz et al., 2015). The decline of Msi-1 expression in Xenopus
at NF 62+ is consistent with the decline in the neural stem
cell gene Sox2/3 (Gaete et al., 2012; Muñoz et al., 2015). The
most prominent zone of Msi-1 expression at NF 62 by in situ
hybridization (Figure 7C) was in the ventral zone associated
with oligodendrocyte production (Maier and Miller, 1997), rather
than being expressed strongly and evenly in all ependymal
cells.
Xenopus Msi-2 in Vivo
There were two diﬀerent size isoforms of the Xenopus Msi-2
homolog, and the presence of the shorter isoform correlated
with loss of regeneration competence (Figure 5). Long and
short isoforms contained both of the mRNA-binding domains
(Figure 4), so the functional signiﬁcance of the shift in
abundance of these isoforms is not known. The existence of
isoforms of Xenopus Msi-2 is consistent with observations in
mouse, where Msi-1 and Msi-2 both have alternatively spliced
isoforms (Sakakibara et al., 2001). Spatial distribution of Msi-
2 is shown in Supplementary Figure 7, but the signal, which
coincides with the dorsal region of Msi-1 expression, may be
incomplete ventrally due to persistent erosion problems during
the section in situ process. In mouse, Msi-2 has a same spatial
expression pattern in spinal cord as Msi-1 (Sakakibara et al.,
2001).
Axolotl Msi-1 in Vivo
Axolotl Msi-1 showed conspicuously diﬀerent patterns of
expression across developmental stages and between regenerating
and intact adult spinal cord. In addition, the pattern diﬀered
completely from that seen in Xenopus. The presence or absence
of Msi-1 expression may reﬂect the developmental state of the
Axolotl CNS. Msi-1 levels were equal and strong in pre-hatching
Axolotl embryos and in juvenile nervous system where growth
is rapid and development continues (Figures 6, 8). The absence
of Msi-1 in intact adult cord and reappearance after injury
(Figures 6, 8) could be related to the relative stability of the cord
in a 2- to 3-year-old animal.
Axolotl Msi-2 in Vivo
The diﬀerence seen between Msi-1 and Msi-2 across Axolotl life
stages (Figure 6) suggests that Msi-2 may play a diﬀerent role in
Axolotl ependymal cells than it does in Xenopus or that there are
additional, undetected, isoforms of Axolotl Msi-2. The high levels
of Msi-2 seen across Xenopus stages are not present in the Axolotl:
the adult Axolotl has low levels of Msi-2 that do not upregulate
during regeneration.
Spatial localization studies for Axolotl Msi-2 failed: available
antibodies
produced
non-speciﬁc
staining.
Also,
in
situ
hybridization beyond the early larval stages is problematical for
adult Axolotl and other urodele CNS tissue for unknown reasons
(e.g., Zhang et al., 2000; Makanae et al., 2016). This is not meant
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
17
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
TABLE 1 | Expression summary for markers, species, stages of development, and intact vs. transected cord.
Species and Stage
Msi-1 mRNA, Ab
Msi-2L
Msi-2S
Shh mRNA
GFAP Ab
PCNA Ab
mRNA
mRNA
or Ab
Xenopus NF 50–53
Strong, ependymal, gray
matter
Strong
Absent
Strong
No GFAP gene
Strong ependymal
Xenopus NF 50–53
regeneration
Upregulated
Strong
Absent
Changed
distribution
–
Strong ependymal
Xenopus NF 62
Low; restricted ependymal
zones
Strong
Strong
Present
–
More restricted than NF 50
Xenopus NF 62+ cut
(Suppl) No increase over
NF 62+ intact
–
Xenopus adult
Lower
Strong
–
Axolotl embryo
Strong; ependymal, gray
matter
Medium
Strong
Axolotl juvenile
Strong; ependymal, gray
matter
Strong
Present
Strong
Radial processes
Ependymal, gray matter
Axolotl adult
Absent
Low
Present
Low
Radial processes
Ependymal, gray matter,
less extensive than juvenile
Axolotl adult regeneration
Strongly upregulated
Low
Present
Strong
Reduced
Ependymal outgrowth and
stump
mRNA or antibody expression is listed according to species, life stage and intact or lesioned cord for Msi1, long and short forms of Msi-2 (Msi-2L, Msi-2S), sonic
hedgehog (Shh), glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) expression. (Suppl) Indicates data in the supplementary section from
experiments that were performed in a related, but not strictly equivalent form to that included in the paper.
as a criticism of the work from any laboratory: something in
Axolotl tissue produces extraordinarily high background in adult
urodele CNS so that only a very high signal shows over that
background.
Structural Similarities, Differences and
Regeneration
Ependymal Zone Organization and Marker
Expression
Xenopus
Dorsal expansion of the Xenopus ependymal zone starts soon
after hatching (Roberts, 2000). The stage 50–52 Xenopus
ependymal cells showed a dorsal/dorsolateral extension of Msi-
1 expression (Figure 7A). In NF 62+ tadpoles the pattern
was diﬀerent with a reduced Msi-1 expression generally and
isolated zones of stronger expression ﬂanking the central canal
(Figure 7C). The most ventral of these areas corresponds to a
zone generating oligodendrocytes in the developing cord of other
species (rev. Leigh and Maden, 2005).
Axolotl
In the Axolotl, the late tailbud stage embryo had broad expression
of Msi-1 mRNA and protein throughout the spinal cord
(Figures 8A,B) that would be expected in a vertebrate embryo.
The intact juvenile Axolotl cord showed a dorsal plume of Msi-
1 expression even more extensive than that in young Xenopus
tadpoles (Figure 7C). The ependymal zone in the adult Axolotl
cord has multiple ranks of cells (nuclear stain only Figure 8D)
that indicate an absence of a pronounced dorsal plume of cells as
well as an absence of Msi-1 expression.
The dorsal extension of the ependymal zone of the spinal
cord may be the common characteristic of amphibian CNS
development. In both Xenopus and the Axolotl the dorsal
extension of ependymal cells exists well beyond the embryonic
stages, into the juvenile stage in the Axolotl (Figures 8C, 11D).
In embryos this is the region in which populations of dorsal
interneurons are produced during spinal cord development (rev.
Leigh and Maden, 2005). It is also known to be the zone in
which the tanycytes, a specialized dorsal ependymal population
will be present in the adult (Figure 10B; Bodega et al., 1994;
Meletis et al., 2008). Pax7 and Pax6 protein are still present in
larval and adult Axolotl cord, so neurogenesis from the dorsal
plume ependymal cells is a possibility (Mchedlishvili et al., 2007).
However, the formation of tanycytes, dorsal ependymal cells with
close blood vessel associations that transfer material between the
cerebrospinal ﬂuid and blood, is a strong possibility at these
late stages (rev. Moore, 2016). Formation of tanycytes would
also require dorsal-ventral regionalization signals within the
ependymal zone.
Radial processes, GFAP
There are similarities and diﬀerences in the structure of
regeneration competent (NF 50–53), non-regenerating (NF 62+)
Xenopus spinal cord and Axolotls. Both the neotenic adult
Axolotl (Figure 10B) and metamorphosed urodeles, such as
Pleurodeles waltl (the Spanish Ribbed Newt) continue to maintain
radial ependymal ﬁbers as adults that terminate in endfeet at the
pial surface of the cord (rev. Tanaka and Ferretti, 2009). The
radial processes are maintained in adult anuran cord, as well,
(rev. Tanaka and Ferretti, 2009). As seen in Xenopus, retention of
radial ependymal cell processes is not a guarantee of regeneration
competence (rev. Chernoﬀet al., 2003).
Loss of GFAP content as ependymal cells reorganize to
produce regenerative outgrowth is a common urodele feature.
In Pleurodeles waltl, during tail bulb outgrowth, GFAP is
downregulated and vimentin and nestin intermediate ﬁlament
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
18
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
proteins are upregulated (Walder et al., 2003). Based on antibody
localization, the literature has suggested for years that there
are GFAP-containing intermediate ﬁlaments in the radial glial
ﬁbers in all amphibians studied, urodele or anuran, though
the regional distribution of GFAP+ cell processes along the
dorsal-ventral axis can vary by species (Bodega et al., 1994;
rev. Tanaka and Ferretti, 2009). However, recent studies show
that Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis do not have GFAP
genes, and that GFAP antibodies are crossreacting with other
intermediate ﬁlament proteins (Gervasi et al., 2000; Martinez-
De Luna et al., 2017). The suggestion is that though the
amphibian orders urodela (or caudata) and gymnophiona
(caecilians) have a GFAP gene, the evolution of anura resulted
in loss of the ancestral gene and they use vimentin or
peripherin in its place (Gervasi et al., 2000; Martinez-De
Luna et al., 2017). It is diﬃcult to see how substitution of
one intermediate ﬁlament protein for another would cause
spinal cord regeneration failure, when there is so much
intermediate ﬁlament heterogeneity in amphibians ependymal
radial processes to start with Bodega et al. (1994). The radial
process intermediate ﬁlament proteins do, however, represent a
useful set of markers of ependymal cell reorganization during
regeneration.
Ependymal reorganization and regeneration
The in vitro results presented here (Figures 12, 13) establish
some equivalency between the in vivo and in vitro behavior of
the cells that is useful in a discussion of tissue reorganization for
regeneration. The disorganization of amphibian ependymal cells
for regenerative outgrowth, and later reformation of a central
canal are both critical to regeneration of a functional spinal
cord.
The in vivo regenerative outgrowth process constitutes a loss,
or partial loss, of epithelial organization. This is manifested as
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in the Axolotl body
cord (Figure 10), and as bulb-like outgrowth in other urodeles
such as Pleurodeles waltl and Notophthalmus viridescens (Eastern
Red-Spotted Newt) (Walder et al., 2003; Zukor et al., 2011).
The bulb-like outgrowth, with loss of basal lamina and a partial
disorganization of the epithelial ependymal cells could represent
a form of collective cell migration into the extracellular matrix-
ﬁlled lesion site (Friedl and Gilmour, 2009).
EGF and ependymal cells
Epidermal growth factor, along with ﬁbroblast growth factor-2
(FGF-2), can activate ependymal cell proliferation when infused
after mammalian SCI (rat, Kojima and Tator, 2002). EGF is
also one of several growth factors that can support epithelial-to-
mesenchymal transition through apical transmembrane receptor
tyrosine kinases (rev. Savagner, 2001). EGF is known to
support cell migration modes associated with both edge cell-
mediated collective migration or fully mesenchymal migration
in EMT (Barrandon and Green, 1987; Wells et al., 1999;
Savagner, 2001; Friedl and Gilmour, 2009; Park and Han, 2009).
Present and prior studies show that EGF maintains Axolotl
ependymal cells in a state of mesenchymal outgrowth in vitro
for extended periods (Figure 13; O’Hara and Chernoﬀ, 1994;
Chernoﬀet al., 1998). Although the Xenopus NF 50–53
outgrowth in vivo is more bulb-like, with only partial loss of
epithelial structure, the Xenopus ependymal cells responded to
EGF in vitro with mesenchymal outgrowth like that of the Axolotl
cells (Figure 13). This diﬀerence between in vivo and in vitro
ependymal outgrowth in Xenopus could reﬂect both substrate
and culture medium conditions that diﬀer from the in vivo
environment that induce changes in integrins and growth factor
receptor production.
Cell Proliferation and Regeneration
Xenopus in Vivo and in Vitro
In the rapidly growing/developing CNS of NF 50 Xenopus
tadpoles
even
intact
cord
is
Msi-1-positive
and
highly
proliferative (Figure 11A). Ependymal outgrowth into the
lesion site is also highly proliferative (PCNA+; Figure 11).
Proliferation is maintained in vitro (Figures 11A,C, 12A,C).
The PCNA+ status of the entire NF 50–53 Xenopus ependymal
zone makes it likely that proliferation forms an important part
of regenerative outgrowth from the stump in addition to any
migratory cell behavior.
At NF 62, the zone of proliferating cells was reduced in vivo
(Figure 11B). This could be related to a decrease in growth rate,
or it may be related to the accompanying decrease in Msi-1
levels (Figure 7C) and a decrease in neural stem cell properties
reported by others in NF 62+ spinal cord (Muñoz et al., 2015). In
culture, the change in behavior at NF 62+ is manifested partly as
poor adhesion, which made PCNA and Msi-1 antibody staining
procedures impossible.
Axolotl in Vivo and in Vitro
Axolotl PCNA labeling showed that cell proliferation in the
body region spinal cord continued throughout the life stages
examined. Axolotls are still growing as adults and the PCNA
labeling reﬂected that. There was no evidence of distinct zones of
proliferation distinguishing intact stump cord and regenerating
ependymal cell outgrowth in the adult, unlike the high PCNA
labeling zone described by Rost et al. (2016) for larval cord
after tail amputation. Axolotl ependymal cells in the regenerative
outgrowth were proliferative and Msi-1 positive (Figures 8F,
11E,F), but intact adult Axolotl cord ependymal cells were
proliferative and Msi-1 negative (Figures 8D, 11E). Msi-1 and
proliferation are not irrevocably linked in the adult. Perhaps
the low levels of Msi-2 are suﬃcient to maintain normal Notch
signaling for the proliferation required in intact adult Axolotl
CNS growth. Alternatively, the coexpression of Msi-1 and PCNA
in regenerating adult tissue and in vitro may be a consequence
of intracellular signaling triggered by mesenchymal ependymal
organization (Figures 8E, 10D, 13C, rev. Kalluri and Weinberg,
2009).
Msi and Tissue Organization
In
Axolotl
body
region
spinal
cord,
a
clear
epithelial/mesenchymal transition (EMT) process is involved
in regenerative outgrowth (O’Hara et al., 1992; Chernoﬀet al.,
2003). In Xenopus body cord gap replacement there is some
disorganization, but the outgrowth assumes a more bulb-like
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
19
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

Chernoff et al.
Musashi and Ependymal Cells
organization, like that in newt cord or Axolotl tail amputation
and the ampulla in Xenopus tail cord (rev. Chernoﬀ, 1996; Clarke
and Ferretti, 1998; Gargioli and Slack, 2004; Zukor et al., 2011).
The role of Msi expression in EMT or bulb outgrowth is not
clear-cut. For example, Msi-1 and Msi-2 are overexpressed in a
number of human carcinomas (cancers of epithelial origin), but
downregulated in others (rev. Katz et al., 2014). In some cases
Msi-1, -2 expression correlates with maintenance of epithelial
organization and sometimes with EMT (Katz et al., 2014). In
regenerating Xenopus and Axolotl spinal cord, Msi1 expression
does not appear to be linked to epithelial organization, because it
is strongly expressed during regenerative outgrowth in vivo and
in vitro (Figures 5, 6, 13).
The pre-existing presence of Msi-1 (NF 50–53 Xenopus)
vs. upregulation of Msi-1 (adult Axolotl) in regenerative
ependymal outgrowth depends upon the life stage of the
animal. The tadpoles are still developing; the adult Axolotl
is mature. EGF (Figure 12) maintains the ependymal cells
in a mesenchymal state in the cultures. Mesenchymally
organized Axolotl ependymal cells always show Msi-1 expression
(Figure 13). The EGF+ cultures also show that the regeneration-
incompetent (NF 62+) Xenopus cells can no longer respond
to conditions that maintain mesenchymal outgrowth. This
correlates with the lower levels of Msi-1 seen in Xenopus
NF 62 section in situ hybridization and semi-quantitative RT-
PCR.
Dorsal-ventral Patterning
Shh in Xenopus
In the intact NF 50–53 Xenopus cord and in the regenerated
cord,
Shh
is
coexpressed
with
Msi-1
in
the
ﬂoorplate
(Figures 7A,B,H,I). The bulb-like regenerating outgrowth
of the Xenopus cord lesion site maintained zones of gene
expression along the dorsal-ventral axis with a Shh+ ventral
zone largely complementary to Msi-1 outgrowth (Figures 7F,G
and Supplementary Figure 6C). Xenopus dorsal-ventral axis
expression of Msi-1 and Shh was coincident across the ﬂoorplate
when a central canal was present in intact or reformed cord, and
complementary only during regenerative outgrowth (Figure 7
and Supplementary Figure 6). There were PCNA+ cells
throughout the Xenopus regeneration tissue so the segregation
of Msi-1 and Shh expression was not related to isolated zones of
proliferating cells (Figure 11C).
Shh expression persists in the non-regenerating NF 62+
Xenopus cord (Figure 7D). The Shh is localized to the ﬂoorplate,
which remains Msi-1 positive (Figure 7C).
Shh in Axolotl
In larval Axolotl tail cord, Shh expression is localized to the
ﬂoorplate, as it is in higher vertebrate development (Schnapp
et al., 2005). The very low levels of Shh mRNA in the intact
adult Axolotl body region cord and strong upregulation after
transection paralleled the pattern of Msi-1 mRNA and protein
expression (Figures 6, 9). This reinforces the concept that the
intact adult Axolotl cord is in a relatively stable, quiescent state
developmentally that reactivates a developmental process after
injury.
Work from other laboratories has shown that localized zones
of Pax-6 and Pax-7 protein expression persist along the dorsal-
ventral axis in intact adult Axolotl cord (Mchedlishvili et al.,
2007). During spinal cord development, Delta/Notch signaling is
upstream of Shh expression, which, in turn, regulates Pax gene
expression in dorsal-ventral patterning (rev. Leigh and Maden,
2005). It remains to be seen whether the upregulation of Notch
pathway associated Msi-1 expression acts upstream of Shh in the
regenerating Axolotl cord.
The present study examined Msi family mRNA-binding
protein expression known to be involved in neural stem
cell behavior (Sakakibara et al., 1996; Good et al., 1998) in
Xenopus and the Axolotl. What diﬀers from other studies is the
examination of (1) gap regeneration as opposed to amputation
and unidirectional regeneration in (2) body region cord, not
tail, where a combined cord and non-cord blastema forms, and
(3) presents comparison of multiple life stages in Xenopus and
the Axolotl. The choice of body region cord (above the cauda
equina) makes comparison with mammalian cord injury models
a little more direct than tail amputation studies. The use of adult
Axolotl, where Msi-1 must be reactivated, is also more relevant to
mammalian CNS injury responses.
ETHICS STATEMENT
This study using amphibian animals was carried out according
to NIH Guide under supervision of the IUPUI School of Science
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (SARC).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All
of
the
authors
contributed
to
planning
and
execution of experiments. EC, HS, and DS executed the
immunohistochemistry experiments. KS and TB-A executed
the molecular biology studies. EC, HS, and KS executed the cell
culture studies.
FUNDING
Most of this research was funded by the W.M. Keck Foundation
and the Morton Fund to Cure Paralysis. The Xenopus in situ
studies were obtained with funding from Eli Lilly and Company.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Peter Good of the Louisiana State Medical
Center for his generous gift of the original clones of Nrp-1 and
Xrp-1.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fncel.2018.
00045/full#supplementary-material
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
20
February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 45

===== Cigliola2020_DMM_Zebrafish+SCRreview =====
REVIEW
Building bridges, not walls: spinal cord regeneration in zebrafish
Valentina Cigliola1,2, Clayton J. Becker1,2 and Kenneth D. Poss1,2,*
ABSTRACT
Spinal cord injury is a devastating condition in which massive cell
death and disruption of neural circuitry lead to long-term chronic
functional impairment and paralysis. In mammals, spinal cord tissue
has minimal capacity to regenerate after injury. In stark contrast, the
regeneration
of
a
completely
transected
spinal
cord
and
accompanying reversal of paralysis in adult zebrafish is arguably
one of the most spectacular biological phenomena in nature. Here, we
review reports from the last decade that dissect the mechanisms of
spinal cord regeneration in zebrafish. We highlight recent progress as
well as areas requiring emphasis in a line of study that has great
potential to uncover strategies for human spinal cord repair.
KEY WORDS: Regeneration, Spinal cord, Zebrafish
Introduction
Movement is a fundamental method to interact with the world
around us. Under normal conditions, our central nervous system
(CNS) sends signals through descending neural tracts to control
movement. This process occurs automatically such that it is
difficult to conceive what life would be like if those tracts were
interrupted.
Spinal cord injury (SCI) in mammals causes massive cell death.
Severed distal axons that have lost contact with neuronal cell bodies
dissolve through a stereotyped process known as Wallerian
degeneration. Occasionally, proximal axonal tracts survive and
sprout, but, in the vast majority of cases, they fail to regenerate or re-
innervate appropriate targets (Cajal, 1928). A major physical barrier
to axon regrowth is the formation of a heterogeneous mass of tissue
mainly
consisting
of
reactive
astrocytes,
fibroblasts
and
inflammatory immune cells, commonly referred to as a glial scar
(Fig. 1). To complicate matters, local astrocyte loss can alter
neuronal
ion
homeostasis,
and
oligodendrocyte
deficiency
contributes to poor myelination and impaired axonal activity
(Grossman et al., 2001; Thuret et al., 2006; Bradbury and
Burnside, 2019; Courtine and Sofroniew, 2019).
Because of this poor capacity for the CNS to regenerate disrupted
circuits, and because there are no effective strategies to boost this
capacity, most affected individuals remain paralyzed for their entire
lives. SCI, and all complications associated with impaired sensory
and motor function, currently affect approximately 291,000 people
in the United States, with an average age at injury of about 43 years
(National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center, 2019). For those
paralyzed individuals, the discovery of methods to re-establish
functional neuronal connections is critical, as these could be
coupled with electrostimulatory and engineering approaches to
therapeutically relieve paralysis.
Unlike humans or commonly studied mammalian model
systems, a number of vertebrates can regenerate crushed or
transected spinal cord tissue at the adult stage. Regrowth of
severed axons, repair of neuronal circuits and functional recovery
to full movement capacity have been observed in tadpole-stage
frogs (Edwards-Faret et al., 2017), in adult salamanders (Butler
and Ward, 1967; Piatt and Piatt, 1958), to some extent in certain
reptiles (Rehermann et al., 2009; Simpson, 1964), in lampreys
(Cohen et al., 1986; McClellan, 1990; Oliphint et al., 2010;
Rovainen, 1976; Selzer, 1978) and in teleost fish species (Becker
et al., 1997; Bernstein, 1964). Researchers employing amphibians
and reptiles are developing, or are positioned to develop, numerous
transgenic and genetic tools for dissecting the mechanisms of
these events (Tazaki et al., 2017; Jacyniak et al., 2017). In this
article, we focus on studies in zebrafish, which can be
experimentally manipulated by arguably the most mature toolset
among vertebrates with elevated regenerative capacity. Zebrafish
have other advantages, such as their relatively short generation
times compared to other non-mammalian species that can be
genetically modified (e.g. salamanders) and low maintenance
costs (Becker et al., 1997; Hui et al., 2010) (Fig. 2).
Spinal cord regeneration in zebrafish is complex, involving
inflammation,
cell
death,
cell
migration,
cell
proliferation,
neurogenesis,
axonogenesis,
and
tissue-
and
circuit-level
remodeling (Hui et al., 2014). Many questions inherent to the
processes that occur during spinal cord regeneration are still
unresolved and, perhaps surprisingly, are the subject of only a
handful of research groups worldwide. Here, we present an
overview of the past decade of experiments assessing mechanisms
of spinal cord regeneration in larval and adult zebrafish, keeping in
mind the recognized potential pitfalls of morpholino-based studies.
We focus on the molecular signals implicated in hallmark events
through which lost tissue is recovered. We anticipate that these
discoveries will direct future investigations and suggest avenues to
boost regeneration in mammalian species.
Establishing a progenitor pool for new neurons
Studies over the past decade, reviewed below, have indicated that,
upon injury, the adult zebrafish spinal cord triggers proliferation of
the resident neural progenitors and their subsequent differentiation
into new neurons that are able to integrate into the existing circuitry
(Ghosh and Hui, 2016). Interestingly, neurons are produced in
excess upon injury: this is true for serotonergic neurons, the
numbers of which increase fivefold compared to those in uninjured
control animals (Kuscha et al., 2012b), and motor neurons, which
are generated in excess compared to what is later stabilized in the
spinal cord (Reimer et al., 2008). These phenomena indicate that the
level of neurogenesis upon injury is not tightly regulated.
Neurons have been proposed to arise from a special type of cell
with its soma lining the spinal cord’s central canal and long radial
1Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA. 2Regeneration Next, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
*Author for correspondence (kenneth.poss@duke.edu)
V.C., 0000-0002-1596-7332; K.D.P., 0000-0002-6743-5709
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed.
1
© 2020. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Disease Models & Mechanisms (2020) 13, dmm044131. doi:10.1242/dmm.044131
Disease Models & Mechanisms

processes contacting the pial surface with a foot-like structure.
These cells, first identified in the brain, share some features with
radial glia, such as expression of the astrocyte marker glial fibrillary
acidic protein (Gfap) and of aquaporin-4 and glutamine synthase.
They possess functions such as sealing the blood-brain barrier or
regulating ion homeostasis, while also lining the central canal and
being ciliated (Becker and Becker, 2015). Because of this hybrid
nature and function, these progenitors are referred to as ependymo-
radial glial cells (ERGs). The idea that ERGs would be the major
source of new neurons in the CNS upon injury was first proposed
after observing that they normally proliferate slowly, but respond to
injury with a strong increase in proliferation in the adult zebrafish
brain (Grandel et al., 2006; Rothenaigner et al., 2011). Using a cell-
labeling strategy in adult newts, Berg et al. identified ERGs as a
source of new tyrosine hydroxylase-positive (TH+) neurons after
ablation of dopaminergic cells by stereotaxic injection of 6-
hydroxydopamine (Berg et al., 2010). The possibility that ERGs
could behave in a similar manner in adult zebrafish was first
proposed in 2008, when Reimer et al. followed labeled olig2-
expressing ERGs in a Tg(olig2:EGFP) transgenic zebrafish line and
observed that, after SCI, some of the newly generated neurons
identified by HB9 (also known as Mnx1) expression (a marker of
motor neurons) also expressed EGFP (Reimer et al., 2008). More
direct evidence that ERGs give rise to CNS neurons came in 2011,
when Kroehne et al. genetically marked adult zebrafish brain ERGs
for the first time using a Cre-LoxP system to irreversibly trace their
progeny. In this study, the authors used a transgenic line expressing
a bicistronic mRNA coding for mCherry and CreERT2 recombinase
under the control of the zebrafish her4.1 promoter, with expression
increasing in proliferating ERGs upon injury. These fish were
crossed to a line allowing irreversible, Cre-released EGFP
expression upon tamoxifen administration. After a stabbing brain
lesion, the newly generated neurons were EGFP labeled, indicating
that they were derived from ERGs (Kroehne et al., 2011).
Of note, a non-radial glial cell population with stem cell
properties named ‘boundary cells’ or ‘progenitor pools’ has been
reported to give rise to ERGs and neurons in the zebrafish
telencephalon (de Oliveira-Carlos et al., 2013). It is important to
determine which progenitor population(s) exist in spinal cord and
how they behave upon injury, even if their contribution to
regeneration is expected to be minor. ERGs expressing the
transcription factor foxj1a and proliferating in response to injury
have been identified in zebrafish larvae and adults, with their
expansion proposed to depend on Hedgehog (Hh) signaling.
Indeed, treatment of zebrafish larvae with the Hh inhibitor
cyclopamine
after
spinal
cord
transection
reduced
foxj1a
transcript levels and decreased ERG proliferation (Ribeiro et al.,
2017). Notably, ERGs also display regional differences, i.e. they
have different transcription factor expression profiles according to
their dorsoventral position in the central canal (Becker and Becker,
2015), an indicator of the specific neuronal subtype they will give
rise to, as discussed below.
Key
Immune cell
Fibroblast
Astrocyte
Reactive astrocyte 
Oligodendrocyte
Abortive axon sprouting
Astrocytic and fibrotic scars
Tissue bridging
Axons
Bridging
glia
Fig. 1. Different responses to spinal cord injury (SCI) in zebrafish and mammals. Representation of different cellular events occurring after SCI in zebrafish
and mice. Upon SCI in mammals, a complex cascade of events occurs, leading to the formation of a scar at the lesion site constructed by stromal-derived
fibroblasts, inflammatory immune cells and hypertrophic astrocytes. The scar impedes the regrowth of spared axons. Conversely, in zebrafish, injury induces the
infiltration of immune cells followed by bridging of glial cells and axonal tracts, leading to functional regeneration.
2
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2020) 13, dmm044131. doi:10.1242/dmm.044131
Disease Models & Mechanisms

Motor neuron regeneration
Motor neurons control muscle movements by transmitting impulses
directly from the spinal cord to skeletal muscle. As reviewed here,
their regeneration is influenced byan array of local and remote signals.
Transcriptional regulators
Lineage-tracing experiments have revealed that a subset of ERGs
lining the central canal in dorsoventral positions increase expression
of olig2, nkx6.1 and pax6 (of which zebrafish has two orthologs,
pax6a and pax6b) upon SCI, where they proliferate and act as motor
neuron progenitors in adult zebrafish (Reimer et al., 2008, 2009).
This same expression signature has also been observed in zebrafish
larvae upon nitroreductase technology-enabled ablation of motor
neurons, suggesting that their targeted loss is sufficient to trigger
regeneration from ERGs (Ohnmacht et al., 2016).
Consistent with cells in the ependyma that possess neural stem cell
properties, Guo et al. found that mRNA coding for the transcription
factor gene sox11b is localized in a subset of cells lining the central
canal upon adult spinal cord transection, as well as in newly
differentiated neurons. Sox11b could ostensibly act by upregulating
the expression of the pro-neural basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor ascl1a and the neural stem cell-associated gene nestin, both of
which participate in neuronal differentiation during embryogenesis
(Guo et al., 2011). Aside from Sox11b, Ogoi et al. reported the
upregulation of Sox2 in ependymal cells following spinal cord
transection in adult zebrafish and suggested a role for this
transcription factor in proliferation. Six to 9% of Sox2-expressing
cells also expressed the neuronal marker HuC/D (also known as
Elavl3/4), indicating that Sox2-positive cells are contributing to
regenerative neurogenesis (Ogai et al., 2014). It will be important to
further elucidate the roles of Sox11b and Sox2, and of other
transcriptional complexes and their corresponding target genes that
constitute the neurogenic programs activated by injury.
Signaling pathways
As is often the case in the context of regeneration, the signals first
deployed in developing embryos are re-engaged during spinal cord
regeneration,
with
a
handful
implicated
in
motor
neuron
regeneration. Among these, Hh signaling appears to have a crucial
role, as transcript levels for the receptor patched 1 and the co-
receptor smoothened are increased in Olig2+/Nkx6.1+/Pax6+
progenitors
upon
injury.
Blockade
of
Hh
signaling
with
cyclopamine impairs motor neuron regeneration in adult zebrafish
(Reimer et al., 2009). As might be expected, zebrafish have also
been studied to elucidate the molecular influences that restrict, rather
than promote, regeneration. For example, Notch signaling, as
assessed by in situ hybridization of Hairy-related (Her) genes, is
reactivated upon injury in adults, predominantly in Olig+ progenitor
cells that give rise to HB9-expressing motor neurons. Induced
transgenic expression of an activated Notch1a receptor reduces
motor neuron regeneration, concomitant with attenuated neural
progenitor proliferation. In this same study, blockade of Notch
signaling
with
the
gamma-secretase
inhibitor
(2S)-N-[(3,5-
difluorophenyl)acetyl]-L-alanyl-2-phenyl]glycine 1,1-dimethylethyl
ester (DAPT) conversely increased motor neuron generation
(Dias et al., 2012).
In addition to Notch and Hh, fibroblast growth factor (Fgf)
signaling has recently been implicated in adult motor neuron
regeneration: Fgf3 has been described to direct neurogenesis of
islet1 (also known as isl1)-expressing motor neurons and to induce
axonogenesis in cMet (also known as Met)-expressing motor
neurons. The effects of Fgfs are likely to be mediated through the
Mapk pathway and appear to be conserved in mammalian cells
(Goldshmit et al., 2018). In addition to these pathways,
Briona et al. used an inducible fate-mapping system to show that
Gfap+ cells in zebrafish larvae display neurogenic potential upon
injury that depends upon the levels of Wnt/β-catenin signaling
(Briona et al., 2015).
Inflammatory signals
The immune system is now well recognized as a key regulator of
tissue regeneration, acting either as a pro- or an anti- regenerative
influence (Eming et al., 2017; Karin and Clevers, 2016).
With respect to zebrafish spinal cord regeneration, suppressing the
Larval stage
Adult stage
1 dpi
2 dpi
3 dpi
Uninjured
Loss of 
tissue continuity
Tissue bridging
Remodeling
Uninjured
Loss of 
tissue continuity
Tissue bridging
Remodeling
3 dpi
15 dpi
30 dpi
Fig. 2. Time course of spinal cord regeneration in zebrafish. (Top) In zebrafish larvae, spinal cord transection destroys axonal and glial connections, eliciting
the formation of a tissue bridge that spans the injury epicenter by 2 days post-injury (dpi). A remodeling phase follows at 3 dpi. (Bottom) A similar response to injury
is observed in adult zebrafish. By 15 dpi, some axonal and glial processes have traversed the injury site. Subsequent remodeling reconstitutes structure.
3
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2020) 13, dmm044131. doi:10.1242/dmm.044131
Disease Models & Mechanisms

inflammatory response that follows SCI in larvae with the
immunosuppressant
dexamethasone
reduces
motor
neuron
regeneration (Ohnmacht et al., 2016). In adult zebrafish, elegant
genetic studies have dissected the roles of regulatory T cells (Tregs)
in spinal cord regeneration. Tregs are characterized by expression of
foxp3, and their genetic ablation disrupts normal regeneration of
spinal cord tissue in zebrafish. Tregs are proposed to act by inducing
proliferation of Sox2+ neural progenitors, and they appear to remain
near or in direct contact with HuC/D-expressing newly formed
neurons after injury. One of the likely roles of Tregs is the
production of the neurogenic factor Neurotrophin 3, as systemic
delivery of this factor partially rescues the regeneration defects
observed in fish lacking Tregs (Hui et al., 2017; Ogai et al., 2014).
Neurotransmitters
Dopamine (DA) has been reported to act as a remote signal affecting
motor neuron regeneration after SCI in adult zebrafish. DA is
proposed to be released by brain-derived dopaminergic TH1+ axons
sprouting after spinal cord transection in areas rostral to the lesion
and in close proximity to Olig2+ ERGs. Reimer and colleagues
reported that endogenous DA is required for the regeneration of
motor neurons, and that intraperitoneal injections of a DA agonist
increase the proportion of regenerated motor neurons. DA action
appears to be mediated through the D4 receptor, a negative regulator
of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)/protein kinase A
(PKA) signaling pathway. Supporting this hypothesis, inhibition of
cAMP in larvae using the SQ22536 inhibitor significantly increased
the development of motor neurons. Conversely, increasing cAMP
levels through rolipram administration reduced motor neuron
numbers. As cAMP controls PKA activity, which negatively
regulates Hh signaling, the authors suggested that DA likely
influences spinal cord neurogenesis by feeding into Hh signaling
(Reimer
et
al.,
2013).
Similar
to
dopamine,
serotonin,
a
neurotransmitter supplied to the spinal cord mainly by descending
axons from the brain, induces regeneration of motor neurons from
ERGs, which express serotonin receptors. Ablation of serotonergic
axons in adult zebrafish through toxins abolished motor neuron
regeneration, and, conversely, increasing serotonin levels through
intraperitoneal injections increased the number of regenerated
motor neurons (Barreiro-Iglesias et al., 2015). Although there is
more to elucidate regarding the direct and/or indirect effects of DA
and serotonin on ERGs, these studies suggest an intriguing crosstalk
between brain-derived neuronal projections and ERGs.
Interneuron regeneration
Bilateral movement is coordinated by interneurons. V0-V2 classes
of interneurons have been directly identified in zebrafish, whereas
the presence of V3 interneurons is still uncertain. Interneuron
regeneration upon SCI has been evaluated using transgenic
zebrafish in which the regulatory sequences upstream of vsx1, an
early marker for undifferentiated V2 interneurons, direct EGFP
expression (Batista et al., 2008; Kuscha et al., 2012b). While
expression of this transgene is not detected in the uninjured spinal
cord, large numbers of EGFP-expressing V2 cells are evident in the
mediolateral ependymal region upon injury. These interneuron
progenitors enter the cell cycle and have been proposed to be newly
generated from a specific ERG population co-expressing the
markers Pax6 and Nkx6.1, and are located more dorsally in the
ependymal region with respect to the progenitors giving rise to
motor neurons (Kuscha et al., 2012b). While these studies are
interesting,
permanent
cell
lineage-tracing
tools
allowing
conditional or inducible tagging of specific cell types to track
their fate changes over time are needed to demonstrate the full
differentiation sequence of ERGs into interneurons. In a separate
study, Briona and Dorsky reported the presence of a cell population
in the ependymal region of the spinal cord that expresses the
transcription factor dbx1a. Interestingly, cells expressing dbx1a
(one of the two zebrafish dbx1 orthologs) exhibit a proliferative and
neurogenic response to injury in zebrafish larvae, as they
incorporate 5′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU) and express the
neuronal
marker
HuC/D
(Briona
and
Dorsky,
2014).
The
neuronal subtype derived from dbx1a+ cells remains unknown, as
genetic fate-mapping studies have not been performed to trace these
cells. However, studies performed in mice found that Dbx1-
expressing cells give rise to V0 and V1 interneurons during
development (Pierani et al., 2001). Consequently, one can speculate
that dbx1+ cell-derived neurons belong to this subpopulation. In
addition, whether cells expressing dbx1 act as progenitors upon
injury in adult zebrafish is unknown.
Serotonergic and dopaminergic neuron regeneration
Dopaminergic and serotonergic systems play an important role in
modulating spinal locomotor circuits. Upon spinal cord transection
in adult zebrafish, TH1+ (mainly dopaminergic) and serotonin
receptor
(5-HT+)-positive
(serotonergic)
terminals
and
cells
undergo major changes. TH1+ cell bodies are generally located in
the brain and project into the spinal cord. Spinal cord lesions induce
changes in TH1+ terminal varicosities that are regenerated, although
without re-establishing the same complexity as before injury.
Conversely, 5-HT+ varicosity indices are 80% higher than in
unlesioned animals at 6 weeks post-injury. In addition, unlike TH1+
cell bodies, 5-HT+ cell bodies are newly generated after injury at the
lesion site (Kuscha et al., 2012a). 5-HT+ cells originate from ERGs
located around the central canal, in a region comprising the Olig2 +
zone and a more ventral zone expressing Nkx6.1 and Sonic
hedgehog a (Shha), as assessed by 5-HT antibody staining in olig2:
GFP or shha:GFP reporter lines (Kuscha et al., 2012a,b; Reimer
et al., 2009).
Regeneration of undefined neuronal subtypes
Several additional molecular cues have been shown to affect
neurogenesis upon spinal cord transection, although for some of
them the neuronal subtype they give rise to remains undefined.
Nelson et al. reported that glucocorticoid (GC) signaling negatively
affects neurogenesis by acting on ependymal glia. They found that
expression of the GC receptor Nr3c1 diminishes upon spinal cord
transection in ependymal glia that surround the central canal in
larval zebrafish, as assessed by immunohistochemistry, and that
increasing GC signaling levels with agonists decreases the
proportion of proliferating HuC/D-expressing cells. Interestingly,
Nr3c1 expression follows the opposite direction in rat ependymal
glia that surround the central canal, where its levels increase upon
injury,
determined
again
by
immunohistochemistry.
This
observation suggests a difference between zebrafish and mammals
that might be of interest (Nelson et al., 2019). Taken together, it
appears that, as described in many studies of spinal cord
development
(Cardozo
et
al.,
2017),
the
combination
of
transcription factors expressed in different dorsoventral progenitor
domains of the spinal cord defines the subtype of daughter neuron
that regenerates after injury (Figs 3 and 4).
The glial cell paradigm
A well-described barrier to mammalian spinal cord regeneration is
astrocytic gliosis at the lesion site that leads to formation of a glial
4
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2020) 13, dmm044131. doi:10.1242/dmm.044131
Disease Models & Mechanisms

scar, which physically impedes axonal regrowth (Hu et al., 2010;
Silver and Miller, 2004; Stichel and Müller, 1998). Glial cell
responses to SCI in zebrafish are thought to fundamentally differ
from those in mammals. Goldsmith and colleagues proposed a
model in which SCI triggers proliferation of nearby glial cells and
their migration to the lesion site, followed by their elongation along
the anteroposterior axis and acquisition of a bipolar morphology
(bridging glia). At 2-3 weeks post-injury, glial cells elongate
further, forming a bridge between the two transected spinal cord
ends that could serve as scaffold for axons to regrow across the
lesion. Dismantling and remodeling of the glial bridge would restore
the
central
canal
and
re-establish
spinal
cord
morphology
(Goldshmit et al., 2012).
Glial bridge formation depends on signaling through Fgf receptors,
which affects the proliferation, migration and onset of differentiation
of glial cells. Disruption of Fgf signaling post-SCI in adult zebrafish
by induced expression of a dominant-negative Fgf receptor, or by
treatment with the pharmacological inhibitor SU5402, blocked
axonal regeneration 3 weeks post-SCI. Conversely, zebrafish with
mutations in spry4, a known cell-autonomous inhibitor of Fgf
signaling,
or
those
injected
intraperitoneally
with
FGF8,
demonstrated accelerated glial bridging across the lesions and
accumulation of regenerating axons (Goldshmit et al., 2012).
More recently, Mokalled et al. reported the involvement of
connective tissue growth factor (ctgf, or ccn2), a component of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) with no known extracellular receptor,
but with a role in multiple signaling pathways, in glial bridge
formation in adult zebrafish. One of the two zebrafish ctgf orthologs,
ctgfa (also known as ccn2a), is induced at the spinal cord lesion site
in a limited set of early bridging glia, designated ‘pioneer glia’, as
well as in other tissues. A viable ctgfa mutant strain showed defects
in glial bridging and spinal cord regeneration, whereas induced
transgenic overexpression of the full-length ctgfa or its C-terminal
domain
alone
increased
glial
bridging
and
axon
growth.
Interestingly, a one-time application of human recombinant CTGF
protein at the lesion improved spinal cord regeneration in ctgfa
mutant zebrafish (Mokalled et al., 2016). The key next steps in this
line of research include defining additional features of pioneer glia,
and determining how Ctgf might be polarizing glia and instigating
bridge morphogenesis. Of note, cultured primate glial cells also
elongate and acquire a bipolar morphology when stimulated with
exogenous human FGF2, confirming the conserved role of Fgf
signaling (Goldshmit et al., 2012). Whether Fgf and Ctgf could be
used as possible pro-regenerative factors in mammals remains to be
fully explored, noting that their systemic delivery is likely to have
limited or undesirable effects compared with more targeted delivery
approaches. Wang et al. reported that small interfering RNA (siRNA)
knockdown of Ctgf in the injured rat spinal cord reduced glial scar
formation post-injury (Wang et al., 2018). The cellular basis of this
improvement, which contrasts the ctgfa loss-of-function results in
Dorsal
Central
canal
Ventral
V2 interneurons
Motor neurons
Serotonergic neurons
Foxj1
Sox2
Pax6  
Nkx6.1
Pax6 
Nkx6.1
Olig2
Nkx6.1
Sox11b
Nestin
Ascl1a
a
Key
Bridging glia
ERGs
Neurons
Fig. 3. ERG progenitor subpopulations. A
cross section of the spinal cord, illustrating the
proposed ERGs organized in compartments that
give rise to different neuron types. Transcription
factors in the gray zones are common to all
ERGs. Pax6- and Nkx6.1-expressing ERGs
(yellow zones) give rise to V2 interneurons, ERGs
expressing Pax6, Nkx6.1 and Olig2 (red zones)
give rise to motor neurons, and ERGs only
expressing Nkx6.1 (green zones) give rise to
serotonergic neurons.
5
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2020) 13, dmm044131. doi:10.1242/dmm.044131
Disease Models & Mechanisms

zebrafish, is unclear, and – to our knowledge – the effects of excess
Ctgf application on mammalian SCI is unknown.
The regenerating axons bridge the lesion site in a manner that
spatially and temporally correlates with the presence of bridging glia,
yet the idea that the lesion site is traversed only after a glial bridge is
established is controversial. Indeed, nitroreductase-enabled ablation
of Gfap+ glial cells did not affect axonal regrowth in zebrafish larvae
(Wehner et al., 2017), meaning that regeneration could occur in the
absence of (Wehner et al., 2017) or before (Dervan and Roberts,
2003) the formation of a glial bridge. This was supported by
simultaneous time-lapse video microscopy imaging of axonal and
glial processes, leading to the observation that most axons enter and
cross the lesion site independently of glial processes (Briona et al.,
2015). Along this line, work in goldfish led to the hypothesis that glial
cells trail behind new axons, rather than leading their regeneration
(Nona and Stafford, 1995). Although the glial ablation experiment
provides good evidence that axons grow independently from the glial
bridge across the lesion site, one cannot rule out the possibility that a
few glial cells that escaped ablation are sufficient to form a bridge
(Fig. 4). It would be of interest to identify new methods to deplete,
genetically or through toxins, the entire glial cell population and then
study how axons grow across the lesion site.
Axon regrowth
In addition to neurogenesis and gliogenesis to replace and remodel
lost tissue, axons from neurons whose cell bodies are located in the
brain project longitudinally across the injury site in the spinal cord.
These axons are severed upon injury, but regrow and innervate
appropriate targets to restore spinal cord function in adult zebrafish
(Becker et al., 1997). Anguita-Salinas et al. recently studied the
extent to which regrowing axons follow a pre-injury trajectory. The
authors transplanted RFP-tagged cells from a transgenic fish
embryo into a neurod:EGFP embryo that forms EGFP+ neurons
to generate mosaic animals, and selected larvae with single or few
RFP+ neurons in the spinal cord. By following the trajectory of
RFP-labeled regenerating axons upon injury, they observed
different
behaviors
between
ventral
and
dorsal
axons.
Specifically, regeneration of dorsal axons was limited or absent,
whereas ventral axons regenerated to either ventral or dorsal sites
(Anguita-Salinas et al., 2019). The basis of the differential
regenerative responses is unclear; however, axonal re-growth is
known to be driven in part by intrinsic properties of the neurons
themselves, such as pro-regenerative gene expression profiles, as
well as by environmental cues that permit axon growth (Rasmussen
and Sagasti, 2017).
Neuron-intrinsic properties
Neurons possess different intrinsic capacities for axonal regrowth
after injury (Becker et al., 1997), suggesting that axonal regrowth is,
at least in part, driven by cell-autonomous components. Becker et al.
identified L1.1, a cell surface protein of the immunoglobulin
superfamily, as a candidate cell recognition molecule upregulated in
regenerating neurons. Morpholino-based knockdown of L1.1
impaired regrowth of axons from the brainstem as well as
locomotor recovery in adult zebrafish (Becker et al., 2004).
Phenelzine, an L1 mimetic, increased the expression of L1.1 and
phosphorylation of Erk in the caudal region of the lesioned spinal
cord, accelerating axon regrowth, remyelination and locomotor
Axon regrowth
Neurogenesis
Syntenin-a
L1.1
Sema4d
Dopamine
Hh
Notch
Fgf
Glial bridging
Ctgfa
Fgf
Key
Bridging glia
Neurons
Fig. 4. Signals inducing neurogenesis, glial bridging and axon regrowth after SCI. Several signaling factors have been implicated in the regrowth of axons
(Syntenin-a, L1.1, Sema4d), neurogenesis (dopamine, Notch, Hh, Fgf), and formation of a glial bridge (Ctgf, Fgf) after SCI in zebrafish. For some of these (i.e.
dopamine, Notch, Fgf), unexpected similarities can be observed among vertebrates with different capacities for spinal cord regeneration.
6
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2020) 13, dmm044131. doi:10.1242/dmm.044131
Disease Models & Mechanisms

recovery (Li et al., 2018). L1.1 is proposed to guide the regenerating
axons to their proper targets by homophilic and heterophilic binding
with other neuronal cell adhesion molecules such as Axonin-1 and
Contactin. Further work including targeted genetic manipulation
would refine the specific roles for L1.1 expressed in the brainstem
compared to L1.1 expressed in spinal cord interneurons, and would
help determine whether L1.1 expression is sufficient to initiate axon
growth.
Additional cell recognition molecules have been implicated in
axonal regeneration, including Syntenin-a (Yu and Schachner,
2013) and Sema4d (Peng et al., 2017). Interestingly, the latter has
been shown to play a role in the interaction between motor neurons
and support cells like microglia. Morpholino-mediated knockdown
of Sema4D in adult zebrafish decreases microglial association with
motor neurons and impairs functional recovery (Peng et al., 2017).
Regenerating neurons also upregulate the expression of kinases such
as Aurora kinase B, transcription factors such as atf3 and
microRNAs such as miR-133b (Gwee et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2017; Yu et al., 2011b). It is likely that there are many more genes
that contribute to cell-autonomous axonal regeneration, and
identifying the factors that allow populations of neurons to regrow
damaged axons after SCI, for example by expression profiling and
molecular genetics, is a priority for the field.
Environmental properties
After SCI, the regenerating axons must traverse a complex cellular
environment to innervate appropriate targets and restore spinal cord
function. In mammals, this environment is thought to be non-
permissive for axon growth due to the presence of inhibitory ECM
components such as chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) and
glial scar tissue formed by reactive astrocytes (Dyck and Karimi-
Abdolrezaee, 2015). The cellular environment in the zebrafish, by
contrast, is permissive for axon growth.
Macrophages invade the site of SCI and induce an inflammatory
response that has been proposed to accelerate axonal recovery in
zebrafish larvae (Tsarouchas et al., 2018). An appropriate immune
response to injury is expected to be crucial to a pro-regenerative
cellular environment. Immune cells such as macrophages and
neutrophils are typically responsible for phagocytosing debris such
as the degenerating axons and myelin sheaths that remain at the site
after SCI. Interestingly, neutrophils are only rarely found near the
injury site in adult zebrafish (Goldshmit et al., 2012). In larvae,
neutrophils can be observed migrating to the injury site; however,
reducing neutrophil migration by genetically ablating microglia has
no negative effect on spinal cord regeneration, suggesting that
neutrophils are dispensable in spinal cord regeneration (Tsarouchas
et al., 2018). Myelin debris can persist in the zebrafish spinal cord to
6 months after injury, and regrowing axons preferentially route
through myelin-free gray matter, suggesting alternative, non-
phagocytic, roles for macrophages during spinal cord regeneration
(Becker and Becker, 2001). Peripheral macrophages can modulate
the level of inflammation in the injured spinal cord by increasing
Tnf-α production and reducing Il-1β near the injury site. In mutant
zebrafish lacking macrophages, regeneration fails due to a
prolonged
period
of
inflammation
that
includes
increased
exposure to Il-1β (Tsarouchas et al., 2018). Histamine injection in
the diencephalon after SCI also increases the level of inflammation,
resulting in increased gliosis, i.e. the proliferation or hypertrophy of
several different types of glial cells, at the injury site, leading to
impaired functional recovery (Huang et al., 2017). Conversely,
pharmacological inhibition or genetic ablation of Il-1β in the early
stages of regeneration results in its failure, consistent with the notion
that inflammation must be tightly regulated for proper regeneration
(Tsarouchas et al., 2018).
Axons require not only an appropriate chemical environment for
growth, but also a growth-permissive physical substrate. ECM
remodeling is thought to be crucial for functional recovery from
SCI; for instance, in mice, ECM proteins such as CSPGs are
upregulated after injury and can inhibit the growth of axons (Dyck
and
Karimi-Abdolrezaee,
2015).
In
zebrafish,
morpholino
knockdown of Chondroitin-4-sulfotransferase-1, a sulfotransferase
important in the synthesis of CSPGs, enhanced the speed of spinal
cord regeneration in both larvae and adults, suggesting that this
mechanism is conserved between zebrafish and mouse (Sahu et al.,
2019). After SCI in zebrafish, the expression of ostensibly growth-
permissive ECM components (like Ctgfa) is induced in both neural
and non-neural tissues within the injured spinal cord. In larvae, the
lesion site itself activates Wnt/β-catenin signaling in fibroblast-like
cells, which was reported to increase the deposition of pro-
regenerative collagen XII (Wehner et al., 2017). Neurons in the
nucleus of median longitudinal fascicle in the brainstem deposit
Tenascin-c, an ECM component that directs morphogenetic
changes such as neurite growth (Yu et al., 2011a). Morpholino
knockdown of Tenascin-c resulted in impaired locomotor recovery
and reduced axon growth after SCI. Additionally, contactin 1a,
which encodes a receptor for Tenascins, is expressed in brainstem
neurons after SCI in adult zebrafish, suggesting that, after injury,
neurons in the brain are able to activate a genetic program that
allows them to remodel the ECM for successful axon growth
(Schweitzer et al., 2007) (Fig. 4).
Angiogenesis
Neurons in the central nervous system have high energy demands,
and as such require robust vascularization for proper function
(James and Mukouyama, 2011). During development, newly
formed neurons and radial glia recruit and coordinate vascular
formation in the spinal cord and neighboring tissues through the
expression of genes such as vegfaa and flt1 (Matsuoka et al., 2017;
Wild et al., 2017). Accordingly, during spinal cord regeneration, the
vasculature must re-form properly in concert with CNS tissue. After
injury, endothelial cells in the vascular network and motor neurons
in the spinal cord each express cell adhesion molecules such as
MCAM, which also mediates angiogenesis during tumor formation
and development (Chan et al., 2005; Liu et al., 2016). Morpholino
knockdown of MCAM during spinal cord regeneration decreases
the expression of angiogenesis-related genes and impairs motor
recovery, suggesting that MCAM helps to direct angiogenesis after
SCI (Liu et al., 2016). Cytokines such as amphoterin (Hmgb1; also
known as Hmgb1a) are also expressed in the vasculature after SCI,
suggesting that the damaged vascular network is coordinating
signaling events in the regenerating spinal cord (Fang et al., 2014).
More research is needed to elucidate the mechanisms by which the
regenerating spinal cord can recruit and pattern new blood vessels
after injury. Genetic tools to target and manipulate factors known to
regulate angiogenesis during ontogenetic development may help
shed new light on how regenerating tissues are able to organize new
blood vessel formation in an adult organism, and identify pro-
regenerative interventions.
Perspectives
Spinal cord regeneration in zebrafish is still understudied and in
some ways mysterious, although several advances have been made
over the past decade. Cells acting as neuronal progenitors, named
ERGs, seem to contribute to regeneration of spinal cord neurons, a
7
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2020) 13, dmm044131. doi:10.1242/dmm.044131
Disease Models & Mechanisms

process that is limited in mammals. Yet, zebrafish ERGs share
several features with mammalian spinal cord stem cells, such as
foxj1 expression (Ribeiro et al., 2017), which is important in
specification of certain progenitor subtypes during mammalian
CNS development (Jacquet et al., 2009; Jacquet et al., 2011). A
deeper understanding of the key gene regulatory networks – the
upstream and downstream regulators driving neurogenesis from
ERGs in zebrafish – can help uncover species-related differences.
After the identification of candidate targets, researchers can perform
functional studies using standard genome-editing approaches that
have advantages over morpholino-based knockdowns. Additionally,
neurogenesis and emergence of movements/behaviors in zebrafish
embryos was recently analyzed at a single-cell level using an elegant
imaging method for comprehensively tracking neuron lineages (Wan
et al., 2019). It is exciting to envision similar imaging strategies to
visualize the re-establishment of neuronal pools and restoration of
circuits in the regenerating spinal cord.
Several recent studies have described enhancer elements in the
genome that are responsive to injury and direct gene expression
preferentially in regeneration contexts (Gehrke et al., 2019;
Goldman et al., 2017; Harris et al., 2016; Hewitt et al., 2017;
Hung et al., 2015; Kang et al., 2016; Suzuki et al., 2019). These
sequences, and the regulatory factors that bind to them, have not
been probed during spinal cord regeneration. Revealing how pro-
regenerative gene expression changes are regulated at the chromatin
level can help explain how regeneration is triggered in zebrafish, and
it might shed light on the reasons why this does not occur in
mammals. Ultimately, deciphering the signals that promote
endogenous spinal cord regeneration in zebrafish might help
unlock and activate regenerative processes in mammalian contexts.
Acknowledgements
We thank Nutishia Lee for artwork and Leslie A. Slota for comments on the
manuscript. We apologize to colleagues if discussion of relevant literature was
shortened or omitted due to space limitations.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Funding
V.C. is supported by a Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Swiss National Science
Foundation. K.D.P. acknowledges research support from the School of Medicine,
Duke University.
References
Anguita-Salinas, C., Sánchez, M., Morales, R. A., Ceci, M. L., Rojas-Benı́tez, D.
and Allende, M. L. (2019). Cellular dynamics during spinal cord regeneration in
larval zebrafish. Dev. Neurosci. 41, 112-122. doi:10.1159/000500185
Barreiro-Iglesias, A., Mysiak, K. S., Scott, A. L., Reimer, M. M., Yang, Y., Becker,
C. G. and Becker, T. (2015). Serotonin promotes development and regeneration
of spinal motor neurons in Zebrafish. Cell Rep. 13, 924-932. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.
2015.09.050
Batista, M. F., Jacobstein, J. and Lewis, K. E. (2008). Zebrafish V2 cells develop
into excitatory CiD and Notch signalling dependent inhibitory VeLD interneurons.
Dev. Biol. 322, 263-275. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.07.015
Becker, T. and Becker, C. G. (2001). Regenerating descending axons preferentially
reroute to the gray matter in the presence of a general macrophage/microglial
reaction caudal to a spinal transection in adult zebrafish. J. Comp. Neurol. 433,
131-147. doi:10.1002/cne.1131
Becker, C. G. and Becker, T. (2015). Neuronal regeneration from ependymo-radial
glial cells: cook, little pot, cook! Dev. Cell 32, 516-527. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2015.
01.001
Becker, T., Wullimann, M. F., Becker, C. G., Bernhardt, R. R. and Schachner, M.
(1997). Axonal regrowth after spinal cord transection in adult zebrafish. J. Comp.
Neurol. 377, 577-595. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-9861(19970127)377:4<577::AID-
CNE8>3.0.CO;2-#
Becker, C. G., Lieberoth, B. C., Morellini, F., Feldner, J., Becker, T. and
Schachner, M. (2004). L1.1 is involved in spinal cord regeneration in adult
zebrafish. J. Neurosci. 24, 7837-7842. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2420-04.2004
Berg, D. A., Kirkham, M., Beljajeva, A., Knapp, D., Habermann, B., Ryge, J.,
Tanaka, E. M. and Simon, A. (2010). Efficient regeneration by activation of
neurogenesis in homeostatically quiescent regions of the adult vertebrate brain.
Development 137, 4127-4134. doi:10.1242/dev.055541
Bernstein, J. J. (1964). Relation of spinal cord regeneration to age in adult goldfish.
Exp. Neurol. 9, 161-174. doi:10.1016/0014-4886(64)90014-7
Bradbury, E. J. and Burnside, E. R. (2019). Moving beyond the glial scar for spinal
cord repair. Nat. Commun. 10, 3879. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-11707-7
Briona, L. K. and Dorsky, R. I. (2014). Radial glial progenitors repair the zebrafish
spinal cord following transection. Exp. Neurol. 256, 81-92. doi:10.1016/j.
expneurol.2014.03.017
Briona, L. K., Poulain, F. E., Mosimann, C. and Dorsky, R. I. (2015). Wnt/ß-
catenin signaling is required for radial glial neurogenesis following spinal cord
injury. Dev. Biol. 403, 15-21. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.03.025
Butler, E. G. and Ward, M. B. (1967). Reconstitution of the spinal cord after ablation
in adult Triturus. Dev. Biol. 15, 464-486. doi:10.1016/0012-1606(67)90038-3
Cajal, S. R. Y. (1928). Degeneration and Regeneration of the Nervous System.
New York: Oxford University Press, American Branch 1, 2.
Cardozo, M. J., Mysiak, K. S., Becker, T. and Becker, C. G. (2017). Reduce,
reuse, recycle - Developmental signals in spinal cord regeneration. Dev. Biol. 432,
53-62. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2017.05.011
Chan, B., Sinha, S., Cho, D., Ramchandran, R. and Sukhatme, V. P. (2005).
Critical roles of CD146 in zebrafish vascular development. Dev. Dyn. 232,
232-244. doi:10.1002/dvdy.20220
Cohen, A. H., Mackler, S. A. and Selzer, M. E. (1986). Functional regeneration
following spinal transection demonstrated in the isolated spinal cord of the larval
sea lamprey. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83, 2763-2766. doi:10.1073/pnas.83.8.
2763
Courtine, G. and Sofroniew, M. V. (2019). Spinal cord repair: advances in biology
and technology. Nat. Med. 25, 898-908. doi:10.1038/s41591-019-0475-6
de Oliveira-Carlos, V., Ganz, J., Hans, S., Kaslin, J. and Brand, M. (2013). Notch
receptor expression in neurogenic regions of the adult zebrafish brain. PLoS ONE
8, e73384. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0073384
Dervan, A. G. and Roberts, B. L. (2003). Reaction of spinal cord central canal cells
to cord transection and their contribution to cord regeneration. J. Comp. Neurol.
458, 293-306. doi:10.1002/cne.10594
Dias, T. B., Yang, Y.-J., Ogai, K., Becker, T. and Becker, C. G. (2012). Notch
signaling controls generation of motor neurons in the lesioned spinal cord of adult
zebrafish. J. Neurosci. 32, 3245-3252. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6398-11.2012
Dyck,
S.
M.
and
Karimi-Abdolrezaee,
S.
(2015).
Chondroitin
sulfate
proteoglycans: key modulators in the developing and pathologic central nervous
system. Exp. Neurol. 269, 169-187. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.04.006
Edwards-Faret, G., Muñoz, R., Méndez-Olivos, E. E., Lee-Liu, D., Tapia, V. S.
and Larraı́n, J. (2017). Spinal cord regeneration in Xenopus laevis. Nat. Protoc.
12, 372-389. doi:10.1038/nprot.2016.177
Eming, S. A., Wynn, T. A. and Martin, P. (2017). Inflammation and metabolism in
tissue repair and regeneration. Science 356, 1026-1030. doi:10.1126/science.
aam7928
Fang, P., Pan, H.-C., Lin, S. L., Zhang, W.-Q., Rauvala, H., Schachner, M. and
Shen, Y.-Q. (2014). HMGB1 contributes to regeneration after spinal cord injury in
adult zebrafish. Mol. Neurobiol. 49, 472-483. doi:10.1007/s12035-013-8533-4
Gehrke, A. R., Neverett, E., Luo, Y.-J., Brandt, A., Ricci, L., Hulett, R. E.,
Gompers, A., Ruby, J. G., Rokhsar, D. S., Reddien, P. W. et al. (2019). Acoel
genome reveals the regulatory landscape of whole-body regeneration. Science
363, eaau6173. doi:10.1126/science.aau6173
Ghosh, S. and Hui, S. P. (2016). Regeneration of Zebrafish CNS: adult
neurogenesis. Neural Plast. 2016, 5815439. doi:10.1155/2016/5815439
Goldman, J. A., Kuzu, G., Lee, N., Karasik, J., Gemberling, M., Foglia, M. J.,
Karra, R., Dickson, A. L., Sun, F., Tolstorukov, M. Y. et al. (2017). Resolving
heart regeneration by replacement histone profiling. Dev. Cell 40, 392-404.e395.
doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2017.01.013
Goldshmit, Y., Sztal, T. E., Jusuf, P. R., Hall, T. E., Nguyen-Chi, M. and Currie,
P. D. (2012). Fgf-dependent glial cell bridges facilitate spinal cord regeneration in
zebrafish. J. Neurosci. 32, 7477-7492. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0758-12.2012
Goldshmit, Y., Tang, J. K. K. Y., Siegel, A. L., Nguyen, P. D., Kaslin, J., Currie,
P. D. and Jusuf, P. R. (2018). Different Fgfs have distinct roles in regulating
neurogenesis after spinal cord injury in zebrafish. Neural Dev. 13, 24. doi:10.1186/
s13064-018-0122-9
Grandel, H., Kaslin, J., Ganz, J., Wenzel, I. and Brand, M. (2006). Neural stem
cells and neurogenesis in the adult zebrafish brain: origin, proliferation dynamics,
migration and cell fate. Dev. Biol. 295, 263-277. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.040
Grossman, S. D., Rosenberg, L. J. and Wrathall, J. R. (2001). Temporal-spatial
pattern of acute neuronal and glial loss after spinal cord contusion. Exp. Neurol.
168, 273-282. doi:10.1006/exnr.2001.7628
Guo, Y., Ma, L., Cristofanilli, M., Hart, R. P., Hao, A. and Schachner, M. (2011).
Transcription factor Sox11b is involved in spinal cord regeneration in adult
zebrafish. Neuroscience 172, 329-341. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.10.026
Gwee, S. S. L., Radford, R. A. W., Chow, S., Syal, M. D., Morsch, M., Formella, I.,
Lee, A., Don, E. K., Badrock, A. P., Cole, N. J. et al. (2018). Aurora kinase B
regulates axonal outgrowth and regeneration in the spinal motor neurons of
8
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2020) 13, dmm044131. doi:10.1242/dmm.044131
Disease Models & Mechanisms

developing zebrafish. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 75, 4269-4285. doi:10.1007/s00018-018-
2780-5
Harris, R. E., Setiawan, L., Saul, J. and Hariharan, I. K. (2016). Localized
epigenetic silencing of a damage-activated WNT enhancer limits regeneration in
mature Drosophila imaginal discs. eLife 5, e11588. doi:10.7554/eLife.11588
Hewitt, K. J., Katsumura, K. R., Matson, D. R., Devadas, P., Tanimura, N.,
Hebert, A. S., Coon, J. J., Kim, J.-S., Dewey, C. N., Keles, S. et al. (2017). GATA
factor-regulated Samd14 enhancer confers red blood cell regeneration and
survival in severe anemia. Dev. Cell 42, 213-225.e214. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.
2017.07.009
Hu, R., Zhou, J., Luo, C., Lin, J., Wang, X., Li, X., Bian, X., Li, Y., Wan, Q., Yu, Y.
et al. (2010). Glial scar and neuroregeneration: histological, functional, and
magnetic resonance imaging analysis in chronic spinal cord injury. J. Neurosurg.
Spine 13, 169-180. doi:10.3171/2010.3.SPINE09190
Huang, S.-B., Zhao, H.-D., Wang, L.-F., Sun, M.-F., Zhu, Y.-L., Wu, Y.-B., Xu, Y.-
D., Peng, S.-X., Cui, C. and Shen, Y.-Q. (2017). Intradiencephalon injection of
histamine inhibited the recovery of locomotor function of spinal cord injured
zebrafish. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 489, 275-280. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.
2017.05.158
Hui, S. P., Dutta, A. and Ghosh, S. (2010). Cellular response after crush injury in
adult zebrafish spinal cord. Dev. Dyn. 239, 2962-2979. doi:10.1002/dvdy.22438
Hui, S. P., Sengupta, D., Lee, S. G. P., Sen, T., Kundu, S., Mathavan, S. and
Ghosh, S. (2014). Genome wide expression profiling during spinal cord
regeneration identifies comprehensive cellular responses in zebrafish. PLoS
ONE 9, e84212. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0084212
Hui, S. P., Sheng, D. Z., Sugimoto, K., Gonzalez-Rajal, A., Nakagawa, S.,
Hesselson, D. and Kikuchi, K. (2017). Zebrafish regulatory T cells mediate
organ-specific regenerative programs. Dev. Cell 43, 659-672.e655. doi:10.1016/j.
devcel.2017.11.010
Hung, H. A., Sun, G., Keles, S. and Svaren, J. (2015). Dynamic regulation of
Schwann cell enhancers after peripheral nerve injury. J. Biol. Chem. 290,
6937-6950. doi:10.1074/jbc.M114.622878
Jacquet, B. V., Salinas-Mondragon, R., Liang, H., Therit, B., Buie, J. D., Dykstra,
M., Campbell, K., Ostrowski, L. E., Brody, S. L. and Ghashghaei, H. T. (2009).
FoxJ1-dependent gene expression is required for differentiation of radial glia into
ependymal cells and a subset of astrocytes in the postnatal brain. Development
136, 4021-4031. doi:10.1242/dev.041129
Jacquet, B. V., Muthusamy, N., Sommerville, L. J., Xiao, G., Liang, H., Zhang, Y.,
Holtzman, M. J. and Ghashghaei, H. T. (2011). Specification of a Foxj1-
dependent lineage in the forebrain is required for embryonic-to-postnatal transition
of neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb. J. Neurosci. 31, 9368-9382. doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.0171-11.2011
Jacyniak, K., McDonald, R. P. and Vickaryous, M. K. (2017). Tail regeneration
and other phenomena of wound healing and tissue restoration in lizards. J. Exp.
Biol. 220, 2858-2869. doi:10.1242/jeb.126862
James, J. M. and Mukouyama, Y.-S. (2011). Neuronal action on the developing
blood vessel pattern. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 22, 1019-1027. doi:10.1016/j.
semcdb.2011.09.010
Kang, J., Hu, J., Karra, R., Dickson, A. L., Tornini, V. A., Nachtrab, G.,
Gemberling, M., Goldman, J. A., Black, B. L. and Poss, K. D. (2016).
Modulation of tissue repair by regeneration enhancer elements. Nature 532,
201-206. doi:10.1038/nature17644
Karin, M. and Clevers, H. (2016). Reparative inflammation takes charge of tissue
regeneration. Nature 529, 307-315. doi:10.1038/nature17039
Kroehne, V., Freudenreich, D., Hans, S., Kaslin, J. and Brand, M. (2011).
Regeneration of the adult zebrafish brain from neurogenic radial glia-type
progenitors. Development 138, 4831-4841. doi:10.1242/dev.072587
Kuscha, V., Barreiro-Iglesias, A., Becker, C. G. and Becker, T. (2012a). Plasticity
of tyrosine hydroxylase and serotonergic systems in the regenerating spinal cord
of adult zebrafish. J. Comp. Neurol. 520, 933-951. doi:10.1002/cne.22739
Kuscha, V., Frazer, S. L., Dias, T. B., Hibi, M., Becker, T. and Becker, C. G.
(2012b). Lesion-induced generation of interneuron cell types in specific
dorsoventral domains in the spinal cord of adult zebrafish. J. Comp. Neurol.
520, 3604-3616. doi:10.1002/cne.23115
Li, R., Sahu, S. and Schachner, M. (2018). Phenelzine, a cell adhesion molecule
L1 mimetic small organic compound, promotes functional recovery and axonal
regrowth in spinal cord-injured zebrafish. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 171,
30-38. doi:10.1016/j.pbb.2018.05.013
Liu, C.-J., Xie, L., Cui, C., Chu, M., Zhao, H.-D., Yao, L., Li, Y.-H., Schachner, M.
and Shen, Y.-Q. (2016). Beneficial roles of melanoma cell adhesion molecule in
spinal cord transection recovery in adult zebrafish. J. Neurochem. 139, 187-196.
doi:10.1111/jnc.13707
Matsuoka, R. L., Rossi, A., Stone, O. A. and Stainier, D. Y. R. (2017). CNS-
resident progenitors direct the vascularization of neighboring tissues. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 114, 10137-10142. doi:10.1073/pnas.1619300114
McClellan, A. D. (1990). Locomotor recovery in spinal-transected lamprey:
regenerated spinal coordinating neurons and mechanosensory inputs couple
locomotor activity across a spinal lesion. Neuroscience 35, 675-685. doi:10.1016/
0306-4522(90)90338-5
Mokalled, M. H., Patra, C., Dickson, A. L., Endo, T., Stainier, D. Y. R. and Poss,
K. D. (2016). Injury-induced ctgfa directs glial bridging and spinal cord
regeneration in zebrafish. Science 354, 630-634. doi:10.1126/science.aaf2679
National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center. (2019). Facts and Figures at a
Glance. Birmingham, AL: University of Alabama at Birmingham.
Nelson, C. M., Lennon, V. A., Lee, H., Krug, R. G., II, Kamalova, A., Madigan,
N. N., Clark, K. J., Windebank, A. J. and Henley, J. R. (2019). Glucocorticoids
target ependymal glia and inhibit repair of the injured spinal cord. Front. Cell Dev.
Biol. 7, 56. doi:10.3389/fcell.2019.00056
Nona, S. N. and Stafford, C. A. (1995). Glial repair at the lesion site in regenerating
goldfish spinal cord: an immunohistochemical study using species-specific
antibodies. J. Neurosci. Res. 42, 350-356. doi:10.1002/jnr.490420309
Ogai, K., Nakatani, K., Hisano, S., Sugitani, K., Koriyama, Y. and Kato, S. (2014).
Function of Sox2 in ependymal cells of lesioned spinal cords in adult zebrafish.
Neurosci. Res. 88, 84-87. doi:10.1016/j.neures.2014.07.010
Ohnmacht, J., Yang, Y., Maurer, G. W., Barreiro-Iglesias, A., Tsarouchas, T. M.,
Wehner, D., Sieger, D., Becker, C. G. and Becker, T. (2016). Spinal motor
neurons are regenerated after mechanical lesion and genetic ablation in larval
zebrafish. Development 143, 1464-1474. doi:10.1242/dev.129155
Oliphint, P. A., Alieva, N., Foldes, A. E., Tytell, E. D., Lau, B. Y.-B., Pariseau,
J. S., Cohen, A. H. and Morgan, J. R. (2010). Regenerated synapses in lamprey
spinal cord are sparse and small even after functional recovery from injury.
J. Comp. Neurol. 518, 2854-2872. doi:10.1002/cne.22368
Peng, S.-X., Yao, L., Cui, C., Zhao, H.-D., Liu, C.-J., Li, Y.-H., Wang, L.-F., Huang,
S.-B. and Shen, Y.-Q. (2017). Semaphorin4D promotes axon regrowth and
swimming
ability
during
recovery
following
zebrafish
spinal
cord
injury.
Neuroscience 351, 36-46. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.03.030
Piatt, J. and Piatt, M. (1958). Transection of the spinal cord in the adult frog. Anat.
Rec. 131, 81-95. doi:10.1002/ar.1091310107
Pierani, A., Moran-Rivard, L., Sunshine, M. J., Littman, D. R., Goulding, M. and
Jessell, T. M. (2001). Control of interneuron fate in the developing spinal cord by
the progenitor homeodomain protein Dbx1. Neuron 29, 367-384. doi:10.1016/
S0896-6273(01)00212-4
Rasmussen, J. P. and Sagasti, A. (2017). Learning to swim, again: axon
regeneration in fish. Exp. Neurol. 287, 318-330. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2016.02.
022
Rehermann, M. I., Marichal, N., Russo, R. E. and Trujillo-Cenóz, O. (2009).
Neural reconnection in the transected spinal cord of the freshwater turtle
Trachemys dorbignyi. J. Comp. Neurol. 515, 197-214. doi:10.1002/cne.22061
Reimer, M. M., Sorensen, I., Kuscha, V., Frank, R. E., Liu, C., Becker, C. G. and
Becker, T. (2008). Motor neuron regeneration in adult zebrafish. J. Neurosci. 28,
8510-8516. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1189-08.2008
Reimer, M. M., Kuscha, V., Wyatt, C., Sorensen, I., Frank, R. E., Knuwer, M.,
Becker, T. and Becker, C. G. (2009). Sonic hedgehog is a polarized signal for
motor neuron regeneration in adult zebrafish. J. Neurosci. 29, 15073-15082.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4748-09.2009
Reimer, M. M., Norris, A., Ohnmacht, J., Patani, R., Zhong, Z., Dias, T. B.,
Kuscha, V., Scott, A. L., Chen, Y.-C., Rozov, S. et al. (2013). Dopamine from the
brain promotes spinal motor neuron generation during development and adult
regeneration. Dev. Cell 25, 478-491. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2013.04.012
Ribeiro, A., Monteiro, J. F., Certal, A. C., Cristovão, A. M. and Saúde, L. (2017).
Foxj1a is expressed in ependymal precursors, controls central canal position and
is activated in new ependymal cells during regeneration in zebrafish. Open Biol. 7,
170139. doi:10.1098/rsob.170139
Rothenaigner, I., Krecsmarik, M., Hayes, J. A., Bahn, B., Lepier, A., Fortin, G.,
Gotz, M., Jagasia, R. and Bally-Cuif, L. (2011). Clonal analysis by distinct viral
vectors identifies bona fide neural stem cells in the adult zebrafish telencephalon
and
characterizes their
division
properties
and
fate.
Development
138,
1459-1469. doi:10.1242/dev.058156
Rovainen, C. M. (1976). Regeneration of Mü ller and Mauthner axons after spinal
transection in larval lampreys. J. Comp. Neurol. 168, 545-554. doi:10.1002/cne.
901680407
Sahu, S., Li, R., Loers, G. and Schachner, M. (2019). Knockdown of chondroitin-4-
sulfotransferase-1,
but
not
of
dermatan-4-sulfotransferase-1,
accelerates
regeneration of zebrafish after spinal cord injury. FASEB J. 33, 2252-2262.
doi:10.1096/fj.201800852RR
Schweitzer, J., Gimnopoulos, D., Lieberoth, B. C., Pogoda, H.-M., Feldner, J.,
Ebert, A., Schachner, M., Becker, T. and Becker, C. G. (2007). Contactin1a
expression is associated with oligodendrocyte differentiation and axonal
regeneration in the central nervous system of zebrafish. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 35,
194-207. doi:10.1016/j.mcn.2007.02.018
Selzer, M. E. (1978). Mechanisms of functional recovery and regeneration after
spinal cord transection in larval sea lamprey. J. Physiol. 277, 395-408. doi:10.
1113/jphysiol.1978.sp012280
Silver, J. and Miller, J. H. (2004). Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 5, 146-156. doi:10.1038/nrn1326
Simpson, S. B.Jr. (1964). Analysis of tail regeneration in the Lizard Lygosoma
Laterale. I. Initiation of regeneration and cartilage differentiation: the role of
ependyma. J. Morphol. 114, 425-435. doi:10.1002/jmor.1051140305
9
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2020) 13, dmm044131. doi:10.1242/dmm.044131
Disease Models & Mechanisms

Stichel, C. C. and Mü ller, H. W. (1998). The CNS lesion scar: new vistas on an old
regeneration barrier. Cell Tissue Res. 294, 1-9. doi:10.1007/s004410051151
Suzuki, N., Hirano, K., Ogino, H. and Ochi, H. (2019). Arid3a regulates nephric
tubule regeneration via evolutionarily conserved regeneration signal-response
enhancers. eLife 8, e43186. doi:10.7554/eLife.43186
Tazaki, A., Tanaka, E. M. and Fei, J.-F. (2017). Salamander spinal cord
regeneration: the ultimate positive control in vertebrate spinal cord regeneration.
Dev. Biol. 432, 63-71. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2017.09.034
Thuret, S., Moon, L. D. F. and Gage, F. H. (2006). Therapeutic interventions after
spinal cord injury. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 628-643. doi:10.1038/nrn1955
Tsarouchas, T. M., Wehner, D., Cavone, L., Munir, T., Keatinge, M., Lambertus,
M., Underhill, A., Barrett, T., Kassapis, E., Ogryzko, N. et al. (2018). Dynamic
control of proinflammatory cytokines Il-1beta and Tnf-alpha by macrophages in
zebrafish spinal cord regeneration. Nat. Commun. 9, 4670. doi:10.1038/s41467-
018-07036-w
Wan, Y., Wei, Z., Looger, L. L., Koyama, M., Druckmann, S. and Keller, P. J.
(2019). Single-cell reconstruction of emerging population activity in an entire
developing circuit. Cell 179, 355-372.e323. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.08.039
Wang, L.-F., Huang, S.-B., Zhao, H.-D., Liu, C.-J., Yao, L. and Shen, Y.-Q. (2017).
Activating transcription factor 3 promotes spinal cord regeneration of adult
zebrafish. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 488, 522-527. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.
2017.05.079
Wang, Y., Kong, Q.-J., Sun, J.-C., Yang, Y., Wang, H.-B., Zhang, Q. and Shi, J.-G.
(2018). Lentivirus-mediated silencing of the CTGF gene suppresses the formation
of glial scar tissue in a rat model of spinal cord injury. Spine J. 18, 164-172. doi:10.
1016/j.spinee.2017.01.004
Wehner, D., Tsarouchas, T. M., Michael, A., Haase, C., Weidinger, G., Reimer,
M. M., Becker, T. and Becker, C. G. (2017). Wnt signaling controls pro-
regenerative Collagen XII in functional spinal cord regeneration in zebrafish. Nat.
Commun. 8, 126. doi:10.1038/s41467-017-00143-0
Wild, R., Klems, A., Takamiya, M., Hayashi, Y., Strä hle, U., Ando, K., Mochizuki,
N., van Impel, A., Schulte-Merker, S., Krueger, J. et al. (2017). Neuronal sFlt1
and Vegfaa determine venous sprouting and spinal cord vascularization. Nat.
Commun. 8, 13991. doi:10.1038/ncomms13991
Yu, Y. and Schachner, M. (2013). Syntenin-a promotes spinal cord regeneration
following injury in adult zebrafish. Eur. J. Neurosci. 38, 2280-2289. doi:10.1111/
ejn.12222
Yu, Y.-M., Cristofanilli, M., Valiveti, A., Ma, L., Yoo, M., Morellini, F. and
Schachner, M. (2011a). The extracellular matrix glycoprotein tenascin-C
promotes locomotor recovery after spinal cord injury in adult zebrafish.
Neuroscience 183, 238-250. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.03.043
Yu, Y.-M., Gibbs, K. M., Davila, J., Campbell, N., Sung, S., Todorova, T. I., Otsuka,
S., Sabaawy, H. E., Hart, R. P. and Schachner, M. (2011b). MicroRNA miR-133b
is essential for functional recovery after spinal cord injury in adult zebrafish.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 33, 1587-1597. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07643.x
10
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2020) 13, dmm044131. doi:10.1242/dmm.044131
Disease Models & Mechanisms

===== Cizkova2020_NeurochemRes_SCI+Models+Treatment =====
Vol:.(1234567890)
Neurochemical Research (2020) 45:134–143
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-019-02800-w
1 3
ORIGINAL PAPER
Spinal Cord Injury: Animal Models, Imaging Tools and the Treatment 
Strategies
Dasa Cizkova1,2,4   · Adriana‑Natalia Murgoci1,4   · Veronika Cubinkova1 · Filip Humenik2 · Zuzana Mojzisova2 · 
Marcela Maloveska2 · Milan Cizek3 · Isabelle Fournier4   · Michel Salzet4 
Received: 14 December 2018 / Revised: 10 April 2019 / Accepted: 11 April 2019 / Published online: 20 April 2019 
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2019
Abstract
Spinal cord injury (SCI) often leads to irreversible neuro-degenerative changes with life-long consequences. While there is 
still no effective therapy available, the results of past research have led to improved quality of life for patients suffering from 
partial or permanent paralysis. In this review we focus on the need, importance and the scientific value of experimental animal 
models simulating SCI in humans. Furthermore, we highlight modern imaging tools determining the location and extent 
of spinal cord damage and their contribution to early diagnosis and selection of appropriate treatment. Finally, we focus on 
available cellular and acellular therapies and novel combinatory approaches with exosomes and active biomaterials. Here 
we discuss the efficacy and limitations of adult mesenchymal stem cells which can be derived from bone marrow, adipose 
tissue or umbilical cord blood and its Wharton’s jelly. Special attention is paid to stem cell-derived exosomes and smart 
biomaterials due to their special properties as a delivery system for proteins, bioactive molecules or even genetic material.
Keywords  Spinal cord injury · Animal models · Imaging · Stem cells · Exosomes · Biomaterials
Abbreviations
ATMSCs	
Adipose tissue mesenchymal stem cells
ASIA score	
American Spinal Injury Association score
bFGF	
Basic fibroblast growth factor
BMSCs	
Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
CM	
Conditioned media
CNS	
Central nervous system
DESI imaging	
Desorption electrospray ionization imag-
ing technique
DTI	
Diffusion tensor imaging
DW-MRI	
Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance 
imaging
FDG	
Fluorodeoxyglucose
GDNF	
Glial cell derived neurotrophic factor
LC ACs	
Long-chain acylcarnitines
lyso PC	
Lysophosphatidylcholines
MALDI	
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization
MEPs	
Motor-evoked potentials
MRI	
Magnetic resonance imaging
MSC	
Mesenchymal stem cells
NGF	
Nerve growth factor
NT-3	
Neurotrophin-3 protein
NT-4	
Neurotrophin-4 protein
PAN/PVC	
Polyacrylonitrile/polyvinylchloride
PGA	
Poly(glycolic acid)
PET	
Positron emission tomography
PHEMA	
Poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate)
PLA	
Poly(lactic acid)
PLCL	
Poly(lactic-co-caprolactone)
PLGA	
Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
PNS	
Peripheral nervous system
PTFE	
Poly(tetrafluoro-ethylene)
PVA	
Polyvinylalcohol
ROS	
Reactive oxygen species
Special Issue: In Honor of Prof. Eva Sykova.
 *	 Dasa Cizkova 
	
cizkova.dasa@gmail.com
1	
Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, 
Dúbravská cesta 9, 845 10 Bratislava, Slovakia
2	
Department of Anatomy, Histology and Physiology, 
University of Veterinary Medicine and Pharmacy in Košice, 
Komenského 73, 041 81 Kosice, Slovakia
3	
Department of Epizootology and Parasitology, University 
of Veterinary Medicine and Pharmacy in Košice, 
Komenského 73, 041 81 Kosice, Slovakia
4	
Inserm, U‑1192—Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse 
Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse‑PRISM, Université 
de Lille, 59000 Lille, France

135
Neurochemical Research (2020) 45:134–143	
1 3
SEPs	
Somato-sensory evoked potentials
SCI	
Spinal cord injury
TBI	
Traumatic brain injury
UC	
Umbilical cord
UCMSC	
Umbilical cord derived mesenchymal 
stem cells
WJ	
Wharton’s jelly
WJMSCs	
Wharton’s jelly derived mesenchymal 
stem cells
Introduction
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating neuro-degenerative 
disorder which still lacks effective treatment and causes a 
significant financial burden for the families affected and the 
whole of society [1]. After direct mechanical insult involv-
ing initial primary injury, the spinal cord undergoes multiple 
pathological changes which are associated with secondary 
damage. This status is represented by the pathophysiologi-
cal cascade accompanied by progressive haemorrhaging, 
intravascular thrombosis and vasospasm leading to ischemia 
and edema. Both events result in production of free radicals, 
which cause lipid peroxidation, excitotoxicity, apoptotic and 
necrotic cell death, and finally inflammation and immuno-
logical response affecting intact, neighbouring tissue. This 
secondary damage expands well beyond the original injury 
site into adjacent spinal cord segments [2].
The Importance of Animal Models 
for Translation Medicine
In order to understand the pathological basis of SCI and 
to develop efficient treatment strategies, a number of dif-
ferent animal models have been widely used. Historically, 
these models included nonhuman primates as well as cats 
and dogs, prior to using rodents [3, 4]. The first SCI experi-
ment conducted on dogs was described by Allen in 1911. 
In that study a weight-drop technique was used, and later 
on it was adapted to rats [5]. Since that time, various surgi-
cal approaches to create the most reliable animal models of 
SCI have been used, such as aneurysm clip compression [6] 
or forceps compression [7]. Currently the most preferable 
types of surgery are contusion, compression and transection 
with various modifications [8]. However, before choosing 
an appropriate animal model of SCI it is necessary to iden-
tify the main aims and purpose of the study. Experimental 
animals, in contrast to human patients, are injured under 
controlled conditions with a simple wound to a targeted spi-
nal region and are more uniform and less complex. Gener-
ally people suffer from multiple injuries, such as fracture 
of vertebrae, or even accompanying traumatic injury of the 
brain [7, 9].
Animal Models Used for SCI Modelling
Currently, rodents seem to be the species most in demand 
for preliminary SCI experiments for several reasons [9]. Rat 
models allow us to monitor the physiological parameters 
and the pathological events that follow SCI. Moreover, some 
observations from rat studies have led to potential therapy 
strategies for patients with SCI [10]. Induction of injury in 
rat models either by spinal contusion, weight-drop or epi-
dural balloon compression can lead to tissue degeneration at 
the epicenter of the injury, extending to neighbouring seg-
ments [11]. Surprisingly, even when severe SCI was induced, 
after some period progressive spontaneous recovery was 
observed [12-15]. Spontaneous recovery in rodent models 
therefore poses an inconvenience that has to be considered 
when evaluating the final results for therapeutic strategies.
On the other hand, inducing SCI in dogs can be con-
sidered as intermediate between rodent models and human 
clinical trials. Moreover, pre-clinical trials on chondrodys-
trophic dog’s models (with spontaneous acute SCI) can be 
performed. In that case, dogs are patients and not models. 
It provides us with an opportunity for screening potential 
treatments before human application. In dogs the mecha-
nisms of injury are similar to those in human patients and are 
comparable in terms of pathology, monitoring of function 
and conclusions [16, 17].
An alternative to already-existing dog and non-human 
primate models exists in the form of the minipig spinal 
injury model, which is characterized by consistent injury 
and stable neurological deficit after surgery [13, 18]. One of 
the advantages of this model is that the pig spinal cord has 
some anatomical features similar to the human spinal cord, 
which allows this model to be used to test the effect of both 
extradural and intrathecally injected substances [19].
Because of the genetic, biological and physiological simi-
larities, non-human primates may be essential models for the 
evaluation of potential therapies. The main limitations of 
using primate models are ethical concerns and high operat-
ing and care costs.
Experimental SCI Procedure
Many different studies showed that animal strains, age, sex, 
injury model, anaesthesia or hypothermia can have an impact 
upon the obtained data. A considerable variability in loco-
motor and sensory recovery between rat strains was noted 
[20, 21]. Thus, the locomotor recovery in Sprague–Dawley 
is quicker than that of Wistar rats, which is not well under-
stood but seems to be related to genetic factors [20]. Further-
more, both female and male rats enrolled in SCI modelling 

136
	
Neurochemical Research (2020) 45:134–143
1 3
have some limitations. In females, which have shorter and 
straighter urethra, the urinating procedure is easier and 
much faster onset of an automatic urinary bladder occur 
in comparison with males. On the other hand, female rats 
exhibit hormonal instability, which can have an impact on 
behavioural testing [21, 22]. Other important factors are the 
conditions during surgery, anaesthesia, body temperature, 
blood pressure, type and spinal level of injury. In the past, 
hypothermia has been extensively used in the treatment of 
traumatic SCI [20-22]. Many studies have shown the effect 
of hypothermia in optimizing functional outcome of mild 
and moderate traumatic SCI, but not against severe trau-
matic injury. Various effects of hypothermia in SCI has been 
extensively reviewed elsewhere [23].
Assessment of Functional Recovery
An important consequence of SCI is the loss of bladder 
function. Manual bladder releasing is required during first 
7–10 days after injury. In animal studies the assessment of 
bladder function is rarely used, but some simple procedures 
are involved to assess bladder dysfunction over time [24, 
25].
To evaluate the loss and recovery of sensory and locomo-
tor functions the various behavioral tests are used. The most 
visible sign of recovery from SCI is recovery of the ability 
to walk. In order to measure the locomotor outcomes, the 
BBB scale rating developed by Basso et al.[26] was stand-
ardized across laboratories. The BBB score evaluate the 
functions of hind limbs during free-moving locomotion of 
animals in open field, on a scale from 0 (complete paralysis) 
to 21 (normal locomotion). Automatic system for analysing 
parameters relating to gait is represented by Catwalk. For 
the monitoring of sensory recovery there are used tests for 
sensitivity to heat and cold, the von Frey test for mechani-
cal allodynia. In experimental SCI, some reflex response-
based tests, such as toe spread reflex, hind limb placing test, 
righting reflex are used to assess recovery, too. For exam-
ple, righting reflex test represent the time, which spent an 
animal to reach a normal position after being placed on its 
back [27]. For choosing the appropriate behavioural tests it 
is necessary to consider, which animals we are using and 
which kind of data we would like to obtain.
Overall, it is essential to understand the different aspects 
of the pathology of animal models used in SCI research and 
correlate them with the pathology of human patients, and 
to find an appropriate interpretation of the results obtained 
from experimental animal studies [10]. Even though there 
are some limitations, animal models represent an irreplace-
able and crucial tool in research into SCIs. It is important 
to understand that animal models for human SCI are not 
able to reproduce all its complexities, thus it is crucial to 
define a specific question and to ensure that the chosen 
model is fit-for-purpose. Furthermore, for any translational 
drug development strategy these models have to be carefully 
selected and designed.
Advances in Spinal Cord Injury Imaging 
Techniques
For primary diagnosis of acute SCI to confirm and local-
ize the site and extent of traumatic injury in experimental 
models or in clinical patients, precise imaging methods are 
needed (Table 1).
Radiography
One of the first imaging tools was radiography, an imaging 
technique using X-rays (gamma rays) which could be used 
for visualization of the spinal cord in three standard pro-
jections: antero-posterior, lateral and open-mouth odontoid 
view. With this imagining we can identify only vertebral 
fracture, degenerative disorders or tumours, because there 
is relatively low sensitivity for SCI detection (50.7%) [28].
Myelography
Another imaging method is myelography, a fluoroscopic 
method based on injection and recording of motion of con-
trasting solution in the spinal column. Flow of contrast dye is 
blocked or diverted if there is any abnormality. The benefits 
of this method lie in obtaining relatively fast results and 
quick recovery of patients, up to four hours. However, there 
are many risks such as allergic reactions, nausea, headaches, 
paralysis or loss of bladder control [29]. Radiography and 
myelography are nowadays mostly used in small veterinary 
clinics, especially for their low price. These methods were 
replaced with traditional computer tomography and mag-
netic resonance.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
The studies on PET use in the spinal cord have been few, 
no systematic effort to determine the value of PET in the 
diagnostic and management of SCI was done, comparative 
to large studies in the brain. The PET imaging of the spinal 
cord is retrained by the small size of the spinal cord, low 
resolution of PET, significantly lower 18F-fluorodeoxyglu-
cose (FDG) uptake in the spinal cord than in the brain and 
potential contamination from vertebral bone marrow. But, 
acquisition of PET concurrent with MRI can solve the prob-
lems related to small size and miserable PET visibility of 
the spinal cord. Currently technology is sufficient to detect 
and quantify the abnormalities in the spinal cord, therefore 

137
Neurochemical Research (2020) 45:134–143	
1 3
PET should be routinely correlated with MRI in spinal cord 
disease to improve patient care [30].
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Different 
Types of MRI
Computer tomography is another method using X-rays, 
while MRI uses a magnetic field, magnetic field gradient 
and radio waves to produce computer cross-sectional images 
of the internal organs in the body [29]. The mechanism of 
MRI is based on the fact that the hydrogen atoms in mol-
ecules of water in different tissues of the body are excited 
by the initial signal and then emit a frequency signal which 
is measured by the receiving coil [31]. Using this method 
we can distinguish between ligamentous injury, epidural or 
intramedullary hematoma and disc hernia [32].
A novel non-invasive method using specific MRI 
sequences is diffusion-weighted MRI (DW-MRI). It analy-
ses the diffusion of water molecules in other tissues of the 
body to produce contrasts with images of MRI. A specific 
type of this method is diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), which 
generates colour images of tissue. Each colour represents 
some direction of water diffusion in tissue [31]. DTI can be 
used to diagnose various lesions of the spinal cord, such as 
inflammation, tumor or ischemia [31]. All these disorders 
are imaged as deformation, interruption or displacement of 
fibers as the result of the strength and direction of molecular 
water movement in the white matter of the spinal cord [33]. 
According to new findings, DTI can be a useful method for 
quantification of SCI pathology along the rostro-caudal axis.
In order to better understand the key players in inflam-
matory processes, a novel form of 3D matrix-assisted 
laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) MR imaging was 
recently evolved for a spatio-temporal lipidomic evalua-
tion across the damaged spinal cord tissue. This method 
demonstrates enhanced distribution of long-chain acylcar-
nitines (LC ACs) at the lesion site within the first ten days 
after SCI [34]. Previous studies have clearly documented 
that LC ACs are pro-inflammatory and their accumulation 
may induce cytokine and reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
production, neurotoxicity, mitochondrial damage leading 
to decreased viability and finally also to myelinated axon 
degradation in the peripheral nervous system (PNS) [35-
37]. Furthermore, identification of the turnip-shaped dis-
tribution of LC ACs around the lesion periphery confirms 
that the immune response along the rostro-caudal axis is 
heterogeneous [34, 36, 38].
Rostral to the lesion site where the LC AC and lysophos-
phatidylcholines (lyso PCs) distribution is distinct, the 
microenvironment is neurotrophic with recruitment of T 
regulator lymphocytes stimulating neurite outgrowth and 
axonal repair [36]. Caudal to the lesion site, the LC AC and 
lyso PC distribution is disrupted, contributing mainly to an 
inflammatory microenvironment associated with the pres-
ence of neutrophils and absence of neurotrophic signals [11]. 
In another study the authors applied similar MRI analyses 
to traumatic brain injury (TBI), revealing enhanced brain-
specific cerebrosides, but likewise missing the LC AC mass 
range [39]. In contrast, when desorption electrospray ioni-
zation imaging (DESI) imaging was applied in SCI mod-
els, important lipid peroxidation products such as AA and 
DHA in negative mode were detected [40]. Nevertheless, 
3D MRI techniques, used for the first time, not only outline 
accumulation of LC ACs in response to SCI, but also their 
Table 1   Imaging techniques used for spinal cord injury diagnostic
Methods
Description and outcome of imaging techniques
References
Radiography
– Using X-rays (gamma rays) for visualization of the spinal cord in 3 standard projections
– Relatively low sensitivity for SCI detection
[28]
Myelography – Motion of contrasting solution in the spinal column to evaluate the spinal cord, nerve roots and spinal meninges
[29]
CT
– Series of X-rays in "slices" through the body analysed by a computer
– Ideally suited for identifying acute haemorrhage after SCI
[83]
PET
– Use radioactive positrons (positively charged particles) to detect differences in metabolic and chemical activity in 
the body
– Whereas CT and MRI scans look at structures in the body, a PET scan looks at function
[30]
MRI
– Use magnets rather than X-rays to produce the image
– Provide information about morphology and anatomy of the spinal cord
– Identify bone marrow edema in injured vertebrae that cannot be seen on CT scans
– An important role in case of discordance between clinical status and CT imaging
– Superior visualization of the soft tissue structures and enabled better recognition of the pathologies involving 
intervertebral disks, ligaments, and neural tissues including the spinal cord and nerve roots
[84−86]
DTI
– MRI-based technique, used for describing biologic tissues microstructures, that exploit quantification of water 
diffusion in tissues
– To quantify the degree of white matter integrity, to predict recovery, and to monitor the effects of therapeutic 
interventions
– The relationship between nerve tract-specific changes and clinical status
[87]

138
	
Neurochemical Research (2020) 45:134–143
1 3
spatial regionalization along the rostro-caudal axis, and their 
potential as candidate targets for SCI therapy.
Role of Adult Stem Cell‑Based Therapies
The state-of-the-art interventions for spinal trauma are spi-
nal decompression and stabilization followed by long-term 
targeted neuro-rehabilitation [41]. However, if the injury is 
classified as severe, causing complete transection of axons, 
the standard care and basic treatment are ineffective and 
patients remain paralyzed for the rest of their lives [42]. 
Regenerative medicine strategies together with nanotech-
nologies [43], spinal electric stimulation devices [44, 45] 
and neuro-rehabilitation [46] are promising in terms of the 
development of cutting-edge therapies which may reach 
from bench to bedside for patients with traumatic injuries 
[47]. Many studies have shown progress in the field of cell-
based therapies, with experimental and clinical applications 
for central nervous system (CNS) trauma [48]. However, 
the key aspect for successful treatment is the use of proper 
stem cell sources, their exosomes alone or in combination 
with smart biomaterials supporting nerve growth within the 
lesion cavity, by providing trophic factors and bioactive mol-
ecules [49]. There are also other aspects which need to be 
considered, such as appropriate timing for treatment, deliv-
ery routes, and of course the age and overall health condition 
of patients suffering from trauma and other factors.
Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem Cells (BMSCs)
BMSCs were one of the first stem cells involved in experi-
mental and clinical trials to treat traumatic injuries [50]. 
Previous studies showed that after contusion of the tho-
racic spinal cord and BMSCs transplantation in rats, partial 
improvements in motor, sensory and autonomic functions 
may occur which in some cases may also be associated with 
spared tissue volumes [51]. Further findings showed that 
intravenous injections of BMSCs are more effective than 
freshly-prepared mononuclear fractions of bone marrow 
cells in the treatment of experimental SCI. When consid-
ering various delivery routes, similar neuroprotection was 
observed whether BMSCs were injected locally into the cen-
tral cavity [52], intrathecally [53] or systemically [54, 55]. 
These experimental studies launched a series of I/II clinical 
trials using autologous, allogenic BMSCs or mononuclear 
fractions in patients with acute, sub-acute or chronic spinal 
cord lesions. In general, they revealed that the transplan-
tation of BMSCs into patients is safe and without adverse 
effects [50, 52]. Partial improvement in the American Spi-
nal Injury Association (ASIA) score and partial recovery of 
somato-sensory evoked potentials (SEPs) and motor-evoked 
potentials (MEPs) have been observed in some patients in 
the acute or sub-acute phase. Although promising data have 
been obtained, larger groups of patients are needed before 
any conclusions can be drawn [56]. Since bone marrow 
isolation requires specialist intervention and in some donor 
cases there are certain limitations, other stem cell sources 
such as fat cells are presently being taken into account [57]. 
We can obtain them as waste tissue after liposuction or other 
surgical operations, and after cultivation a homogeneous 
population of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) is required 
[57].
Adipose Tissue Mesenchymal Stem Cells (ATMSCs)
ATMSCs seem to share many similar properties with 
BMSCs, including their morphology and the expression of 
cell surface antigens, but on the other hand they show dif-
ferent proliferation rates and multilineage capacities [58]. 
In addition, conflicting results have been reported from 
the clinical trials. While some indicate that ATMSCs are 
more effective than or at least as effective as BMSCs, others 
conclude that BMSCs are superior to ATMSCs [59]. It is 
very difficult to prefer one type of cell over another, because 
they differ in their cytokine secretome, chemokine recep-
tor expression and apoptosis [60, 61]. Furthermore, experi-
mental studies have confirmed that ATMSCs are cells with 
high proliferative capacity, capable of secreting basic fibro-
blast growth factor (bFGF), interferon-γ, and insulin-like 
growth factor-1 [60, 61]. On the other hand BMSCs belong 
among the cells with slower proliferation rates, but with high 
potency in osteogenic and chondrogenic differentiation, and 
secreting stem cell-derived factor-1 and hepatocyte growth 
factor [60, 61]. Thus both stem cell sources show immu-
nomodulatory effects and broad biological activities which 
should be considered when choosing the MSC source for 
each specific clinical application [59, 62].
Although the data from studies using adult stem cells are 
promising, final translations of pre-clinical findings from 
animal models of SCI to human clinical trials have not met 
the therapeutic expectations. There were several reasons for 
this failure, such as variability in SCI experimental models 
or limited efficacy of adult stem cells, and therefore much 
effort has been put into finding a more primitive source of 
stem cells. In this regard the therapeutic potential of umbili-
cal cord (UC) Wharton’s jelly (WJ) derived MSCs (WJM-
SCs) has emerged [63]. These cells are more primitive with 
high proliferative capacity, low immunogenicity and non-
tumorigenicity [64, 65]. Furthermore, they secrete high 
levels of neurotrophic factors bFGF, nerve growth factor 
(NGF), NT-3, NT-4, glial cell derived neurotrophic factor 
(GDNF) and other bioactive molecules related to neuropro-
tection, neurogenesis and angiogenesis [63]. In the most 
recent study, repeated intrathecal delivery of WJMSCs into 
a rat experimental model of spinal cord trauma showed 

139
Neurochemical Research (2020) 45:134–143	
1 3
dose-dependent beneficial effects [66]. There are several 
clinical trials showing that systemic infusion of UCMSC 
for patients with multiple sclerosis is safe, but their poten-
tial therapeutic benefits need to be further investigated [67]. 
Overall, it is believed that hWJ-MSCs are the most suitable 
for potential wide use in clinical trials for neuro-degenera-
tive disorders.
Condition Media and Exosomes as Potential 
Novel Therapeutic Tools
Even if cell therapies for SCI show promise for tissue regen-
eration, there are some issues in the utilization of these 
approaches. The quality and intrinsic differences between 
cells, the viability of transplanted cells and the immune 
response after transplantation, may limit stem cell-based 
treatment for spinal cord regeneration [54, 68].
Condition Media (CM) Derived from Cells
As an alternative to cell therapies, CM may be considered. 
They have been shown to have beneficial effects on loco-
motor improvement and tissue repair, including axonal out-
growth, with clear effect on spinal cord regeneration after 
injuries [69]. Various cells may be sources for CM, such 
as bone marrow stromal cells [69, 70], dental pulp-derived 
stem cells [71], endothelial progenitor cells, or UC cells. In 
general, MSCs release into CM neurotrophic factors which 
are able to promote locomotor improvements and tissue 
repair after SCI [68]. The BMSC‐CM contain factors with 
anti‐apoptotic, proinflammatory, angiogenic and neuromod-
ulator factors [68, 69]. The CM administered for SCI therapy 
promoted axonal regrowth and locomotor recovery, reduced 
the lesion site and increased the blood vessel diameter within 
the lesion [68, 70]. The composition of CM has limited con-
centration, so frequent administration over longer periods 
should be considered. CM may be delivered as intrathecal 
injections [69, 70], or directly into a transected spinal cord 
lesion site using an osmotic pump [68].
Exosomes
Besides the positive effects of stem cells and conditioned 
medium on SCI, very recent studies point out the therapeutic 
potential of cell-derived exosomes. Exosomes are extracel-
lular vesicles, 50–150 nm in diameter, with a lipid bilayer 
membrane similar to a cell donor membrane [72]. They are 
released by multiple types of cells and can be detected in all 
body fluids [72, 73]. Jeffery D. Kocsisab et al. reported in 
2015 that i-v delivery of MSCs exosomes into a rat model 
of SCI reduced the injury severity and improved functional 
recovery, although the injected MSCs were not detected at 
the SCI site [74]. They suggest that MSCs exosomes can 
mediate transfer of miRNAs or systemic release of trophic 
factors at lesion level [74]. Recently the same group reported 
that MSCs exosomes travelled to the injured, but not the 
uninjured spinal cord, and are associated specifically with 
M2 macrophages but not with macrophages expressing M1 
phenotype or other types of cells [74]. Composition analyses 
of exosomes showed a complex cargo represented by pro-
teins, lipids, short and long forms of RNA and short frag-
ments of DNA. The miR-133b expressed in MSCs exosomes 
have potential therapeutic benefit in the CNS, including SCI 
[75]. The treatment of SCI rats with miR-133b exosomes 
reduced lesion volume, preserved neuronal cells and pro-
moted neurite outgrowth after SCI [75]. Furthermore, 
miR‐21 and miR‐19b detected also in MSCs exosomes have 
therapeutic effects in the rat model of SCI [76].
Taken together, these data suggest that MSC-derived 
exosomes have therapeutic effects on SCI through angio-
genic properties, promoting axonal regeneration and sup-
pressing glial scar formation. The animals treated with 
MSC-derived exosomes showed improved recovery of 
hindlimb locomotor function. These exosomes are more 
stable and may be stored for a longer time than cells and pre-
sent no risk of aneuploidy, so have a lower risk of immune 
rejection [74, 75].
Designing Cellular and Acellular Biomaterial 
Therapies
After many years of fundamental experimental studies in 
regenerative medicine, researchers have come to the conclu-
sion that the best therapy approach for SCI lies in the com-
bination of biomaterial scaffolds, stem cell (cellular), CM 
or exosome (acellular) therapies and molecule delivery [77]. 
As SCIs result in apoptosis, formation of pseudocysts and 
scars, which inhibit regeneration in the injured region, there 
is a need to develop new biomaterials that could be seeded 
with cells or exosomes [51]. The role of the biomaterial is 
to stimulate regeneration of cells and bridge disconnected 
parts of the spinal cord [78]. Biomaterials should include 
attributes such as biocompatibility, porosity, permeabil-
ity and mechanical properties to match with neural tissue. 
They should be able to support the attachment of cells, their 
growth and differentiation.
Hydrogels and electrospun guidance channels seem to 
be among the most promising alternatives for SCI regen-
eration [79]. Besides other characteristics they are able to 
prevent scar formation and create good conditions for tissue 
and neural regeneration [79]. Hydrogels are biocompatible, 
chemically inert and non-toxic. They have many advantages 
also in clinical practice as they can be administered by injec-
tion, so the procedure is non-invasive and easily available 

140
	
Neurochemical Research (2020) 45:134–143
1 3
for surgeons [80]. Other materials used for SCI treatment 
include non-degradable and degradable materials.
Non-degradable materials comprise silicone, polyacry-
lonitrile/polyvinylchloride (PAN/PVC), poly(tetrafluoro-
ethylene) (PTFE), and poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) 
(PHEMA) [77]. They are highly biocompatible, but have 
many disadvantages, stimulate proliferation of inflamma-
tory cells and reveal signs of calcification [81]. On the other 
hand, there is no need to control the degradation rate and 
toxicity of degradation products [77]. Degradable mate-
rials include synthetic polyvinylalcohol (PVA), Poly(α-
hydroxyacids) with poly(glycolic acid) (PGA), poly(lactic 
acid) (PLA), their co-polymer poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) 
(PLGA) and poly(lactic-co-caprolactone) (PLCL) [81]. Nat-
ural polymers are very accessible but very hard to purify, 
which can lead to activation of the immune system [77]. 
They also manifest regular structure caused by highly—con-
trolled synthesis [79].
Alginate sulphate is one of the most interesting inject-
able biomaterials, capable of binding and then progressively 
releasing various growth and neurotrophic factors [82]. Pro-
viding a complex of bioactive molecules creates an optimal 
environment for long-term survival and ultimate differentia-
tion of co-cultivated neural progenitors in vitro [82]. Thus, 
injected alginate-based biomaterial in the central lesion of 
injured spinal cord tissue stimulated multiple regenerative 
processes, particularly enhanced preservation of spinal cord 
tissue with increased numbers of surviving neurons and syn-
aptic vesicles, corticospinal fibers and blood vessels [49]. 
Inflammation processes mediated by activating microglia 
were partially suppressed, although the astrocyte response 
was similar to that in rats after injury but without biomaterial 
therapy. These results indicate the possibility of therapeutic 
application of active alginate implants with a complex of 
bioactive molecules for the treatment of SCI. Thus the ideal 
biomaterial should be biodegradable, enabling re-growth 
of the natural environment without activating the immune 
response. Alginate-based biomaterials appear therefore to 
fulfil many of these criteria [49]. Of course, there are many 
other biomaterials accessible and many still in development, 
so we can expect further progress in the use of biomaterials 
for SCI regeneration (Fig. 1).
Conclusion
Despite huge scientific efforts being done so far in spinal 
cord research, the final solution of the mystery of its regen-
eration is still missing. Fortunately, the care for patients with 
SCI improved, the new surgical methods together with sup-
porting treatment and rehabilitation can minimize damage 
to the spinal cord and restore function to varying degree. 
Fig. 1   Schematic design for the preliminary stages leading to experimental treatments of SCI using mesenchymal stem cells, cells derived condi-
tion medium, exosomes released by cells or biomaterial scaffolds

141
Neurochemical Research (2020) 45:134–143	
1 3
It is clear that individual therapy had its particular value, 
but newer concepts suggest that it is necessary to combine 
these individual strategies to further enhance the final effect. 
Progress in research is giving patients hope that SCIs will be 
eventually repairable.
Acknowledgements  This research was supported by: APVV 15-0613 
(Dasa Cizkova), ERANET-AxonRepair (Dasa Cizkova), VEGA 
2/0146/19, VEGA 1/0571/17, Grants from Ministère de L’Education 
Nationale, L’Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche, INSERM 
(Michel Salzet), SIRIC ONCOLille Grant INCD a-DGOS-Inserm 
6041aa (Isabelle Fournier), IGA UVLF 06/2018 “Influence of Regen-
eration Capacity of Nervous Tissue in vitro through Adult Stem Cells 
products”.
Author Contributions  All the authors contributed to the writing of the 
manuscript.
Compliance with Ethical Standards 
Conflicts of interest  The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
	 1.	 Dalamagkas K, Tsintou M, Seifalian AM (2018) Stem cells for 
spinal cord injuries bearing translational potential. Neural Regen 
Res 13:35–42. https​://doi.org/10.4103/1673-5374.22436​0
	 2.	 Ellingson BM, Kurpad SN, Schmit BD (2008) Ex vivo diffusion 
tensor imaging and quantitative tractography of the rat spinal 
cord during long-term recovery from moderate spinal contusion. 
J Magn Reson Imaging 28:1068–1079. https​://doi.org/10.1002/
jmri.21578​
	 3.	 Akhtar AZ, Pippin JJ, Sandusky CB (2008) Animal models in 
spinal cord injury: a review. Rev Neurosci 19:47–60
	 4.	 Nakae A, Nakai K, Yano K et al (2011) The animal model of 
spinal cord injury as an experimental pain model. J Biomed Bio-
technol 2011:939023. https​://doi.org/10.1155/2011/93902​3
	 5.	 Wrathall JR, Pettegrew RK, Harvey F (1985) Spinal cord contu-
sion in the rat: production of graded, reproducible, injury groups. 
Exp Neurol 88:108–122
	 6.	 Rivlin AS, Tator CH (1978) Effect of duration of acute spinal cord 
compression in a new acute cord injury model in the rat. Surg 
Neurol 10:38–43
	 7.	 Blight AR (1991) Morphometric analysis of a model of spinal 
cord injury in guinea pigs, with behavioral evidence of delayed 
secondary pathology. J Neurol Sci 103:156–171
	 8.	 Lukovic D, Moreno-Manzano V, Lopez-Mocholi E et al (2015) 
Complete rat spinal cord transection as a faithful model of spinal 
cord injury for translational cell transplantation. Sci Rep 5:9640. 
https​://doi.org/10.1038/srep0​9640
	 9.	 Sharif-Alhoseini M, Khormali M, Rezaei M et al (2017) Animal 
models of spinal cord injury: a systematic review. Spinal Cord 
55:714–721. https​://doi.org/10.1038/sc.2016.187
	10.	 Kjell J, Olson L (2016) Rat models of spinal cord injury: from 
pathology to potential therapies. Dis Model Mech 9:1125–1137. 
https​://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.02583​3
	11.	 Cizkova D, Le Marrec-Croq F, Franck J et al (2014) Alterations 
of protein composition along the rostro-caudal axis after spinal 
cord injury: proteomic, in vitro and in vivo analyses. Front Cell 
Neurosci 8:105. https​://doi.org/10.3389/fncel​.2014.00105​
	12.	 Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC et al (1996) MASCIS 
evaluation of open field locomotor scores: effects of experi-
ence and teamwork on reliability. Multicenter Animal Spinal 
Cord Injury Study. J Neurotrauma 13:343–359. https​://doi.
org/10.1089/neu.1996.13.343
	13.	 Navarro R, Juhas S, Keshavarzi S et al (2012) Chronic spinal 
compression model in minipigs: a systematic behavioral, quali-
tative, and quantitative neuropathological study. J Neurotrauma 
29:499–513. https​://doi.org/10.1089/neu.2011.2076
	14.	 Noble LJ, Wrathall JR (1989) Correlative analyses of lesion 
development and functional status after graded spinal cord con-
tusive injuries in the rat. Exp Neurol 103:34–40
	15.	 Vanický I, Urdzíková L, Saganová K et al (2001) A simple and 
reproducible model of spinal cord injury induced by epidural 
balloon inflation in the rat. J Neurotrauma 18:1399–1407. https​
://doi.org/10.1089/08977​15015​27256​87
	16.	 Jeffery ND, Smith PM, Lakatos A et al (2006) Clinical canine 
spinal cord injury provides an opportunity to examine the issues 
in translating laboratory techniques into practical therapy. Spi-
nal Cord 44:584–593. https​://doi.org/10.1038/sj.sc.31019​12
	17.	 Lim JH, Jung CS, Byeon YE et al (2007) Establishment of a 
canine spinal cord injury model induced by epidural balloon 
compression. J Vet Sci 8:89–94
	18.	 Foditsch EE, Miclaus G, Patras I et al (2018) A new technique 
for minimal invasive complete spinal cord injury in minipigs. 
Acta Neurochir (Wien) 160:459–465. https​://doi.org/10.1007/
s0070​1-017-3442-3
	19.	 Lee JHT, Jones CF, Okon EB et al (2013) A novel porcine 
model of traumatic thoracic spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 
30:142–159. https​://doi.org/10.1089/neu.2012.2386
	20.	 Mills CD, Hains BC, Johnson KM, Hulsebosch CE (2001) 
Strain and model differences in behavioral outcomes after spi-
nal cord injury in rat. J Neurotrauma 18:743–756. https​://doi.
org/10.1089/08977​15013​16919​111
	21.	 Sedý J, Urdzíková L, Jendelová P, Syková E (2008) Methods 
for behavioral testing of spinal cord injured rats. Neurosci 
Biobehav Rev 32:550–580. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubi​
orev.2007.10.001
	22.	 Chaovipoch P, Jelks KAB, Gerhold LM et al (2006) 17beta-
estradiol is protective in spinal cord injury in post- and pre-
menopausal rats. J Neurotrauma 23:830–852. https​://doi.
org/10.1089/neu.2006.23.830
	23.	 Inamasu J, Nakamura Y, Ichikizaki K (2003) Induced hypother-
mia in experimental traumatic spinal cord injury: an update. J 
Neurol Sci 209:55–60
	24.	 David BT, Steward O (2010) Deficits in bladder function fol-
lowing spinal cord injury vary depending on the level of the 
injury. Exp Neurol 226:128–135. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
expne​urol.2010.08.014
	25.	 Liebscher T, Schnell L, Schnell D et al (2005) Nogo-A anti-
body improves regeneration and locomotion of spinal cord-
injured rats. Ann Neurol 58:706–719. https​://doi.org/10.1002/
ana.20627​
	26.	 Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC (1995) A sensitive and 
reliable locomotor rating scale for open field testing in rats. J Neu-
rotrauma 12:1–21. https​://doi.org/10.1089/neu.1995.12.1
	27.	 Tung A, Herrera S, Szafran MJ et al (2005) Effect of sleep depri-
vation on righting reflex in the rat is partially reversed by adminis-
tration of adenosine A1 and A2 receptor antagonists. Anesthesiol-
ogy 102:1158–1164
	28.	 Ryken TC, Hadley MN, Walters BC et al (2013) Radiographic 
assessment. Neurosurgery 72(Suppl 2):54–72. https​://doi.
org/10.1227/NEU.0b013​e3182​76ede​e
	29.	 Janssen M, Nabih A, Moussa W et al (2011) Evaluation of diag-
nosis techniques used for spinal injury related back pain. Pain Res 
Treat. https​://doi.org/10.1155/2011/47879​8doi: .

142
	
Neurochemical Research (2020) 45:134–143
1 3
	30.	 Gupta V (2013) Positron emission tomography in spinal cord dis-
ease. Mayo Clin Proc 88:1188–1190. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mayoc​p.2013.09.004
	31.	 Mori S, Zhang J (2006) Principles of diffusion tensor imaging and 
its applications to basic neuroscience research. Neuron 51:527–
539. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro​n.2006.08.012
	32.	 Parizel PM, van der Zijden T, Gaudino S et al (2010) Trauma 
of the spine and spinal cord: imaging strategies. Eur Spine J Off 
Publ Eur Spine Soc Eur Spinal Deform Soc Eur Sect Cerv Spine 
Res Soc 19(Suppl 1):S8–S17. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s0058​
6-009-1123-5
	33.	 Vargas MI, Gariani J, Delattre BA et al (2015) Three-dimensional 
MR imaging of the brachial plexus. Semin Musculoskelet Radiol 
19:137–148. https​://doi.org/10.1055/s-0035-15463​00
	34.	 Quanico J, Hauberg-Lotte L, Devaux S et al (2018) 3D MALDI 
mass spectrometry imaging reveals specific localization of long-
chain acylcarnitines within a 10-day time window of spinal cord 
injury. Sci Rep 8:16083. https​://doi.org/10.1038/s4159​8-018-
34518​-0
	35.	 Adams SH, Hoppel CL, Lok KH et al (2009) Plasma acylcarnitine 
profiles suggest incomplete long-chain fatty acid β-oxidation and 
altered tricarboxylic acid cycle activity in type 2 diabetic African-
American women. J Nutr 139:1073–1081. https​://doi.org/10.3945/
jn.108.10375​4
	36.	 Rutkowsky JM, Knotts TA, Ono-Moore KD et al (2014) Acylcar-
nitines activate proinflammatory signaling pathways. Am J Phys-
iol Endocrinol Metab 306:E1378–E1387. https​://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpen​do.00656​.2013
	37.	 Viader A, Sasaki Y, Kim S et al (2013) Aberrant Schwann cell 
lipid metabolism linked to mitochondrial deficits leads to axon 
degeneration and neuropathy. Neuron 77:886–898. https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuro​n.2013.01.012
	38.	 Devaux S, Cizkova D, Quanico J et al (2016) Proteomic analysis 
of the spatio-temporal based molecular kinetics of acute spinal 
cord injury identifies a time- and segment-specific window for 
effective tissue repair. Mol Cell Proteomics 15:2641–2670. https​
://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M115.05779​4
	39.	 Roux A, Muller L, Jackson SN et al (2016) Mass spectrometry 
imaging of rat brain lipid profile changes over time following trau-
matic brain injury. J Neurosci Methods 272:19–32. https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jneum​eth.2016.02.004
	40.	 Girod M, Shi Y, Cheng J-X, Cooks RG (2011) Mapping lipid 
alterations in traumatically injured rat spinal cord by desorption 
electrospray ionization imaging mass spectrometry. Anal Chem 
83:207–215. https​://doi.org/10.1021/ac102​264z
	41.	 Ahuja CS, Wilson JR, Nori S et al (2017) Traumatic spinal cord 
injury. Nat Rev Dis Primer 3:17018. https​://doi.org/10.1038/
nrdp.2017.18
	42.	 Fawcett JW (2009) Recovery from spinal cord injury: regenera-
tion, plasticity and rehabilitation. Brain 132:1417–1418. https​://
doi.org/10.1093/brain​/awp12​1
	43.	 Kubinová Š, Syková E (2009) Nanotechnology for treatment of 
stroke and spinal cord injury. Nanomedicine 5:99–108. https​://doi.
org/10.2217/nnm.09.93
	44.	 Angeli CA, Boakye M, Morton RA et al (2018) Recovery of over-
ground walking after chronic motor complete spinal cord injury. 
N Engl J Med 379:1244–1250. https​://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMo​
a1803​588
	45.	 Gill ML, Grahn PJ, Calvert JS et al (2018) Neuromodulation of 
lumbosacral spinal networks enables independent stepping after 
complete paraplegia. Nat Med 24:1677. https​://doi.org/10.1038/
s4159​1-018-0175-7
	46.	 Musselman KE, Shah M, Zariffa J (2018) Rehabilitation tech-
nologies and interventions for individuals with spinal cord injury: 
translational potential of current trends. J Neuroeng Rehabil 
15:40. https​://doi.org/10.1186/s1298​4-018-0386-7
	47.	 Sykova E, Forostyak S (2013) Stem cells in regenerative medicine. 
Laser Ther 22:87–92. https​://doi.org/10.5978/islsm​.13-RE-01
	48.	 Kubinová Š, Syková E (2012) Biomaterials combined with cell 
therapy for treatment of spinal cord injury. Regen Med 7:207–224. 
https​://doi.org/10.2217/rme.11.121
	49.	 Grulova I, Slovinska L, Blaško J et al (2015) Delivery of alginate 
scaffold releasing two trophic factors for spinal cord injury repair. 
Sci Rep. https​://doi.org/10.1038/srep1​3702
	50.	 Syková E, Homola A, Mazanec R et al (2006) Autologous bone 
marrow transplantation in patients with subacute and chronic spi-
nal cord injury. Cell Transplant 15:675–687
	51.	 Syková E, Jendelová P, Urdzíková L et al (2006) Bone marrow 
stem cells and polymer hydrogels—two strategies for spinal cord 
injury repair. Cell Mol Neurobiol 26:1113–1129. https​://doi.
org/10.1007/s1057​1-006-9007-2
	52.	 Nandoe Tewarie RDS, Nandoe RDS, Hurtado A et al (2006) Bone 
marrow stromal cells for repair of the spinal cord: towards clinical 
application. Cell Transplant 15:563–577
	53.	 Cizkova D, Novotna I, Slovinska L et al (2011) Repetitive intrath-
ecal catheter delivery of bone marrow mesenchymal stromal 
cells improves functional recovery in a rat model of contusive 
spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 28:1951–1961. https​://doi.
org/10.1089/neu.2010.1413
	54.	 Cízková D, Rosocha J, Vanický I et al (2006) Transplants of 
human mesenchymal stem cells improve functional recovery after 
spinal cord injury in the rat. Cell Mol Neurobiol 26:1167–1180. 
https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1057​1-006-9093-1
	55.	 Osaka M, Honmou O, Murakami T et al (2010) Intravenous 
administration of mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone 
marrow after contusive spinal cord injury improves functional 
outcome. Brain Res 1343:226–235. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.brain​
res.2010.05.011
	56.	 Forostyak S, Sykova E (2017) Neuroprotective potential of cell-
based therapies in ALS: from bench to bedside. Front Neurosci. 
https​://doi.org/10.3389/fnins​.2017.00591​
	57.	 Vishnubalaji R, Al-Nbaheen M, Kadalmani B et al (2012) Com-
parative investigation of the differentiation capability of bone-
marrow- and adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells by qualita-
tive and quantitative analysis. Cell Tissue Res 347:419–427. https​
://doi.org/10.1007/s0044​1-011-1306-3
	58.	 Danisovic L, Varga I, Polák S et al (2009) Comparison of in vitro 
chondrogenic potential of human mesenchymal stem cells derived 
from bone marrow and adipose tissue. Gen Physiol Biophys 
28:56–62
	59.	 Elman JS, Li M, Wang F et al (2014) A comparison of adipose and 
bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cell secreted factors 
in the treatment of systemic inflammation. J Inflamm Lond Engl 
11:1. https​://doi.org/10.1186/1476-9255-11-1
	60.	 Ahmadian Kia N, Bahrami AR, Ebrahimi M et al (2011) Compar-
ative analysis of chemokine receptor’s expression in mesenchymal 
stem cells derived from human bone marrow and adipose tissue. 
J Mol Neurosci MN 44:178–185. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1203​
1-010-9446-6
	61.	 Hsiao ST-F, Asgari A, Lokmic Z et al (2012) Comparative analy-
sis of paracrine factor expression in human adult mesenchymal 
stem cells derived from bone marrow, adipose, and dermal tis-
sue. Stem Cells Dev 21:2189–2203. https​://doi.org/10.1089/
scd.2011.0674
	62.	 Huang JI, Kazmi N, Durbhakula MM et al (2005) Chondrogenic 
potential of progenitor cells derived from human bone marrow 
and adipose tissue: a patient-matched comparison. J Orthop Res 
Off Publ Orthop Res Soc 23:1383–1389. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
orthr​es.2005.03.008.11002​30621​
	63.	 Balasubramanian S, Thej C, Venugopal P et al (2013) Higher 
propensity of Wharton’s jelly derived mesenchymal stromal cells 
towards neuronal lineage in comparison to those derived from 

143
Neurochemical Research (2020) 45:134–143	
1 3
adipose and bone marrow. Cell Biol Int 37:507–515. https​://doi.
org/10.1002/cbin.10056​
	64.	 Kim D-W, Staples M, Shinozuka K et al (2013) Wharton’s jelly-
derived mesenchymal stem cells: phenotypic characterization and 
optimizing their therapeutic potential for clinical applications. Int 
J Mol Sci 14:11692–11712. https​://doi.org/10.3390/ijms1​40611​
692
	65.	 Zhou C, Yang B, Tian Y et al (2011) Immunomodulatory effect 
of human umbilical cord Wharton’s jelly-derived mesenchymal 
stem cells on lymphocytes. Cell Immunol 272:33–38. https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.celli​mm.2011.09.010
	66.	 Krupa P, Vackova I, Ruzicka J et al (2018) The effect of human 
mesenchymal stem cells derived from Wharton’s jelly in spi-
nal cord injury treatment is dose-dependent and can be facili-
tated by repeated application. Int J Mol Sci 19:1503. https​://doi.
org/10.3390/ijms1​90515​03
	67.	 Riordan NH, Morales I, Fernández G et al (2018) Clinical feasibil-
ity of umbilical cord tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells in the 
treatment of multiple sclerosis. J Transl Med 16:57. https​://doi.
org/10.1186/s1296​7-018-1433-7
	68.	 Cantinieaux D, Quertainmont R, Blacher S et al (2013) Condi-
tioned medium from bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem 
cells improves recovery after spinal cord injury in rats: an original 
strategy to avoid cell transplantation. PLoS ONE 8:e69515. https​
://doi.org/10.1371/journ​al.pone.00695​15
	69.	 Kanekiyo K, Wakabayashi T, Nakano N et al (2018) Effects of 
intrathecal injection of the conditioned medium from bone mar-
row stromal cells on spinal cord injury in rats. J Neurotrauma 
35:521–532. https​://doi.org/10.1089/neu.2017.5201
	70.	 Cizkova D, Cubinkova V, Smolek T et al (2018) Localized intrath-
ecal delivery of mesenchymal stromal cells conditioned medium 
improves functional recovery in a rat model of spinal cord injury. 
Int J Mol Sci. https​://doi.org/10.3390/ijms1​90308​70
	71.	 Asadi-Golshan R, Razban V, Mirzaei E et al (2018) Sensory and 
motor behavior evidences supporting the usefulness of condi-
tioned medium from dental pulp-derived stem cells in spinal cord 
injury in rats. Asian Spine J 12:785–793. https​://doi.org/10.31616​
/asj.2018.12.5.785
	72.	 Théry C, Zitvogel L, Amigorena S (2002) Exosomes: composi-
tion, biogenesis and function. Nat Rev Immunol 2:569–579. https​
://doi.org/10.1038/nri85​5
	73.	 Murgoci A-N, Cizkova D, Majerova P et al (2018) Brain-cortex 
microglia-derived exosomes: nanoparticles for glioma therapy. 
Chemphyschem Eur J Chem Phys Phys Chem 19:1205–1214. 
https​://doi.org/10.1002/cphc.20170​1198
	74.	 Lankford KL, Arroyo EJ, Nazimek K et al (2018) Intravenously 
delivered mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes target 
M2-type macrophages in the injured spinal cord. PLoS ONE 
13:e0190358. https​://doi.org/10.1371/journ​al.pone.01903​58
	75.	 Li D, Zhang P, Yao X et al (2018) Exosomes derived from miR-
133b-modified mesenchymal stem cells promote recovery after 
spinal cord injury. Front Neurosci.https​://doi.org/10.3389/fnins​
.2018.00845​
	76.	 Xu G, Ao R, Zhi Z et al (2018) miR-21 and miR-19b delivered by 
hMSC-derived EVs regulate the apoptosis and differentiation of 
neurons in patients with spinal cord injury. J Cell Physiol. https​://
doi.org/10.1002/jcp.27690​
	77.	 Straley KS, Foo CWP, Heilshorn SC (2010) Biomaterial design 
strategies for the treatment of spinal cord injuries. J Neurotrauma 
27:1–19. https​://doi.org/10.1089/neu.2009.0948
	78.	 DeBrot A, Yao L (2018) The combination of induced pluripo-
tent stem cells and bioscaffolds holds promise for spinal cord 
regeneration. Neural Regen Res 13:1677–1684. https​://doi.
org/10.4103/1673-5374.23860​2
	79.	 Tsintou M, Dalamagkas K, Seifalian AM (2015) Advances 
in regenerative therapies for spinal cord injury: a biomate-
rials approach. Neural Regen Res 10:726–742. https​://doi.
org/10.4103/1673-5374.15696​6
	80.	 Macaya D, Spector M (2012) Injectable hydrogel materials for 
spinal cord regeneration: a review. Biomed Mater Bristol Engl 
7:012001. https​://doi.org/10.1088/1748-6041/7/1/01200​1
	81.	 Belkas JS, Munro CA, Shoichet MS et al (2005) Long-term 
in vivo biomechanical properties and biocompatibility of poly(2-
hydroxyethyl methacrylate-co-methyl methacrylate) nerve con-
duits. Biomaterials 26:1741–1749. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bioma​teria​ls.2004.05.031
	82.	 Cizkova D, Slovinska L, Grulova I et al (2015) The influence of 
sustained dual-factor presentation on the expansion and differen-
tiation of neural progenitors in affinity-binding alginate scaffolds. 
J Tissue Eng Regen Med 9:918–929. https​://doi.org/10.1002/
term.1797
	83.	 Trafton PG, Boyd CA (1984) Computed tomography of thoracic 
and lumbar spine injuries. J Trauma 24:506–515
	84.	 Atesok K, Tanaka N, O’Brien A et al (2018) Posttraumatic spi-
nal cord injury without radiographic abnormality. Adv Orthop 
2018:7060654. https​://doi.org/10.1155/2018/70606​54
	85.	 Guarnieri G, Izzo R, Muto M (2016) The role of emergency 
radiology in spinal trauma. Br J Radiol 89:20150833. https​://doi.
org/10.1259/bjr.20150​833
	86.	 Szwedowski D, Walecki J (2014) Spinal Cord Injury without 
Radiographic Abnormality (SCIWORA)—clinical and radiologi-
cal aspects. Pol J Radiol 79:461–464. https​://doi.org/10.12659​/
PJR.89094​4
	87.	 Freund P, Curt A, Friston K, Thompson A (2013) Tracking 
changes following spinal cord injury: insights from neuroimaging. 
Neurosci Rev J Bringing Neurobiol Neurol Psychiatry 19:116–
128. https​://doi.org/10.1177/10738​58412​44919​2
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

===== Clarke1991_Development_NeuralTube+Xenopus =====
Development 112, 499-516 (1991)
Printed in Great Britain © The Company of Biologists Limited 1991
499
Neuroanatomical and functional analysis of neural tube formation in
notochordless Xenopus embryos; laterality of the ventral spinal cord is lost
J. D. W. CLARKE1*, NIGEL HOLDER1, S. R. SOFFE2 and J. STORM-MATHISEN3
1 Anatomy and Human Biology Subject Group, Division of Biomedical Sciences, King's College, Strand, London WC2R 2LS, UK
2Department of Zoology, University of Bristol, Woodland Road, Bristol BS8 1UG, UK
1* Anatomical Institute, University of Oslo, Karl Johans Gate 47, N-0162 Oslo, Norway
•Author for correspondence: Present address, Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, United Medical and Dental School, Guy's
Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK
Summary
Notochordless Xenopus embryos were produced by u.v.
irradiation of the uncleaved fertilized egg. The spinal
cords were examined using intermediate filament
staining for glial cells, retrograde HRP staining for
neuronal morphology and an anti-glycinergic antibody
to reveal commissural cells and axons. The floorplate
cells of the normal cord appear to be absent and their
position along the ventral midline of the cord is occupied
by motor neurones, Kolmer-Agduhr cells, radial glial
cells and a ventrally placed marginal zone containing the
longitudinal axons. Motor neurone number is reduced to
15 % of control values, and the sensory extramedullary
cell number is increased twentyfold. Commissural axons
are still able to cross the ventral cord but do so at
abnormal angles and some commissural axons continue
to grow circumferentially up the contralateral side of the
cord rather than turning to grow longitudinally.
Extracellular 
electrophysiological 
recordings 
from
motor axons reveal that the normal alternation of
locomotor activity on the left and right side of the
embryo is lost in notochordless animals. These results
suggest that the notochord and/or the normal floor plate
structure are important for the development of the
laterality of spinal cord connections and may influence
motor neurone proliferation or differentiation.
Key words: notochord, floor plate, motor neurones,
commissural axons, Xenopus.
Introduction
The vertebrate neuroectoderm forms as a result of one
or more inductive interactions between mesodenn and
ectoderm around the time of gastrulation. The exact
nature of these interactions is poorly understood,
although it appears that some mesodermal components
are not only able to induce a broad 'neural' identity in
the adjacent ectoderm cells, but are also able to specify
which neural structures will develop. That is, mesodenn
may impose positional values on the neuroectoderm
(see reviews by Holtfreter and Hamburger, 1955 and
more recently by Saxen, 1989).
One of the possible interactions between mesoderm
and neuroectoderm is that the notochord may induce
the development of a specialised group of ventral
neuroepithelial cells known as the floor plate. In the
early stages of neural tube development, this ventral
midline structure is composed of simple cuboidal or
columnar cells that span the thin floor beneath the
neural canal. The basal surfaces of these cells are in
close contact with the notochord. The evidence for an
inductive interaction is twofold. First, at appropriate
developmental stages, ectopically grafted notochords
are capable of inducing secondary, ectopic floor plate
structures in the lateral walls of the neural tube of chick
embryos (van Straaten et al. 1988; Placzek et al. 19906,
Yamada et al. 1991)). Second, surgical removal of the
chick notochord results in floorplateless neural tubes
(Placzek et al. 1990b, Yamada et al. 1991) and, in
amphibians, neural tubes that develop in the absence of
notochord appear not to develop floor plate structures,
rather the ventral midline of the tube is composed of a
thick basal mass of cells and axons (Holtfreter and
Hamburger, 1955; Youn and Malacinski, 1981).
In the present paper, we examine in detail the
neuroanatomical and functional consequences of neural
tube development in notochordless Xenopus embryos.
Several recent reports suggest that the floor plate may
play one or more important roles in neuronal develop-
ment; therefore, if the floor place is absent from spinal
cords in notochordless Xenopus embryos, this may have
profound effects upon neural tube organisation. We
have paid particular attention to three related aspects of
neural tube development:
(1) The floor plate
We have used morphological criteria, ultrastructure

500 
/. D. W. Clarke and others
and intermediate filament staining to determine
whether the floor plate is missing from notochordless
embryos and how the other neuroepithelial cells (radial
glia) are reorganised.
(2) Sensory and motor neurone development
It has been suggested (Jessell et al. 1988; Wagner et al.
1990; Yamada et al. 1991; Hirano et al. 1991) that the
floor plate, perhaps together with the underlying
notochord, may play a role in the patterning of the
dorsoventral axis of the neural tube. That is, cells that
differentiate close to the floor plate will develop ventral
cell characteristics, and cells that differentiate distant
from the floor plate will develop dorsal cell character-
istics. Floor plateless neural tubes may thus be more
'dorsalised' than normal. We have examined this
proposal by analysing the number, position and
morphology of dorsal sensory neurones (Rohon-Beard
cells and extramedullary cells, see Clarke et al. 1984)
and ventral neurones (motor neurones).
(3) The development of commissural axons
Commissural neurones have a ventrally directed axon,
which crosses over to the contralateral marginal zone by
growing through the basal regions of the floor plate
cells. In vitro experiments suggest that floor plate cells
can exert a major influence over the growth of
commissural axons, since in rats the floor plate has been
shown to release a chemotropic factor capable of
redirecting commissural axons within a collagen gel
(Tessier-Levigne et al. 1988) and within cultured
neuroepithelium (Placzek et al. 1990a). Also, in situ,
the change in direction of commissural axon growth,
from circumferential growth round the ipsilateral cord
and across the floor plate to longitudinal growth within
the contralateral marginal zone, occurs at or close to the
lateral border of the floor plate (Bovolenta and Dodd,
1990) and may result from a change in the expression of
specific cell surface glycoproteins (and hence cell
affinities) on commissural axons (Dodd etal. 1988). The
floor plate may be the source of the signal that initiates
the change in glycoprotein expression, and may thus act
as an intermediate target in directing commissural axon
growth. Thus if floor plate development is disturbed by
inhibiting notochord development this may have
important consequences for the growth of commissural
axons. We have used an antibody that is specific for
glycinergic commissural neurones (Roberts et al. 1988)
to assess the growth of their axons in notochordless
embryos.
Notochordless embryos can be produced by ultra-
violet irradiation of the vegetal pole of fertilized
Xenopus laevis eggs before their first cleavage. This
procedure produces mesodermal deficits in a dose-
dependent manner (see Fig. 1), and can result in a
variety of embryonic types, ranging from a completely
vegetalised embryo containing no axial mesoderm, to a
nearly normal individual whose mesodermal deficits are
limited to partial or complete deletion of the notochord
and/or prechordal plate. (Malacinski et al. 1977; Youn
and Malacinski, 1981). Notochord and prechordal plate
development are thus most susceptible to the effects of
u.v. irradiation, which is consistent with the view that
irradiation disrupts the distribution of mesoderm-
inducing factors within the vegetal pole of the egg, and
that the development of the notochord and prechordal
plate requires the highest concentration of these factors
(Scharf and Gehart, 1983).
Our results confirm that the structure of the spinal
cord in notochordless embryos is abnormal and,
according to anatomical criteria and intermediate
filament expression, the normal floor plate cells are
absent. Retrograde horseradish peroxidase staining
shows that all the normal neuronal classes are present in
experimental cords, but for some their position,
morphology and number are disturbed. Unlike the
normal cord, which has two lateral marginal zones, all
longitudinal axons in the experimental cord run in a
single marginal zone that covers the ventral and
ventrolateral surfaces of the cord. Within this zone,
however, relative axon position is normal. Glycinergic
commissural axons are still able to cross the ventral
surface of the cord, but often do so at unusually shallow
angles and, in some cases, do not turn to run
longitudinally along with the other contralateral axons,
but continue to grow circumferentially up to the dorsal
surface of the cord. Electrophysiological evidence
shows that, although the experimental cords are able to
generate a rhythmic motor output, they are unable to
generate a normal alternating rhythm on the left and
right sides, rather the whole cord acts like a single-sided
preparation where all motor neurones fire nearly
synchronously. These results may all be consequent
upon removing the normal interaction between noto-
chord and neuroepithelium, although the disruption of
other neural induction mechanisms cannot be ruled out.
Materials and methods
Egg production and u. v. irradiation
Eggs were obtained by injecting female Xenopus laevis with
500i.u. hCG (Sigma) and then stripping twelve hours later.
The eggs were fertilised by gentle rubbing with macerated
testes and were then covered with 1/10 Barth X solution
(Gurdon, 1977). Control eggs were left to develop at room
temperature. Experimental eggs were left to rotate until the
pigmented animal pole was clearly uppermost and then
transfered to a quartz glass dish positioned 7 cm above the
ultraviolet lamp (a mercury pen ray lamp - Ultra Violet
Products Ltd, Cambridge, UK). Eggs were irradiated for
3min at 254 nm and then transferred to an aerated container
of 1/10 Barth X at room temperature.
Wax histology
Embryos were fixed in Perfix (Fisher Diagnostics) for 2h,
dehydrated through Lang's alcohols (Lang, 1937), cleared and
embedded in wax. Serial 8/an transverse sections were
stained with H and E.
Electron microscopy
Embryos were fixed in Karnovsky's fixative for 2h, dehy-
drated, osmicated and embedded in Epon resin. 1 /an sections
were stained with methylene blue and ultrathin sections were
stained with lead citrate and uranyl acetate.

Neural tubes in notochordless Xenopus embryos 
501
HRP
Embryos were anaesthetised in MS222 (Sigma) and a small
area of skin removed to allow HRP (Boehringer grade 1)
application. HRP was recrystallised onto the tips of electroly-
tically sharpened pins, and these were then pushed into
appropriate regions of the CNS or into the myotome blocks.
Embryos were allowed to recover in 1/10 Barth X for 3 to 6 h,
before being reanaesthetised and fixed in 2.5% glutaralde-
hyde in 0.1M phosphate buffer, pH7.4 (PB) for 1.5 h. The
skin and sometimes the myotomes were removed from the
CNS and the remaining tissue washed several times in PB,
before being soaked in 0.04% diaminobenzidene (DAB,
Sigma) for 15min. H2C>2 was added at 0.03% for a further
15min. The tissue was washed in PB, the brain and cord
dissected free, dehydrated, cleared and mounted in DPX
between two coverslips. Some specimens were sectioned in
wax rather than prepared as whole mounts.
Immunohistochemistry
Glycine
Spinal cords were stained for glycinergic neurones as
described previously (Dale et al. 1986; Roberts et al. 1988)
with the exception that the ABC Vector Elite avidin/biotin
system was used rather than the PAP method. The specificity
of the staining was checked using test filters containing spots
of various amino acid-tissue-glutaraldehyde conjugates (Dale
et al. 1986). All immunoreactivity was removed by omitting
the primary antibody step and by adding glycine-glutaralde-
hyde conjugates to the primary antiserum.
Vimentin
Embryos were fixed for 4 h in a 2 % solution of trichloroacetic
acid, washed in PBS, dehydrated and embedded in polyethy-
leneglycol 400 distearate wax (BDH). Transverse sections
were cut at 10/im, dried onto glass slides and dewaxed
through a series of graded acetones to PBS. Non-specific
binding was blocked with 4% bovine serum albumin, 2%
newborn calf serum in PBS for 15min. The anti-vimentin
antibody, Z9 (supplied by Dr Chris Wylie), was diluted 1:100
and applied to sections overnight at 4°C. After washing in
PBS the primary antibody was detected with a fluorescein-
tagged anti-rabbit secondary antibody for 2h at room
temperature. Sections were washed in PBS and mounted in
DABCO (Sigma).
Electrophysiology
Detailed accounts of the methods used here have been
published elsewhere (Kahn and Roberts, 1982). Briefly, the
embryos 
were 
immobilised 
with 
curare 
(70-100/IM
d-tubocurarine) and then pinned to a Sylgard dish and
superfused with Xenopus saline (Na, 115; K, 2.5; Ca, 2.0; Mg,
1.0; Cl, 121; HCO3, 2.5; Hepes, 10; all in DIM, pH7.6).
Suction electrodes applied to the intermyotomal clefts
recorded ventral root activity and a stimulating suction
electrode was used to activate sensory endings in the skin.
Ventral root activity was recorded on tape and then played
back through a thermal arraycorder (Graphtek) for analysis
and presentation.
Results
A grading system to describe the abnormalities charac-
teristic of the u.v.-irradiated embryos has been pro-
posed by Malacinski (Malacinski et al. 191 A) and slightly
modified by Scharf and Gerhart (1983). The grades or
indices of axial deficiency (IAD) are:
0 - normal in all externally visible respects
1 - reduced forehead; eyes smaller than normal
and sometimes joined
2 - eyes fused or cyclopic; but at least some
retinal pigment visible
3 - no visible retinal pigment; otic vesicles or
single vesicle still present
4 - no otic vesicle present; somites present in
trunk or portion thereof
5 - no somites present; trace of tail mesenchyme
occasionally seen
Nearly all u.v.-irradiated embryos used in our study
were grade 1 or 2 (Fig. 1). Individuals with total or
partial notochord deletions could be selected as this
deficit results in a constriction of the body width just
Fig. 1. Xenopus embryos at stage 35/36 (A) and stage 29/30 (B) or their u.v.-treated equivalent. From top to bottom;
normal embryo, IAD Type 1/2, IAD Type 3, IAD Type 4. -Lines en background grid are lmm apart.

502 
J. D. W. Clarke and others
ventral to the level of the neural tube. The assignment
of embryos into these grades is straightforward after 2
days of development, but less easy earlier before the
development of clear head structures. It is possible,
then, that some of the embryos analysed before 2 days
may have fallen into the grade 3 category. This
possibility is discussed in more detail later.
Normal cord structure
At 2 and 3 days of development the spinal cord is a
gently tapering tube of approximately oval cross-
section. The neurocoel is roughly triangular in cross-
section and eccentrically placed towards the ventral
surface of the cord (Fig. 2A). Most ependymal cells
lining the neurocoel are radial glia and have branching
processes that span the cord out to its surface. Along
the lateral surface of the cord, these branching
processes expand to form end-feet and interdigitate to
form the glia limitans. Vimentin staining labels the
peripheral branches of these processes (Fig. 2E). In
contrast, the ventral surface of the neurocoel is lined by
3, 4 or 5 roughly cuboidal cells, which do not have
branching processes, do not stain for vimentin, and
form the floor plate.
All longitudinal running axons he within the two
lateral marginal zones. Occasionally, the dorsal part of
the marginal zones is separated from the rest by a
superficial neuronal cell body (Roberts and Clarke,
1982). The majority of neuronal cells bodies lie in the
mantle zone between the ependymal layer and the
marginal zones. Rohon-Beard cells are the major
exception to this, and they form a cell column along the
dorsal midline of the cord. Their superficial cell surfaces
have a less extensive covering of neuroepithelial end-
feet than other cord surfaces (Taylor and Roberts,
1983).
Notochordless embryo spinal cord
The structure of spinal cords that develop in the
absence of a notochord differ from control cords in
three obvious ways:
(1) The neurocoel lies in a more dorsal position,
often with only a thin cellular bridge (less than 5 /an)
separating it from the dorsal cord surface (Fig. 2B).
Occasionally the neurocoel is much reduced in size and
can be difficult to see in wax-sectioned material
(Fig. 4D,F).
(2) Ventral to the neurocoel, there is no morphologi-
cal evidence for any floor plate cells, i.e. no cuboidal
cells span the distance to the ventral cord surface. This
area is now filled with neurone cell bodies, radial glial
cells with branching processes and Kolmer-Agduhr cells
(see later).
(3) The ventral and ventrolateral surfaces of the cord
are now lined with a single cresent-shaped marginal
zone that contains the longitudinal axons. There is no
obvious boundary between left and right marginal zone
(Fig. 2B and 4E,F).
Vimentin 
staining 
and 
electron 
microscopy
(Fig. 2C,D,F) indicate that the ventral marginal zone,
including the midline, contains the branching processes
of radial glia cells. The glia limitans, formed by the
radial glial endfeet, appears to be less complete than in
normal cords, so that occasionally neuronal processes
are found contacting the basal lamina that lines the cord
(Fig. 2D). The packing of neuronal processes, within
the marginal zone is less dense than that of control
specimens.
In serial wax sections, the dorsal surface of the
experimental cords is less uniformly smooth than
ventral and lateral surfaces. This is because cells are
frequently found to lie outside but attached to the
regular cord surface. Some of these dorsal cells are
shown to be ectopic Rohon-Beard cells (see later).
Neurones revealed by HRP labelling
Normal cord (fi=20)
The stage 37/38 (Nieuwkop and Faber, 1956) Xenopus
embryo spinal cord has previously been extensively
analysed by retrograde HRP staining (Roberts and
Clarke, 1982). We have repeated this analysis on the
slightly earlier stages 33 through to 36 to coincide more
closely with the developmental stages of the u.v.-
treated animals. We find that the neuronal types
present at stages 33/34 and 35/36 closely resemble
those in the stage 37/38 cord, and will thus describe
these only briefly.
Three types of HRP application were used and each
filled characteristic cell classes.
(1) Myotome HRP applications. This labels three
classes of neurone; motor neurones, Rohon-Beard cells
and extramedullary cells. Motor neurones (Figs 3A,B
and 4A,B) lie in a ventrolateral or lateral position
within the spinal cord, their dendrites extend into the
ipsilateral marginal zone but do not enter the ventral
floor plate or contralateral marginal zone, and their
axons usually run caudally for a variable distance in the
ventrolateral marginal zone before exiting in a ventral
root. Later in development, axial motor neurones can
be subdivided into two groups - primary and secondary.
Primary motor neurones (Fig. 3A,B) are born first,
have large cell bodies, extensive dendritic arbors and a
synaptic relationship with Mauthner's axon. Secondary
motor neurones (Fig. 3A,B) are smaller, born later,
have less extensive dendritic arbors and are not
contacted by Mauthner's axon (Hughes, 1959; Blight,
1978; Forehand and Farel, 1982; van Mier et al. 1985;
Nordlander, 1986). At early stages of development only
the criterion of cell size is easily analysed and Fig. 7
demonstrates a skewed distribution of cell sizes that is
not clearly separated into two groups. However, in the
tail, at slightly later stages of development (stage 40),
all primary motor neurons are larger than all secondary
motor neurones (Nordlander, 1986); therefore, it is
likely that the more numerous small cells of Fig. 7 are
secondaries and the larger cells are primaries.
Rohon-Beard cells (Fig. 3A) lie on or close to the
dorsal midline of the cord. They usually have large
smooth cell bodies with both an ascending and a
descending axon in the dosolateral part of the marginal
zone. They also have a peripheral axon, which exits the

Neural tubes in notochordless Xenopus embryos 
503
Fig. 2. (A) Photomicrograph of an unstained transverse section of a normal stage 35/36 spinal cord. Note lateral marginal
zones and ventrally placed central canal. (B) Toluidine-blue-stained transverse section of a normal stage 35/36 IAD Type 1
spinal cord. Note central canal is now placed dorsally and the pale-staining marginal zone (*) lines the ventral half of the
cord. (C,D) Electron micrographs of the ventral midline of Type 1 spinal cord shown in B. Note the characteristic radial,
glia-like endfeet, normally only seen in the lateral marginal zones, the large extracellular spaces and, in D, several axonal
profiles lying immediately adjacent to the basal lamina (arrows). (E,F) Transverse sections of normal (E) and Type 1 spinal
cord (F) stained with the anti-vimentin antibody Z9. Vimentin-positive radial processes and endfeet are present only in the
lateral marginal zones of normal cords, but are present also across the ventral midline of the uv-treated cord. My,
myotomes; not, notochord; fp, floor plate; c, central canal; mz, marginal zone; ef, endfoot. Scale bar in A is 50 fan and
applies to A, B, E and F, and is 1/xm in C and D.

504 
/. D. W. Clarke and others
Fig. 3. Camera-lucida drawings of motoneurones. (A) Side-view whole-mounted spinal cord from a normal embryo.
Neurons filled from a myotome HRP application. Large black cell is a primary motor neurone and small black cell is a
secondary motor neurone. Positions and sizes of other motor neurone cell bodies are shown as unfilled outlines. Rohon-
Beard cells are shown stippled along the dorsal cord. Rostral is to the left. (B) Transverse sections from a normal embryo
showing two large primary motor neurones and three smaller secondary motor neurones. Note dendrites are restricted to
one side only. No motor neurones are found ventral to the neurocoel. (C,D,E) Ventral views of whole-mounted spinal
cords from u.v.-treated embryos. Motor neurone.s and their caudally running axons lie on or close to the ventral midline.
In C both cells have dendrites that clearly extend in both left and right halves of the marginal zone. Arrows indicate
positions where axons exit the cord. The most rostral cell in C is unusual in that the motor dendrites overlap with the
Rohon-Beard axons (shown dashed). One Rohon-Beard axon is shown crossing the cord ventrally; this was only seen once.
(F,G) Transverse sections from u.v.-treated embryos showing motor neurones with clear bilateral dendrites. Rohon-Beard
axons are shown as short wavy lines dorsolateral to the motor cells. Rohon-Beard and extramedullary cells are stippled.
(H,I) The position of motor neurones (ventrally) and Rohon-Beard and extramedullary cells (dorsally) plotted onto
standardised section outlines. H is from a normal embryo and I from a u.v.-treated embryo. Note the large number of cells
outside the spinal cord in I. My, myotome; not, notochord. Scale bar is 50jan for B, C, H, I and 30 jan for A, D, E, F, G.

Neural tubes in notochordless Xenopus embryos 
505
my
not 
"*»
my
i 
/1
.
^
/
^ 
; - 
».
C A
:9
\
Fig. 4. (A.B) Transverse sections of normal cords containing HRP-filled motor neurones. A shows two large, heavily filled
primary motor neurones and one small, pale secondary (arrowed). B shows a large primary and its dendrites confined to
the ipsilateral marginal zone. (C,D) Transverse sections of u.v.-treated cords containing large HRP-filled motor neurones
along the ventral midline. In C a labelled Rohon-Beard cell is present in the dorsolateral cord. (E,F) Transverse sections
of u.v.-treated cords containing HRP-labelled sensory and motor axons and several extrameduUary cells (curved arrows)
attached in lines or bunches to the dorsal cord surface. In E note that the sensory axons (filled straight arrows) occupy the
dorsolateralmost region of the ventral marginal zone and the motor axon (open arrow) lies midventrally. My, myotomes;
not, notochord; asterisk, melanocyte. Scale bar is 50j/m.
cord dorsally and then runs over or through the
myotomes to the skin.
ExtrameduUary cells are present in only small
numbers (see Hughes 1957 and Roberts and Clarke,
1982). Their morphology is essentially the same as for
Rohon-Beard cells except that their cell bodies lie
outside the spinal cord, often suspended within the
connective tissue dorsal to the cord or adjacent to the
myotomes.
(2) Rostral cord/caudal hindbrain HRP applications.
These label five neuronal classes; Rohon-Beard cells,
ascending interneurones, dorsolateral commissural
interneurones, commissural interneurones and Kolmer-
Agduhr cells.
Ascending interneurones have an ascending ipsilat-
eral axon and can have either unipolar or multipolar cell
bodies with dendrites in the ipsilateral marginal zone.
They were originally divided into two classes according

506 
/. D. W. Clarke and others
I
I
I
xi/
Fig. 5. Camera-lucida
drawings of neurones with
commissural axons. (A) Side
view, and (B) ventral view of
whole-mounted spinal cords
from normal embryos. Cells
labelled from HRP applied to
the contralateral rostral spinal
cord. A shows the two
morphological classes seen.
Dorsolateral commissural
interneurones have multipolar
cell bodies and a thin ventrally
directed axon, while
commissural interneurones
(stippled) have unipolar cell
bodies and dendrites that arise
from a thicker ventrally
directed process. B shows that
the axons from these cells
cross the ventral surface at
angles close to 90° to the long
axis. (C) Side view and (D)
ventral view of whole-mounted
spinal cords from u.v.-treated
embryos. Cells labelled from
HRP applied to the
contralateral rostral cord. C
shows that both morphological
classes of commissural neurone
are present (compare with A).
D shows that the angle at
which their axon crosses the
ventral midline (shown dotted)
is more variable than in
control spinal cords. Scale bar
is 50/an.
to their dorsal or ventral position (Roberts and Clarke,
1982) but have since been classed together on the basis
of their GAB A immunoreactivity (Roberts et al. 1987).
Commissural interneurones (Fig. 5A) have unipolar
cell bodies, a thick primary process that curves ventrally
round the cord just inside the marginal zone, dendrites
within the ipsilateral marginal zone and an axon that
crosses the ventral floor plate to the contralateral
marginal zone where it either ascends, descends or
branches and does both. These neurones can be
selectively stained with an anti-glycine antibody (Fig. 7
and Roberts et al. 1988). A few commissural inter-
neurones also have an axon within the ipsilateral
marginal zone (Roberts et al. 1988).
Dorsolateral commissural interneurones (Fig. 5A)
have multipolar cell bodies adjacent to the Rohon-
Beard cells with dendrites in the dorsal half of the
marginal zone. A thin ventral axon runs ventrally just
inside the marginal zone to cross the ventral floor plate
and then ascend, descend or branch in the contralateral
marginal zone.
Kolmer-Agduhr cells (Fig. 6A) are ciliated cerebro-
spinal-fluid-contacting neurones, whose cell bodies lie
within the ventral ependymal lining of the neurocoel
close to the ventral floor plate cells. They have
ipsilateral ascending axons and no dendrites.
(3) Caudal spinal cord HRP applications. These label
five neuronal classes; Rohon-Beard cells, commissural
and dorsolateral commissural interneurones, descend-
ing interneurones and motor neurones.
Descending interneurones are the only cell class to be
specifically labelled by caudal HRP application; the
other classes have been described above. Descending
interneurones have multipolar cell bodies, dendrites
that extend throughout the ipsilateral marginal zone
and ipsilateral descending axons.

Neural tubes in notochordless Xenopus embryos 
507
Fig. 6. Camera-lucida drawings of Kolmer-Agduhr cells. (A) Transverse section containing a Kolmer-Agduhr cell filled
caudal to a rostral cord HRP application in a normal embryo. This cell has a typically simple morphology, contacts the
cerebrospinal fluid and occupies a position adjacent or close to the floor plate cells. (B) Transverse section containing a
Kohner-Agduhr cell filled caudal to a rostral cord HRP application in a u.v.-treated embryo. This cerebrospinal fluid
contacting cell has characteristic simple morphology but now occupies a position close to the midline beneath the
neurocoel. (C) The positions of seven Kolmer-Agduhr cells from a u.v.-treated embryo have been superimposed on a
typical transverse section. All but one occupy a position close to the midline. (D) Side view of whole-mounted spinal cord.
In this u.v.-treated case, four Kohner-Agduhr cells have been filled rostral to a caudal HRP application. This is never seen
in normal embryos. The outline of the neurocoel is indicated, caudal is to the left and ventral at the bottom. Scale bar is
50 fjm.
Control
u.v.
Control
u.v.
Control
u.v.
Control
u.v.
56±20
•8.4±7.7
5.7±5.2
5.8±3.4
0.7±1.0
•14.7±10
400±69
356±40
12
17
7
7
7
7
4
4
Table 1. A comparison of cell numbers in control and
u.v.-treated embryos
Cell type 
Treatment 
Mean±s.D. 
n
Motor neurones
Rohon-Beard cells
Extramedullary cells
Glycinergic neurones
Motor and sensory cells were analysed following a standardised
HRP application at stage 37/38, and glycinergic cells from 8
embryos fixed at stage 35/36.
(Asterisk indicates significantly different mean values, /><0.001.)
Spinal cords from notochordless embryos (n=51)
These will be described by dealing with each neuronal
type in turn.
The number of Rohon-Beard cells within the cord
filled from a standardised HRP application to the
myotomes is the same in control and experimental
embryos (Table 1). There is, however, a dramatic
increase (approximately twentyfold) in the number of
labelled extramedullary cells. These cells were often
found together in bunches or streams of cells attached
to the cord surface, but could also be found singly as far
away from the cord as the dorsolateral edge of the
myotomes (Fig. 31). In some cases, these streams or
bunches of cells were continuous with Rohon-Beard
cells within the cord, suggesting that they may be
misplaced Rohon-Beard cells rather than a separate cell
type. The irregular nature of parts of the dorsal cord
surface and the sometimes obscured neurocoel, suggest
that the mechanisms of neural tube closure have been
incomplete, and this may have allowed for the
abnormal migration of the Rohon-Beard cells.
The central axons of Rohon-Beard cells run in the
most dorsolateral part of the marginal zone (Fig. 4E).
The number of labelled motor neurones in exper-
imental cords is reduced to approximately 15 % of the
numbers found in control cords (Table 1), as judged
from standardised HRP applications to the myotomes.
An analysis of size (Fig. 7) reveals that this reduction in
number is due largely to a loss of the smallest cells. This
is strongly suggestive that the motor neurones present
in notochordless embryos are all primary motor
neurones and that the smaller, later born secondary
motor neurones are not present. Motor neurone
position is also altered, with their cell bodies now
placed midventrally and the dendrites from single
motor neurones often extend into the marginal zone on
both sides of the midline (Fig. 3C,F,G and 4C,D). As in
normals, the dendrites do not extend into the most
dorsolateral part of the marginal zones and thus are not
directly contactable by Rohon-Beard axons. Motor

508 
/. D. W. Clarke and others
20-
MOTONEURONE 
SIZE
CONTROL
10-
40 60 BO 100
UV
200
300
AREA 
urn2
Fig. 7. Histograms to show the variability in motor
neurone size in control and u.v.-treated embryos. The large
numbers of small cells (less than 100 /xm2) are absent from
u.v.-treated embryos. Data collected from 5 control
animals and 4 experimental animals. The cross-sectional
area of cell bodies was measured from enlarged camera-
lucida drawings of HRP stained motor neurones.
neurone axons run caudally along the ventral midline of
the 
marginal 
zone 
before 
exiting 
the 
cord
(Fig. 3C,D,E). Ventral roots form midventrally.
Retrograde HRP reveals that both commissural and
dorsolateral commissural interneurones are present in
notochordless embryos (Figure 5C,D). Their respect-
ive dendritic and proximal axon morphologies are
normal. However, the angle at which their axons cross
the ventral midline is often, but not always, abnormal.
In normal cords most commissural axons cross the
ventral surface in a very direct manner, i.e. at close to
90 degrees to the long axis of the cord, and thus close to
the level of their cell bodies (Fig. 5B). This angle of
crossing is much more variable in notochordless
embryos, and although some axons still cross in a direct
manner, many cross at more oblique angles and some at
very shallow angles indeed (Fig. 5D). In the notochord-
less embryos, the commissural axons remain on the
inside edge of the ventrally placed marginal zone, in
contrast to those in normals that lie close to the basal
(superficial) surface of the ventral floor plate cells. The
presence of some cells with extremely shallow crossing
angles raises the possibility that some 'would-be-
commissuraF axons do not actually cross the ventral
midline and these would thus not be recognised as
commissurals on morphological grounds (they would be
classified as ascending or descending interneurones).
Any such 'non-crossing commissural' axons will, how-
ever, be specifically recognised by their glycinergic
immunoreactivity (Roberts et al. 1988); see later
section.
Most Kolmer-Agduhr cells have rostrally directed
axons and are filled, as in normals, from rostral HRP
applications. They are identified by having a ciliated
CSF-contacting surface and a single process. In
notochordless embryos, their cell bodies lie along the
midline, ventral to the neurocoel or within one cell
diameter of the midline (Fig. 6B,C). Since the neuro-
coel is more dorsal than in normals, the Kolmer-
Agduhr cells are correspondingly more dorsal. In some
notochordless embryos rostral Kolmer-Agduhr cells are
filled from caudal HRP applications (Fig. 6D); these
cells therefore have caudally directed axons. This is
never seen in control embryos.
Ascending interneurones 
and 
descending inter-
neurones, both with ipsilateral axons, are revealed by
HRP applications to the rostral cord or caudal cord,
respectively (Fig. 8A,B,C). The dendritic organisation
of these cells has not been analysed in detail, but most
have a clear ventrally directed major process..
Glycinergic immunoreactivity
Normal cords (rc=32)
The development of glycinergic neurones in normal
Xenopus embryos has been described previously
(Roberts et al. 1988). Our own observations on normal
cords confirm this earlier description and will thus be
summarised only briefly.
All glycinergic cells have a commissural axon. They
have unipolar cell bodies and dendrites within the
ipsilateral marginal zone. The axon is directed ventrally
along the medial edge of the marginal zone, until it
reaches the lateral edge of the floor plate where it then
lies close to the superficial (basal) surface of the floor
plate cells. For cells differentiating at the caudal end of
the developing cell column, the initial growth of the
axon within the contralateral marginal zone is almost
always in a rostral direction. For cells that develop late
within areas already containing glycinergic cells, some
axons may initially turn caudally or branch to form a
rostral and a caudally directed axon.
Notochordless embryos (n=38)
Glycinergic neurones are present in notochordless
embryos in approximately normal numbers (Table 1).
In almost all cases, the glycinergic cells had axons that
crossed the ventral side of the cord to the contralateral
marginal zone and, as in normals, they had unipolar
somas with a thick proximal axonal process. These cells
differed from those in controls in three ways:
(1) The angle of crossing was much more variable in
experimental cords compared to normals (Figs 9 and
10). In normal cords, 66% (49/74) of measured axons
crossed at angles that deviated less than 10° away from
90° to the long axis of the cord, and only 7% (5/74)
crossed at greater than 25° away from 90°. In
experimental cords, these figures decreased to 20%
(15/73) and increased to 52 % (38/73) respectively.
(2) A larger proportion of the measured axons were
directed caudally (Figs 9, 10) in experimental cords
(34% or 25/73) compared to normals (13 % or 10/74).
This was evident for axons of the most caudal cells,
which in normals are always seen to grow rostrally, as
well as for axons from more rostral cells.
(3) In some preparations, more often in those
analysed at approximately stage 30 than in older
embryos, it was clear that some axons (up to 21 in a
single preparation) did not turn to grow longitudinally,

Neural tubes in notochordless Xenopus embryos 
509
rather they continued to grow circumferentially, past
the other longitudinal axons and up to the dorsal
surface of the cord or hindbrain (Fig. 11A,B,C,D).
Some of these stained dorsal axons ended abruptly
suggesting that they may have left the cord at this point,
while others turned to grow ventrally back down on the
same side to the majority of stained axons (Fig. 11C).
Three axons were found that circumnavigated the cord.
Electrophysiology
Normal embryos
Xenopus embryos paralysed by curare will respond to
normal sensory stimulation by generating fictive loco-
motory activity within their spinal cords, which can be
monitored by placing extracellular suction electrodes
close to the motor axons within the intermyotomal
clefts. This activity underlies the alternating myotome
contractions that drive normal swimming movements in
freely moving embryos (Kahn and Roberts, 1982).
During fictive swimming in curarised normal embryos
bursts of motor axon activity alternate on the two sides
of the body (Fig. 12A). Within each burst individual
motor neurones fire only once (Roberts et al. 1981).
During a single episode of fictive swimming, which can
last for up to several minutes, the cycle period (time
between motor axon bursts) gradually increases from
approximately 45 ms to 80ms (Figure). Occasionally
during an episode of fictive swimming a few cycles of
motor activity occur, in which discharge is synchronous
on the two sides (Fig. 12A). The cycle period during
this so-called 'synchrony' ranges between 15 and 25 ms,
Fig. 8. Interneurones.
(A,B) Camera-lucida drawings
of transverse sections
containing neurones filled from
rostral cord (in B) and caudal
cord (in A) in u.v.-treated
embryos. Notice how many
cells have a clear dorsal to
ventral polarity of their main
process. Stippled cells are
Rohon-Beard cells and
extramedullary cells. Unfilled
cell profiles are from cells with
no clear processes and which
are thus probably oriented in a
rostrocaudal direction.
(C) Photomicrograph of the
side view of a whole-mounted
u.v.-treated cord. HRP was
applied to the rostral cord (to
the left). Note the
predominant dorsal-to-ventral
orientation of most of the
labelled cells. Scale bar is
50 fim for A and B, and
100 urn for C.
and is approximately half that of adjacent swimming
cycles.
Notochordless embryos («=4)
Notochordless embryos do not swim normally. In
response to both gentle and more damaging stimulation
of the trunk skin, the embryo is only able to generate
bursts of shuddering movements during which the
animal contracts along its body axis but does not make
any alternating side-to-side movements. No propulsive
force is generated.
In curarised preparations, the motor axon activity
recorded from intermyotomal clefts is, as in normals,
clearly rhythmic. However, in contrast to normals,
activity does not alternate on left and right sides but is
always synchronous on the two sides (Fig. 12B). As in
normals, episodes of fictive motor activity can be
evoked either by stroking the skin with a fine gerbil hair
or by electrically stimulating the skin with a suction
electrode. The cycle period between motor axon bursts
ranged between 20 ms at the start of episodes to 45 ms at
the end of episodes.
Discussion
The effects of u. v. irradiation
Ultraviolet irradiation of the fertilized but uncleaved
Xenopus egg subsequently produces dose-dependent
deficits in the development of the axial mesoderm
(Malacinski etal. 1977; Youn and Malacinski, 1981). At

510 
J. D. W. Clarke and others
Fig. 9. Photomicrographs of the ventral surface of whole-mounted cords stained for glycinergic axons. A and B are from
control embryos, A from the rostral cord/caudal hindbrain area and B from midtrunk cord. Note the stained axons cross
the ventral cord in a fairly direct manner. C and D are from equivalent regions of a u.v. type 1 embryo. Note now how the
angle of crossing is highly variable. Scale bar is 50^m and applies to all.
low doses of u.v. the deficit can be restricted to an
absence of notochord with the remaining mesoderm
developing intact (Youn and Malacinski, 1981). Under
these conditions neural induction and neuralation
proceed, but an abnormal neural tube is produced as
described in the present paper. Motor neuron numbers
are 
reduced, 
extramedullary 
cell numbers 
are
CROSSING 
ANGLE
n = 74 
CONTROL
n = 73 
UV
^
increased, commissural axon trajectories are altered,
the floor plate is apparently missing, and longitudinal
axons line the ventral surface of the spinal cord. Are
these abnormalities due solely to the disruption of an
interaction between notochord and neural tube, or
could the u.v. treatment be acting via another
mechanism? The dorsal marginal zone (DMZ) of the
early gastrula is responsible for organising the axial
structures of the later embryo, i.e. somite, notochord
and neural tube formation (Spemann, 1938; Smith and
Slack, 1983), and if the DMZ is replaced in u.v.
embryos, either by direct transplantation from a normal
embryo (Chung and Malacinski, 1975) or by induction,
following transplantation of the dorsal-most vegetal
blastomeres from a normal blastula (Gimlich and
Fig. 10. Histograms to show the variability of angle of
crossing of glycinergic commissural axons in control and
u.v.-treated embryos. Angles were measured relative to the
ventral midline of the spinal cord, those directed rostrally
have values less than 90° and those directed caudally have
values greater than 90°. Angles were allocated into bin
widths of 10°. Note the increased variability in the
experimental cords and the increased proportion that are
directed caudally (hatched) rather than rostrally.

Neural tubes in notochordless Xenopus embryos 
511
B
Fig. 11. Camera-lucida drawings of glycinergic cells and axons. (A,B) Ventral views of whole-mounted spinal cords from
u.v.-treated embryos. The positions of all glycinergic cell bodies within the drawn segments are indicated, but only some of
the axons are included for clarity. Most of the undrawn axons run longitudinally along the ventral surface of the cord and
would thus obscure other details. The arrowed axons have all grown dorsally and probably all arise from contralateral cell
bodies. This is clearly seen in three of the filled cells in A and in all four of the filled cells in B. The remaining two filled
cells in A have caudally directed axons which remain ipsilateral for unusually long distances before eventually crossing to
the other side of the cord. The growth cones of these cells were clear. Dotted lines represent axons growing on dorsal
surface of cord. (C,D) Side views of whole-mounted spinal cords from u.v.-treated embryos. Arrows indicate trajectories of
dorsally positioned glycinergic axons. In some cases (C) axons turn to grow back down ventrally on the same side of the
cord, while in others they continue circumferentially and grow over the dorsal surface and down ventrally on the
contralateral side of the cord (dotted in D). Stipple in C indicates position of large numbers of stained longitudinal axons.
Scale bar is 50 /zm.
Gerhart, 1984), then the development of normal axial
structures can be rescued. These experiments demon-
strate both that the DMZ is altered by the u.v.
treatment and that any perturbations that consequently
arise in the neuroectoderm, the large majority of which
is not derived from the DMZ (Keller, 1975), do so in

512 
J. D. W. Clarke and others
A 
syn
i 
L
M 
i (• I ). * I t-
H | If
Fig. 12. Motor neurone activity in paralysed embryos. (A) Control embryo. Extracellular action potentials recorded from
one left (L) and one right (R) intermyotome cleft region. Activity was evoked by a single electrical stimulus to the skin
(not shown). Note that the activity in left and right usually alternates. Occasionally short periods of synchronous activity
occurs, usually towards the start of an episode. Phase relations are indicated by dotted lines. (B) U.v.-treated embryo.
Extracellular potentials recorded from left and right intermyotome regions now show no periods of alternating motor
activity, rather the activity is always synchronous. Scale bar is 50ms. syn, synchrony.
response to the DMZ lesion rather than via other
routes.
Keller has divided the marginal zone into two regions
according to whether or not the cells involute during the
movements of gastrulation (Keller et al. 1985). The
notochord is derived from deep cells of the dorsal
involuting marginal zone (IMZ), while the cells that
normally give rise to the floor plate of the neural tube
are derived from the dorsal region of the non-involuting
marginal zone (NIMZ). How the properties and fates of
those two areas of the DMZ are altered by the u.v.
treatment is unknown. With the low doses of u.v. used
in our study, it is possible that the cell movements are
largely normal but that the dorsal IMZ is now fated to
become somitic mesoderm, rather than notochord, and
the dorsal NIMZ is still fated to become ventral
neuroepithelium, but not to develop the specialisation
of the floor plate.
Recent evidence suggests that the DMZ may be the
source of a signal that spreads through the ectoderm
and. contributes to neural induction (Dixon and
Kintner, 1989; Ruiz i Altaba, 1990). Since, as discussed
above, the DMZ is altered by u.v. treatment, this
spreading signal may also be altered. However, with the
low doses of u.v. used in our study, the dimensions of
the neural tube are normal (Youn and Malacinski, 1981)
and, with the exception of small motor neurones, all
neuronal cell types are present within the embryonic
spinal cord. Thus, it appears that, if the spreading signal
is altered, it cannot be involved in these aspects of
neural induction. The principal alterations in neural
structure in u.v. embryos centre around the organisa-
tion of the ventral midline of the neural tube, and
recent evidence suggests that, in the chick, interactions
between the notochord and the neural tube are central
to the patterning of this region (van Straaten et al. 1988,
1989, Wagner et al. 1990; Placzek et al. 19906, Hirano et
al. 1991; Yamada et al. 1991). Our present results are
consistent with the view that similar interactions
between notochord and neural tube are operating in the
Xenopus embryo.
The notochord imposes laterality
In the Xenopus embryo, spinal cords that develop in the
absence of a notochord show an impaired ability to
maintain a strict left/right laterality relative to the
cord's ventral midline. This loss of laterality is manifest
in motor neurones that occupy a midventral position
beneath the neurocoel, with many single motor
neurones having dendritic processes in the marginal
zones on either side of the midline (Fig. 3). Normally
motor neurone dendrites are restricted to the ipsilateral
marginal zone. Also in normal cords, the left and right
marginal zones are clearly separated from one another,
but, in notochordless embryos, a continuous marginal
zone stretches across the cord's ventral surface. The
loss of laterality is also revealed by the longitudinal
axons that run close to the ventral midline in
notochordless embryos. Some of these axons can be
seen to wander across the midline, far from their cell
bodies, in a manner never seen in normal cords.
Consistent with these observations, glycinergic axons,
which normally cross from side to side via a very direct
route, often take less direct routes to the contralateral
side, and a few may never reach the contralateral side.
A lack of functional laterality is strikingly demonstrated
by the inability of the notochordless cord to generate a
normally alternating motor output (Fig. 12). Instead,

Neural tubes in notochordless Xenopus embryos 
513
they produce a pattern of motor output that resembles
the activity generated by a surgically isolated single side
of the cord, where all motor neurones in a single
segment fire synchronously (Soffe, 1989).
The neural structure that may normally impose
laterality on the organisation of the ventral cord is the
floor plate, and it is possible that all the consequences of
cord development without a notochord are in fact,
more directly, the result of development without a floor
plate. The evidence that the floor plate is missing in
notochordless embryos is threefold:
(1) No cuboidal cells, characteristic of the floor plate
in normal cords, are present ventral to the neurocoel.
Instead the neuroepithelial cells present in this location
are morphologically similar to the radial glial cells of the
normal marginal zones (Fig. 2C,D).
(2) Normal floor plate cells do not express vimentin
at 2 to 3 days of development (Fig. 2E), but in
notochordless embryos vimentin-positive processes are
present throughout the ventral midline of the cord
(Fig. 2F).
(3) The motor neurones, Kolmer-Agduhr cells and
ventrolateral axons of the two sides of the cord are
normally separated from each other only by the floor
plate cells. Both these cell types and their axons he
directly ventral to the neurocoel in notochordless
embryos and are not divided into left and right
populations by any other cell type.
This evidence from the Xenopus embryo is further
supported by recent experiments on chick embryos that
provide strong evidence that the floor plate is induced
by the notochord. Here surgical removal of the early
notochord results in a floorplateless spinal cord, and a
notochord grafted to the lateral wall of the neural tube
can induce a secondary floor plate (van Straaten et al.
1988; Placzek et al. 1990b, Yamada et al. 1991). At
present, there is no biochemical marker that is specific
for the Xenopus embryo floor plate; thus, although cells
with a normal floor plate morphology are absent from
u.v. embryos, we cannot rule out the possibility that
cells with other morphologies maintain the molecular
characteristics of floor plate cells.
As a mechanism to impose the normal laterality of
motor neurone dendrites and ventral, non-commissural
axons, we suggest that the floor plate may present a less
attractive growth substrate for these processes than the
cell surfaces within the marginal zone.
The floor plate is not essential for the development of
commissural axons, but probably does influence their
growth
The floor plate has been suggested to play one or more
important roles in the development of commissural
axons. First, in rats it may secrete a diffusible factor that
is able to redirect the growing commissural axons
towards the floor plate (Tessier-Levigne et al. 1989).
Furthermore, having reached the floor plate, rat
commissural axons lose the expression of one cell-
surface glycoprotein (TAG-1) and begin expression of
another surface glycoprotein (LI, Dodd et al. 1988).
The signal for this transformation may come from the
floor plate, and may be required for the change in
behaviour observed in commissural growth cones as
they reach its contralateral side of the floor plate. Here
they make an abrupt 90 degree turn to grow anteriorly
in close association with the lateral wall of the floor
plate cells (Bovolenta and Dodd, 1990). This change in
direction may be guided by interactions between
commissural axons and the cell surface properties of the
floor plate, or by as yet unspecified interactions
between commissural axons and longitudinal axons
within the ventrolateral funiculus (Bovolenta and
Dodd, 1990; Yaginuma et al. 1990). In zebrafish
embryos, commissural axons bypass ventrolateral
axons in the contralateral cord but may fasciculate with
other more dorsal axons (Kuwada et al. 1990). In both
zebrafish and rats, growth cone morphology is more
complex at the floor plate compared to positions along
their growth pathway, an observation which in other
systems is coincident with the growth cone having
reached so-called decision regions in their pathways
(Bovolenta and Mason, 1987; Caudy and Bentley,
1968a,b; Tosney and Landmesser, 1985).
The evidence presented in this paper suggests that
the floor plate is not essential either for the initial
ventrally directed growth of axons or for the glycinergic
axons to cross into the contralateral half of the marginal
zone. In experimental cords analysed by retrograde
HRP staining, the majority of spinal interneurones have
a clear dorsal-to-ventral polarity to their proximal
axonal process (Fig. 8), and this is confirmed by the
glycinergic staining (Figs 9 and 11) which, in normal
cords, is specific for commissural interneurones
(Roberts et al. 1988). The overwhelming majority of
glycinergic axons cross the ventral surface of the cord in
notochordless embryos. An intrinsic dorsal-to-ventral
growth of axons has also been reported in explants of
chick and rat spinal cord devoid of floor plate (Placzek
et al. 1990a, Nornes et al. 1990).
The normal ventral structure of the spinal cord does,
however, seem to be important for directing the angle
of crossing of commissural axons. In the absence of the
normal ventral structure, glycinergic axons often take
very indirect routes across the ventral midline and one
consequence of this is that some of the commissural
axons are able to turn caudally into the contralateral
marginal zone. In normal cords, the initial contralateral
growth is almost always in the rostral direction (Roberts
et al. 1988). Whether this means that positional cues
that determine rostrally directed growth are lost, or
whether the direction of growth is determined by the
angle and direction of crossing is not certain. Evidence
that some rostrocaudal cues are lost is suggested by the
caudal growth of some Kolmer Agduhr axons
(Fig. 6D). Normally these axons only grow rostrally
(Dale et al. 1987a,fc).
In some notochordless embryos, some glycinergic
axons failed to turn into the contralateral marginal zone
and continued to grow circumferentially up to the
dorsal surface of the cord (Fig. 11). This axonal
behaviour was most often seen in the hindbrain and
rostral cord of the more affected (Grade 2 or 3)

514 
/. D. W. Clarke and others
embryos. Since the u.v. treatment seems to affect
rostral structures more than caudal ones, it is probable
that this continued circumferential growth results from
a more severe lesion to the cord. The factors that
normally direct the glycinergic axons to turn and grow
longitudinally may include the expression of cell
adhesion molecules like LI (Dodd et al. 1988), which
promote fasciculation between commissural axons and
other longitudinal axons. We suggest therefore that the
more severe lesions to the Xenopus cord may disrupt
this fasciculation either by preventing the expression of
fasciculation factors on commissural axons or other
axons, or that the axons with which commissural axons
may fasciculate are absent or reduced in number. In
normal cords, the axons of Kolmer-Agduhr cells are in
the appropriate position and are present at the right
time in development (Dale et al. 1987a,b) to provide a
scaffold onto which commissural axons may grow. We
are therefore currently examining their distribution and
growth in u.v.-treated embryos using GABA immuno-
cytochemistry.
Dorsoventral patterning of the neural tube
The normal balance of dorsal and ventral neurones
appears to be disrupted in notochordless embryos
(Table 1). As judged from HRP labelling in the
myotomes, the number of motor neurones is reduced to
about 15 % of normal and the number of extramedull-
ary cells is increase by twentyfold. Extramedullary cells
are generated within the neural tube and subsequently
migrate out of the dorsal cord (Hughes, 1957); their
proliferation is thus likely to be controlled within the
cord. It is possible that some or all of the supernumary
extramedullary cells are in fact Rohon-Beard cells that
have migrated outside the cord. This may be possible
due to incomplete neural tube closure (as judged by the
occasional apparent lack of a central canal) or the lack
of an effective glia limitans, which may normally act to
retain cells within the neural tube.
The increase in extramedullary cells and the decrease
in motor neurones may at first appear consistent with
the proposal that the notochord and/or floor plate can
impose positional values on the dorsoventral axis of the
neural tube (Jessell et al. 1988; Wagner et al. 1990;
Yamada etal. 1991). A diffusible morphogen, perhaps a
retinoid (Wagner et al. 1990), from the notochord or
floor plate, could produce a gradient such that cells
close to the floor plate, where the morphogen is most
concentrated, become motor neurones, and those
further away take on progressively more dorsal
characteristics. In fact, if the u.v. treatment completely
removes the notochord and the floor plate, then this
hypothesis would predict all cells would acquire the
most dorsal characteristics. This is clearly not the case.
Perhaps a more likely explanation is that a particular
interaction between the notochord and/or floorplate
and the neuroepithelium normally induces the stem
cells to produce motor neurones (van Straaten et al.
1988, 1989, Hirano et al. 1991; Yamada et al. 1991). In
Xenopus, the absence of a notochord does not reduce
the motor neurone population to zero and this may
reflect the very early birth of some motor neurones
during gastulation (Lamborghini, 1980), before any
interaction with the notochord is possible. In fact, the
only motor neurones to differentiate in notochordless
embryos may be the so-called primary motor neurones,
which in normal cords are large cells present in
relatively small numbers compared to the more
numerous, smaller secondary motor neurones (Figs 3,
4, 7 and Hughes, 1959; van Mier et al. 1985;
Nordlander, 1986).
The increased number of extramedullary or Rohon-
Beard cells may be explained if the proliferation of
those cells were normally regulated by a mechanism
that measured cell density within the neural tube. Thus,
if Rohon-Beard cells were able to migrate out of the
neural tube, more would be produced to maintain the
normal cell density. In normal embryos, 80% of
Rohon-Beard cells are born before the end of
gastrulation; however, some are born as late as stage 24
(Lamborghini, 1980) at which time neural tube closure
(stages 19 to 21, Nieuwkoop and Faber, 1956) is
complete. Any increase in proliferation due to cell
migration in notochordless embryos should occur
around this time, rather than earlier in development.
A further possibility for the increased number of
HRP-labelled extramedullary cells is that the total
number of extramedullary and Rohon-Beard cells is
unchanged, but their density has increased due to a
shortening of the length of neural tube. While the
notochordless embryos are shorter than normals by
about 25 %, we feel this is unlikely to account for the
observed threefold increase in combined Rohon-Beard
and extramedullary cell numbers. Experiments to
determine the total populations of these cells and motor
neurones are however, in progress.
Functional consequences
The electrophysiological data show that the spinal cords
of notochordless embryos are able to generate a
rhythmic motor output but are unable to coordinate this
rhythmicity in such a way as to give the alternating
motor output on the two sides of the animal that
characterise swimming (Fig. 12). Alternation is nor-
mally achieved by the reciprocal inhibitory connections
made by the glycinergic commissural axons (Dale, 1985;
Dale et al. 1986). The synchronous firing pattern
recorded from left and right motor axons could result
from a normally connected central arrangement of
premotor and motor neurones if the motor axons from
one side of the cord were able to innervate the
contralateral as well as the ipsilateral myotomes. Thus,
although the activity of left and right motor neurones
would be alternating normally, this would be masked at
the level of motor axons within the bilaterally inner-
vated myotomes. This is unlikely to be the case here, as
any underlying alternating motor axon activity would
be expected to be revealed as a pattern of motor
discharge whose characteristics (shape, amplitude,
width) differed on alternate cycles. This was never
seen. Also, intracellular recordings from ventral spinal
neurones have revealed that each neurone fires on each

Neural tubes in notochordless Xenopus embryos 515
cycle at the accelerated synchronous rate rather than
the slower rate observed in normal cords (Soffe and
Clarke unpublished observations).
More likely explanations for the synchronous left and
right motor activity are either that the bilateral
dendrites of motor neurones allow these cells to be
rhythmically excited by two groups of premotor
interneurones, active in alternation on either side of the
cord (thus motor neurones would fire at twice the
frequency of premotor interneurones) or that the whole
spinal cord acts as a single-phase oscillator, like a single
surgically isolated side of the cord, with all rhythmically
active cells firing synchronously and at the same rate.
The former proposal would require that the normal
laterality of connections between premotor inter-
neurones is maintained in the experimental cords. This
seems unlikely in view of the tendency of HRP-labelled
axons not to respect the ventral midline as a boundary;
however, these alternatives need to be tested by a more
detailed study of the dendritic and axonal projections of
premotor interneurones and the use of intracellular
electrodes to determine synaptic connectivity and the
firing patterns of premotor interneurones.
Action Research and the SERC provided financial assist-
ance. Thanks to Steve Franey for histology, Cynthia Civil and
Sheila Collins for word processing and Leon Kelberman for
photography. Tom Jesse 11, Malcolm Maden, Tahereh Kama-
lati, Jim Hill and Emily Gale have all provided helpful
discussion. Chris Wylie and Janet Heasman kindly provided
the anti-vimentin antibody.
References
BLIGHT, A. (1978). Golgj-staining of 'primary' and 'secondary'
motoneurons in the developing spinal cord of an amphibian.
/. comp. Neurol. 180, 679-689.
BOVOLENTA, P. AND DODD, J. (1990). Guidance of commissural
growth cones at the floor plate in embryonic rat spinal cord.
Development 109, 435-447.
BOVOLENTA, P. AND MASON, C. A. (1987). Growth cone
morphology varies with position in the developing mouse visual
pathway from retina to first targets. J. Neurosci. 7, 1447-1460.
CAUDY, M. AND BENTLEY, D. (1986a). Pioneer growth cone
morphologies reveal proximal increase in substrate affinity
within leg segments of grasshopper embryos. J. Neurosci. 6,
364-379.
CAUDY, M. AND BENTLEY, D. (19866). Pioneer growth cone
steering along a series of neuronal and nonneuronal cues of
different affinities. /. Neurosci. 6, 1781-1795.
CHUNG, H. AND MALACINSKI, G. M. (1975). Repair of ultraviolet
irradiation damage to a cytoplasmic component required for
neural induction in the amphibian egg. Proc. natn. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 72, 1235-1239.
CLARKE, J. D. W., HAYES, B. P., HUNT, S. P. AND ROBERTS, A.
(1984). Sensory physiology, anatomy and immunohistochemistry
of Rohon-Beard neurones in embryos of Xenopus laevis. J.
Physiol. 348, 511-525.
DALE, N. (1985). Reciprocal inhibitory interneurones in the
Xenopus embryo spinal cord. J. Physiol. London 363, 61-70.
DALE, N., OTTERSON, O. P., ROBERTS, A. AND STORM-MATHISEN, J.
(1986). Inhibitory neurones of a motor pattern generator in
Xenopus revealed by antibodies to glycine. Nature 324, 255-257.
DALE, N., ROBERTS, A., OTTERSEN, O. P. AND STORM-MATHISEN, J.
(1987a). The morphology and distribution of 'Kolmer-Agduhr
cells', a class of cerebrospinal-fluid-contacting neurons revealed
in the frog embryo spinal cord by GABA immunocytochemistry.
Proc. R. Soc. London B 232, 193-203.
DALE, N., ROBERTS, A., OTTERSEN, O. P. AND STORM-MATHISEN, J.
(19876). The development of a population of spinal cord
neurons and their axonal projections revealed by GABA
immunocytochemistry in frog embryos. Proc. R. Soc. London B
232, 205-215.
DKON, J. E. AND KINTNER, C. R. (1989). Cellular contact required
for neural induction in Xenopus embryos: evidence for two
signals. Development 106, 749-757.
DODD, J., MORTON, S. B., KARAGOGEOS, D., YAMAMOTO, M. AND
JESSELL, T. M. (1988). Spatial regulation of axonal glycoprotein
expression on subsets of embryonic spinal neurons. Neuron 1,
105-116.
FOREHAND, C. J. AND FAREL, P. B. (1982). Spinal cord
development in anuran larvae. I. Primary and secondary
neurons. J. comp. Neurol. 209, 386-394.
GIMLICH, R. L. AND GERHART, J. C. (1984). Early cellular
interactions promote embryonic axis formation in Xenopus
laevis. Devi Biol. 104, 117-130.
GURDON, J. B. (1977). Methods for nuclear transplantation in
Amphibia. Methods Cell Biol. 16, 125-139.
HIRANO, S., FUSE, S. AND SOHAL, G. S. (1991). The effect of the
floor plate on pattern and polarity in the developing central
nervous system. Science 251, 310-313.
HOLTFRETER, J. AND HAMBURGER, V. (1955). Embryogenesis:
Progressive differentiation. In Foundations of Experimental
Embryology (ed. Willier, B. H. et al.) pp. 230-296.
Philadelphia: Saunders Press.
HUGHES, A. (1957). The development of the primary sensory
system in Xenopus laevis (Daudin). J. Anat. 91, 323-338.
HUGHES, A. (1959). Studies in embryonic and larval development
in amphibia. II. The spinal motor root. /. Embryol. exp.
Morph. 7, 128-145.
JESSELL, T. M., BOVOLENTA, P., PLACZEK, M., TESSIER-LAVIGNE,
M. AND DODD, J. (1988). Polarity and patterning in the neural
tube: the origin and function of the floor plate. In The Cellular
Basis of Morphogenesis. CIBA Foundation Symposium.
KAHN, J. A. AND ROBERTS, A. (1982). The central nervous origin
of the swimming motor pattern in embryos of Xenopus laevis. J.
exp. Biol. 99, 185-196.
KELLER, R. E. (1975). Vital dye mapping of the gastrula and
neurala of Xenopus laevis. I. Prospective areas and
morphogenetic movements of the superficial layer. Devi Biol.
51, 222-241.
KELLER, R. E., DANILCHIK, M., GIMLICH, R. AND SHIH, J. (1985).
The function and mechanism of convergent extension during
gastrulation of Xenopus laevis. J. Embryol. exp. Morph. 89
Suppl., 185-209.
KUWADA, J. Y., BERNHARDT, R. R. AND CHITNIS, A. B. (1990).
Pathfinding by identified growth cones in the spinal cord of
zebrafish embryos. J. Neurosci. 10, 1299-1308.
LAMBORGHINI, J. E. (1980). Rohon-Beard cells and other large
neurons in Xenopus embryos originate during gastrulation. J.
comp. Neurol. 189, 323-333.
LANG, A. G. (1937). The use of n-butyl alcohol in the paraffin
method. Stain Technol. 12, 113-117.
MALACINSKI, G. M., ALUS, C. D. AND CHUNG, H-M. (1974).
Correction of developmental abnormalities resulting from
localized ultra-violet irratiation of an amphibian egg (1). J. exp.
Zool. 189, 249-254.
MALACINSKI, G. M., BROTHERS, A. J. AND CHUNG, H-M. (1977).
Destruction of components of the neural induction system of the
amphibian egg with ultraviolet irradiation. Devi Biol. 56, 24-39.
NIEUWKOOP, P. D. AND FABER, J. (1956). Normal Tables of
Xenopus laevis (Daudin). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
NORDLANDER, R. H. (1986). Motoneurons of the tail of young
Xenopus tadpoles. J. comp. Neurol. 253, 403-413.
NORNES, H. O., KNAPIK, E. AND KJSOGER, S. (1990). Polarised
outgrowth of circumferential fibres from explants of avian
embryonic spinal cord. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 16, 316.
PLACZEK, M., TESSIER-LAVIGNE, M., JESSELL, T. AND DODD, J.
(1990a). Orientation of commissural axons m vitro in response
to a floor plate-derived chemoattractant. Development 110,
19-30.
PLACZEK, M., TESSIER-LAVIGNE, M., YAMADA, T., JESSELL, T. AND

516 
J. D. W. Clarke and others
DODD, J. (1990ft). Mesodermal control of neural cell identity:
floor plate induction by the notochord. Science 250, 985-988.
ROBERTS, A. AND CLARKE, J. D. W. (1982). The neuroanatomy of
an amphibian embryo spinal cord. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 296,
195-212.
ROBERTS, A., DALE, N., OTTERSEN, O. P. AND STORM-MATHISEN, J.
(1987). The early development of neurons with GAB A
immunoreactivity in the CNS of Xenopus laevis embryos. /.
comp. Neurol. 261, 435-449.
ROBERTS, A., DALE, N., OTTERSEN, O. P. AND STORM-MATHISEN, J.
(1988). Development and characterization of commissural
interneurones in the spinal cord of Xenopus laevis embryos
revealed by antibodies to glycine. Development 103, 447-461.
ROBERTS, A., KAHN, J. A., SOFFE, S. R. AND CLARKE, J. D. W.
(1981). Neural control of swimming in a vertebrate. Science 213,
1032-1034.
Ruiz I ALTABA, A. (1990). Neural expression of the Xenopus
homeobox gene Xhox3: evidence for a patterning neural signal
that spreads through trhe ectoderm. Development 108, 595-604.
SAXEN, L. (1989). Neural induction. Int. J. Devi Biol. 33, 21-48.
SCHARF, S. R. AND GERHART, J. C. (1983). Axis determination in
eggs of Xenopus laevis: A critical period before first cleavage,
identified by the common effects of cold, pressure and
ultraviolet irradiation. Devi Biol. 99, 75-87.
SMITH, J. C. AND SLACK, J. M. W. (1983). Dorsalisation and
neural induction: properties of the organiser in Xenopus laevis.
J. Embryol. exp. Morph. 78, 299-317.
SOFFE, S. R. (1989). Roles of glycinergic inhibition and N-methyl-
D-aspartate receptor mediated excitation in the locomotor
rhythmicity of one half of the Xenopus embryo central nervous
system. Eur. J. Neurosci. 1, 561-571.
SPEMANN, H. (1938). Embryonic Development and Induction. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
TAYLOR, J. S. H. AND ROBERTS, A. (1983). The early development
of primary sensory neurites in an amphibian embryo: a scanning
electron microscope study. /. Embryol. exp. Morph. 75, 49-66.
TESSIER-LAVIGNE, M., PLACZEK, M., LUMSDEN, A. G. S., DODD, J.
AND JESSELL, T. M. (1988). Chemotropic guidance of developing
axons in the mammalian central nervous system. Nature 336,
775-778.
TOSNEY, K. W. AND LANDMESSER, L. (1985). Growth cone
morphology and trajectory in the lumbosacral region of the
chick embryo. /. Neurosci. 5, 2345-2358.
VAN MlER, R., VAN RHEDEN, R. AND TEN DONKELAAR, H . J.
(1985). The development of the dendritic organisation of
primary and secondary motoneurons in the spinal cord of
Xenopus. Anal. Embryol. 172, 311-324.
VAN STRAATEN, H. W. M., HEKHNG, J. W. M., BEURSGENS, J. P.
W. M., TERWINDT-ROUWENHORST, E. AND DRUKKER, J. (1989).
Effect of the notochord on proliferation and differentiation in
the neural tube of the chick embryo. Development 107, 793-804.
VAN STRAATEN, H. W. M., HEKKING, J. W. M., WIERTZ-HOESSELS,
E. J. L. M., THORS, F. AND DRUKKER, J. (1988). Effect of
notochord on the differentiation of a floor plate area in the
neural tube of the chick embryo. Anat. Embryol. 177, 317-324.
WAGNER, M., THALLER, C , JESSELL, T. AND EICHELE, G. (1990).
Polarizing activity and retinoid synthesis in the floor plate of the
neural tube. Nature 345, 819-822.
YAGINUMA, H., SHIGA, T., HOMMA, S., ISHIHARA, R. AND
OPPENHEIM, R. W. (1990). Identification of early developing
axon projections from spinal interneurons in the chick embryo
with a neuron specific b-tubulin antibody: evidence for a new
'pioneer' pathway in the spinal cord. Development 108, 705-716.
YAMADA, T., PLACZEK, M., TANAKA, H., DODD, J. AND JESSELL,
T. M. (1991). Control of cell pattern in the developing nervous
system: polarizing activity of the floor plate and notochord. Cell
64, 635-647.
YOUN, B. W. AND MALACINSKI, G. M. (1981). Axial structure
development in ultraviolet-irradiated (notochord-defective)
amphibian embryos. Devi Biol. 83, 339-352.
(Accepted 13 March 1991)

===== Close2021_NatMethods+spatialtx =====
23
FOCUS | comment
FOCUS | comment
Nature Methods | VOL 18 | January 2021 | 15–25 | www.nature.com/naturemethods
Spatially resolved transcriptomics in 
neuroscience
One major challenge in neuroscience is to gain a systematic understanding of the extraordinary diversity of brain 
cell types and how they contribute to brain function. Spatially resolved transcriptomics holds unmatched promise 
in unraveling the organization of brain cell types and their relationship with connectivity, circuit dynamics, behavior 
and disease. Here we discuss neuroscience applications of various spatially resolved transcriptomics methods, as 
well as technical challenges that need to be overcome to realize their full potentials.
Jennie L. Close, Brian R. Long and Hongkui Zeng
T
o understand any complex organ such 
as the brain, it is imperative to have a 
census of the cell types that compose 
it, their functions, and the relationships 
among them. Brain cell types exhibit 
extraordinary diversity in their molecular, 
anatomical and functional properties. 
It has been a challenge to systematically 
categorize these cell types and establish 
correspondence across different modalities1. 
Single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) 
provides an efficient way to classify brain 
cells into types by their transcriptome-level 
gene expression patterns2–5. However, this 
approach is applied to dissociated cells, 
which lose their anatomical and spatial 
contexts. Furthermore, scRNA-seq can 
now be performed in combination with 
morphoelectric measurements using 
techniques such as Patch-seq, making it 
possible to relate anatomical, morphological 
and electrophysiological properties with 
gene expression for multimodal integrated 
cell type classification6,7. But the throughput 
of Patch-seq is low.
Spatially resolved transcriptomics  
has emerged as a general approach  
capable of linking single-cell 
transcriptomic profiles with connectional, 
morphological, physiological and 
functional properties while providing 
cellular locations within the tissue. 
Most spatially resolved transcriptomics 
techniques are based on multiplexed 
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), 
in situ sequencing, or in situ capture 
(ex situ sequencing) approaches; report 
on the expression of dozens to hundreds 
of genes; and are performed on thin tissue 
slices. Spatially resolved transcriptomics 
also provides an opportunity to 
characterize cellular or subcellular 
molecular details during behavioral  
states or diseases. Here we discuss 
the potential for spatially resolved 
transcriptomics not only to provide 
a census of cell types in the nervous 
system, but also to serve as a Rosetta 
Stone linking molecular identity, 
connectivity, morphology and physiology 
into a comprehensive understanding of 
functional brain circuitry.
Revealing the spatial organization of 
cell types
One promise of spatially resolved 
transcriptomics for neuroscience is mapping 
molecular cell types defined by single-cell 
b
c
f
a
d
Gad1
Slc17a6
Ttyh2
Pdgfra
Aqp4
Selplg
Myh11
Fn1
e
Fibroblast
Ependymal
Choroid
Habenula
Oligo
CA1
DG
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12 13
Fig. 1 | Cell type mapping with spatially resolved transcriptomics. a, An osmFISH map of 31 cell types  
in mouse somatosensory cortex was created by serial hybridization of smFISH probes recognizing  
39 genes (adapted with permission from ref. 8, Springer Nature). b, A MERFISH-derived map of mouse 
hypothalamic preoptic area was created with a panel of 155 genes. Inset shows high-magnification 
image of individual cells from area indicated in white box (adapted with permission from ref. 10, AAAS). 
c, seqFISH-derived de novo cell typing of 13 cell types of mouse dentate gyrus (adapted with permission 
from ref. 13, Elsevier). d, pciSeq, a method of padlock probe–based in situ sequencing, was used to 
determine cell type composition of mouse hippocampus (adapted with permission from ref. 14, Springer 
Nature). e, STARmap, a padlock probe–based method, was applied to mouse visual cortex to map  
16 cell types (adapted with permission from ref. 15, AAAS). f, Slide-seq was used to generate a map of 
hippocampus (adapted with permission from ref. 17, AAAS).

24
comment | FOCUS
comment | FOCUS
Nature Methods | VOL 18 | January 2021 | 15–25 | www.nature.com/naturemethods
transcriptomics across the brain. Several 
spatially resolved transcriptomics methods 
work well for cell type mapping in the 
brain, depending on the multiplexing 
required (Fig. 1). At the low end of the 
multiplexing spectrum, a detailed cellular 
map of 31 mouse somatosensory cortex 
cell types was generated with 39 genes 
using a semiautomated version of single 
molecule (sm) FISH, osmFISH8 (Fig. 1a). 
When hundreds of genes are needed, 
barcoded methods such as MERFISH9–11 and 
seqFISH12,13 are more suitable. Application 
of MERFISH using a panel of 155 genes 
has revealed the precise spatial context 
and behavior-dependent gene expression 
profiles of 70 cell types in the mouse 
hypothalamic preoptic area10 (Fig. 1b). 
Maps of mouse hippocampus have been 
generated using panels of hundreds of 
genes with two separate in situ sequencing 
methods, seqFISH13 and pciSeq14. pciSeq 
relies on padlock probe hybridization at 
the transcripts of interest, followed by 
amplification and in situ barcode sequencing 
by ligation, whereas seqFISH barcode 
sequencing makes use of the amplified 
hybridization chain reaction (Fig. 1c,d). 
With a 160-gene panel, STARmap was used 
effectively to characterize cell locations in 
mouse primary visual cortex and prefrontal 
cortex, as well as determine which cell types 
were likely most active via analysis of 48 
activity-regulated genes15 (Fig. 1e). It will 
also be possible to interrogate thousands of 
genes, along with protein expression and 
localization, in future experiments with 
advanced barcoding methods11,12.
These methods offer high sensitivity  
and single-cell-level spatial resolution  
for gene detection, but areas profiled are 
usually small due to the lengthy imaging 
process required. Conversely, in situ capture 
and ex situ sequencing–based spatial 
barcoding methods such as Visium  
(10x Genomics) and Slide-seq provide 
unbiased transcriptome-scale profiling on 
large areas (for example, whole mouse brain 
sections) in both mouse and human brain16,17 
(Fig. 1f), albeit with lower sensitivity and 
lower spatial resolution. These individual 
mapping efforts illustrate the power of 
harnessing multiplexed methods for gene 
expression assessment in intact tissues. 
Further technical improvements will 
increase their scalability for high-resolution 
brain-wide cell type mapping (see below).
The BRAIN Initiative Cell Census 
Network (BICCN) and other efforts such 
as the Human Cell Atlas strive to create 
comprehensive transcriptomics-based brain 
cell type atlases for several mammalian 
species, starting with the mouse. Using 
spatially resolved transcriptomics to 
generate accurate and densely sampled maps 
of cell types, neuroscientists can expect a 
resource similar to the original Allen Mouse 
Brain Atlas, but with cell type annotation 
and quantification of multiple genes within 
each single cell. Recent work from the 
BICCN highlights one cortical area, primary 
motor cortex, as the start of this systematic 
effort in the mouse, demonstrating the 
integration of single-cell transcriptomics 
and spatially resolved transcriptomics to 
understand the spatial organization of brain 
cell types18,19.
The future of spatially resolved 
transcriptomics: multimodal 
correspondence
We expect spatially resolved 
transcriptomics methods to be extended 
far beyond cell type mapping and 
increasingly used to draw correspondence 
between data modalities and provide 
cell type context for neurobiology 
experiments across species. Transcriptomic 
profiling of neurons following functional 
measurements has the potential to 
transform systems neuroscience. Coupling 
calcium imaging and/or optogenetic 
probing of connectivity with post hoc 
identification of transcriptomic cell types 
via spatially resolved transcriptomics can 
provide cell-type-specific interpretation 
of circuit function (Fig. 2). Even with 
limited multiplexing (12 genes), in situ 
assessment of molecular types after in vivo 
calcium imaging revealed the molecular 
identity of discrete neuronal types in the 
hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus to 
be predictive of neuronal activity across 
multiple behavioral states20. Immediate 
early gene (IEG) activation can also be 
used as a proxy for neuronal activity. 
Post hoc IEG expression measurement 
combined with transcriptomic cell type 
identification through MERFISH has 
revealed hypothalamic cell types selectively 
activated in different behaviors10.
Spatially resolved transcriptomics can 
provide high-resolution descriptive data 
for the human brain, which has been a 
E
Projection target A
Projection target B
Projection target B
Projection target C
Projection target B
Projection target C
E
a
b
c
Fig. 2 | Spatially resolved transcriptomics linking transcriptomic cell types with connectivity and 
circuit function. a, Determining cell type identities after multi-patch and optogenetic stimulation 
experiments allows high-throughput measurements of cell-type-dependent local connectivity.  
b, Barcoded anterograde or retrograde viral labeling can add long-range projection information to cell 
type maps. c, Spatially resolved transcriptomics following in vivo activity measurements such as calcium 
imaging would add cell type identities to circuit analysis.

25
FOCUS | comment
FOCUS | comment
Nature Methods | VOL 18 | January 2021 | 15–25 | www.nature.com/naturemethods
challenge to parse without the genetic tools 
that have rendered the mouse brain such a 
tractable target. Multi-round smFISH was 
adapted to describe cell type composition 
differences and gene expression changes 
in similar cell types in mouse and human 
brain, illustrating evolutionary differences 
in upper layer neurons2,21. Comprehensive 
maps of molecular cell types using highly 
multiplexed methods allow interspecies 
comparison of homologous regions and 
cell types. Since many human psychiatric 
and neurodegenerative diseases involve 
subcellular processes and pathological 
protein localization, we expect these 
methods to provide insight into the disease 
process. In fact, both in situ sequencing and 
transcriptome-scale spatial transcriptomics 
have been used to localize and confirm 
expression of a cohort of plaque-induced 
genes in human brain tissue that were 
identified using the same methods in a 
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease22.
An exciting prospect extending 
brain-wide cell type mapping is the addition 
of connectivity-mapping information 
across the same spatial scale. Through 
the use of multiplexed retrograde viral 
labeling or sequencing-based readout of 
projection targets, it may be possible to 
combine dense cell type maps with neuronal 
projection targets (Fig. 2). Using the BARseq 
method, axonal projections of thousands 
of spatially resolved neurons in the mouse 
auditory cortex have been simultaneously 
mapped and related to cell class identities 
by combining viral delivery of cellular 
barcodes with in situ sequencing to read out 
barcodes together with cell identity genes23. 
If combined with comprehensive profiling 
of molecular cell types, this approach 
could yield rich connectivity maps of the 
mammalian nervous system.
Overcoming technical challenges to 
improve scalability and adoption
Spatially resolved transcriptomics is 
facing several challenges that are slowing 
widespread adoption and broad application. 
As with any new technology, very few of 
these methods have produced published 
results outside their labs of origin. This 
reflects the difficulty in reducing to practice 
a complex sequence of sample processing, 
imaging and data processing. As methods 
are refined and various entities pursue 
commercialization of these techniques, we 
hope that usability and reproducibility  
will be addressed in future publications  
and products.
One technical challenge that affects both 
imaging- and sequencing-based spatially 
resolved transcriptomic methods is how to 
correctly associate detected mRNAs with 
single cells. For capture-and-sequencing–
based methods such as Visium and 
Slide-seq, this challenge is manifested as 
the need to computationally deconvolve 
the reads from a single spot or bead into 
the cells that originally housed the mRNA. 
For imaging-based methods, the challenge 
is to associate individual mRNA molecules 
with the correct cells. Most published 
approaches treat cell segmentation as an 
image-processing problem, with total 
mRNA, DAPI or other images providing 
the only substrate for determining a cell’s 
outline. This approach is challenged by the 
highly ramified processes of both neurons 
and glial cells and the close apposition 
of cells of differing types. The existence 
of well-defined transcriptomic cell types 
can provide useful prior information: for 
example, pciSeq and Baysor use scRNA-seq 
cluster data to probabilistically assign 
mRNAs to individual cells14,24, although the 
results depend on the genes imaged and the 
underlying scRNA-seq data.
Another challenge is scalability — 
that is, the ability to image hundreds to 
thousands of genes with high sensitivity in 
larger samples at cellular and subcellular 
resolution. Expansion and clearing methods 
such as ExFISH combined with signal 
amplification may provide a way forward in 
thick brain tissue, though this has yet to be 
achieved with a high level of multiplexing 
in brain25. For thin-section imaging-based 
methods, higher throughput imaging 
is essential to process multiple sections 
efficiently. For capture-and-sequencing–
based methods, increased spatial resolution 
(see, for example, ref. 26) and enhanced 
sensitivity through amplification of 
selective transcripts are needed to reach 
single-cell-level decoding.
A three-dimensional map of all known 
cell types in the brain overlaid with 
connectivity and functional information 
could be on the horizon. And with each step 
toward this possibility, the concept of a cell 
type will change as the shifting relationships 
among molecular type, location and 
function are resolved.
Ultimately, highly multiplexed, 
high-resolution and high-throughput 
spatially resolved transcriptomics 
approaches will enable routine assessment 
of cell types in many neuroscience 
applications. With these approaches, 
researchers can evaluate cell type variability 
across individuals and different genetic 
backgrounds in any species, study the 
transitions and migrations of different  
cell states and cell types during  
neural development, identify cellular 
correlates of behaviors and the brain’s 
computational processes, and uncover 
cell-type-specific pathological changes in 
human diseases and animal models.  
All these will vastly enrich our 
understanding of brain function.
❐
Jennie L. Close, Brian R. Long 
  and 
Hongkui Zeng 
  ✉
Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, WA, USA.  
✉e-mail: hongkuiz@alleninstitute.org
Published online: 6 January 2021 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-020-01040-z
References
	1.	 Zeng, H. & Sanes, J. R. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 530–546 (2017).
	2.	 Hodge, R. D. et al. Nature 573, 61–68 (2019).
	3.	 Lake, B. B. et al. Science 352, 1586–1590 (2016).
	4.	 Tasic, B. et al. Nature 563, 72–78 (2018).
	5.	 Zeisel, A. et al. Science 347, 1138–1142 (2015).
	6.	 Gouwens, N. W. et al. Cell 183, 935–953.e919 (2020).
	7.	 Scala, F. et al. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2907-3 
(2020).
	8.	 Codeluppi, S. et al. Nat. Methods 15, 932–935 (2018).
	9.	 Chen, K. H., Boettiger, A. N., Moffitt, J. R., Wang, S. & Zhuang, X. 
Science 348, aaa6090 (2015).
	10.	Moffitt, J. R. et al. Science 362, eaau5324 (2018).
	11.	Xia, C., Fan, J., Emanuel, G., Hao, J. & Zhuang, X. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 116, 19490–19499 (2019).
	12.	Eng, C. L. et al. Nature 568, 235–239 (2019).
	13.	Shah, S., Lubeck, E., Zhou, W. & Cai, L. Neuron 92,  
342–357 (2016).
	14.	Qian, X. et al. Nat. Methods 17, 101–106 (2020).
	15.	Wang, X. et al. Science 361, eaat5691 (2018).
	16.	Maynard, K. R., Jaffe, A. E. & Martinowich, K. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 45, 232–233 (2020).
	17.	Rodriques, S. G. et al. Science 363, 1463–1467 (2019).
	18.	Zhang, M. et al. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2020. 
06.04.105700 (2020).
	19.	BRAIN Initiative Cell Census Network (BICCN). Preprint at 
bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.343129 (2020).
	20.	Xu, S. et al. Science 370, eabb2494 (2020).
	21.	Kalmbach, B. E. et al. Neuron 100, 1194–1208.e1195 (2018).
	22.	Chen, W. T. et al. Cell 182, 976–991.e919 (2020).
	23.	Chen, X. et al. Cell 179, 772–786.e719 (2019).
	24.	Petukhov, V., Soldatov, R. A., Khodosevich, K. & Kharchenko, P. V.  
Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.05.326777 
(2020).
	25.	Chen, F. et al. Nat. Methods 13, 679–684 (2016).
	26.	Liu, Y. et al. Cell 183, 1665–1681.e18 (2020).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Allen Institute for Brain 
Science and by grant U19MH114830 from the National 
Institute of Mental Health to H.Z. The content is solely 
the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily 
represent the official views of NIH and its subsidiary 
institutes. The authors wish to thank the Allen Institute 
founder, Paul G. Allen, for his vision, encouragement  
and support.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

===== Corradetti2020_BioEssays_AmphibianRegeneration+Cancer =====
Received: 21 December 2020
Revised: 18 February 2021
Accepted: 23 February 2021
DOI: 10.1002/bies.202000339
P R O B L E M S & PA R A D I G M S
Prospects & Overviews
Amphibian regeneration and mammalian cancer: Similarities
and contrasts from an evolutionary biology perspective
Comparing the regenerative potential of mammalian embryos and urodeles to develop
effective strategies against human cancer
Bruna Corradetti1,2
Prashant Dogra3
Simone Pisano1,2
Zhihui Wang3
Mauro Ferrari4
Shu-hsia Chen5,6
Richard L. Sidman7
Renata Pasqualini8,9
Wadih Arap8,10
Vittorio Cristini3,11
1 Department of Nanomedicine, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, Texas, USA
2 Swansea University Medical School, Swansea, Wales, UK
3 Mathematics in Medicine Program, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, Texas, USA
4 Department of Pharmaceutics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
5 Immunotherapy Research Center, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, Texas, USA
6 Cancer Center, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, Texas, USA
7 Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
8 Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey, USA
9 Division of Cancer Biology, Department of Radiation Oncology, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey, USA
10 Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey, USA
11 Department of Imaging Physics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA
Correspondence
BrunaCorradetti,MSc,Departmentof
Nanomedicine,HoustonMethodistResearch
Institute,Houston,TX77030,USA.
Email:bcorradetti2@houstonmethodist.org
Abstract
Here we review and discuss the link between regeneration capacity and tumor sup-
pression comparing mammals (embryos versus adults) with highly regenerative verte-
brates. Similar to mammal embryo morphogenesis, in amphibians (essentially newts
and salamanders) the reparative process relies on a precise molecular and cellular
machinery capable of sensing abnormal signals and actively reprograming or eliminat-
ing them. As the embryo’s evil twin, tumor also retains common functional attributes.
The immune system plays a pivotal role in maintaining a physiological balance to
provide surveillance against tumor initiation or to support its initiation and progres-
sion. We speculate that susceptibility to cancer development in adult mammals may
be determined by the loss of an advanced regenerative capability during evolution
and believe that gaining mechanistic insights into how regenerative capacity linked to
tumor suppression is postnatally lost in mammals might illuminate an as yet unrecog-
nized route to cancer treatment.
BioEssays. 2021;2000339.
© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC
1 of 11
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/bies
https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.202000339

2 of 11
CORRADETTI ET AL.
KEYWORDS
cancer, computational modelling, embryogenesis, evolution, immune system, regeneration,
wound healing
INTRODUCTION TO REGENERATION AND CANCER
Regeneration implies a well-coordinated restoration of physically or
functionally lost cells, tissues, and organs. This reparative process
restores missing structures by recapitulating developmental pro-
cesses, while achieving remarkable functional integration between
newly formed and pre-existing tissues. To complete such a colossal
morphological and functional task, regeneration requires instructive
signals to regulate cell cycles efficiently, ultimately resulting in a
finite number of cells that, in turn, undergo division and accomplish
tissue repair.[1] Participating cells must be guided precisely to areas
of need for effective cell interaction, and—once regeneration is
complete—specific cues are also required to terminate the signal(s).
While the regenerative biological processes may restore morphology
and function, they are not infallible, as revealed by an increasing
body of evidence that aberrant cell growth aimed at tissue repair
could lead to malignant transformation.[2] In certain cases, it has
been reasoned that the formation of malignant tumors might actually
be dependent upon an impaired and/or incomplete regeneration
program. This working hypothesis is supported by several lines of
experimental evidence that during local tissue repair in adult mammals
(putatively an abridged attempt at regeneration), chronic exposure to
damage and attempted repair may induce accumulation of (epi)genetic
lesions, leading to cancer initiation, especially in epithelial tissues.[3,4]
Conversely, regenerative processes have long been reported to revert
malignant cells back to a physiological phenotype, as demonstrated
in highly regenerative organisms, such as salamanders and frogs.[5,6]
These complementary observations suggest that the biological
responses associated with regeneration result in paradoxically oppo-
site outcomes: tissue degeneration (such as fibrosis or tumors), or
reconstruction. Over three decades ago, Dvorak originally deemed
tumors to be “wounds that do not heal”,[7] and ever since that conceptual
breakthrough was put forward, the complex relationship between car-
cinogenesis, inflammation, and local tissue repair has been extensively
reviewed.[8–10] In this article, we will discuss the apparent ancestral
link between mammalian embryos and highly regenerative vertebrate
organisms. Specifically, we will compare and contrast the ancient
molecular and cellular mechanisms activated during mammalian
embryonic development with those leading to functional restoration of
a whole tissue, structure or organ in amphibians, with special emphasis
on emerging evidence that amphibian regeneration might provide
biological clues about the underpinnings of the regression of malignant
transformation. Finally, we will provide a perspective on the role of
the immature prenatal mammalian immune system in maintaining
physiological balance during tissue morphogenesis and in providing
surveillance against cancer initiation and progression.
HIGHLY REGENERATIVE ORGANISMS AND
MAMMALIAN EMBRYOS: SIMILARITIES AND
CONTRASTS
Nature provides a plethora of fascinating instances of vertebrate
organisms capable of regenerating various complex structures.
Indeed, adult salamanders easily regrow limbs, tail, eyes, jaws, and
heart following injury; adult zebrafish may rebuild functional fins
and heart.[11–15] With somewhat more limited potential, but still
impressively, reptiles may regrow a part of their tail as a mechanism
to elude tissue damage or to replace a section lost to a predator’s
grasp.
The strategies used by highly regenerative vertebrate organisms to
restore organ function putatively involve the crucial role of stem cells,
connective tissue-associated fibroblasts, and skeletal muscle fibers
that undergo de-differentiation to become progenitor cells.[16] Undif-
ferentiated cells typically accumulate at the site(s) of injury and sub-
sequently achieve functional regeneration or morphogenesis.[17] Such
targeted accumulation of undifferentiated cells enables certain organ-
isms to regenerate organs or organ parts. Notably, the cluster of undif-
ferentiated cells comes to display cell properties not exclusively asso-
ciated with their origin. They may actually assume other cell lineages,
new chondrogenic specification being among the most frequently
encountered.[18] They may also revert to their previous phenotype
due to the persistence of proteins that functionally determine their
fate, or they may secrete agents that influence differentiation of neigh-
boring cells as a field-effect. Macrophages in particular play key roles
as regulators of neighboring cells.[19] However, systemic depletion
of macrophages, for instance in axolotl (the so-called “walking fish”),
results in formation of a thick scar at the end of the limb stump. More-
over, pro- and anti-inflammatory signals are induced following an insult
orinjury,andmaybesustainedthroughouttheprocessofregeneration,
due to the transient presence of macrophages.[20] This strikingly pre-
cise process is perpetuated until tissue restoration is completed, and
most interestingly, without incurring genetic abnormalities or aberra-
tions. Rather, it has been observed that such regeneration-permissive
environments have the ability to reverse tumorigenesis by reprogram-
ing tumor cells.[21] As an example, the administration of chemical car-
cinogens often induces cancer in regeneration-incompetent tissues
(such as the newt dorsal iris) but not in regeneration-competent ones
(such as the newt ventral iris).[2] Specifically, despite their low fre-
quency, malignant transformation can be observed together with the
formation of invasive epithelial tumors. However, this biological phe-
nomenon may generally be followed by spontaneous remission, as
tumor cells are somehow apparently “forced” to become reorganized
into non-malignant tissue cells.[6]

CORRADETTI ET AL.
3 of 11
In adult mammals, a rudimentary regenerative potential is evident
on the part of endogenous stem cells, which almost always are insuffi-
cient to regenerate a whole functional organ following an injury; how-
ever, a process similar to organ formation in amphibians can also be
identified during mammalian embryonic development. A common uni-
fying attribute could be that mammalian embryos harbor an enor-
mous number of undifferentiated cells, which have high-proliferation
rates, and display specific differentiative potential, by virtue of which
they have a proper positional identity during the process of tissue
morphogenesis.[22] Moreover, cells traverse lineage boundaries during
non-mammalian regeneration and tissue patterning in growing mam-
malian embryos, a phenomenon that is achieved by the continuous
regulated interplay between neighboring cells.[23] The aggregate of
these processes is consistent with the ancient similarities in behav-
ior between amphibian undifferentiated cell clusters and early stages
of mammalian embryo formation. The mammalian embryonic environ-
ment critically supports normal tissue development and it might have
evolved either to preclude or minimize malignant transformation. As
a matter of fact, several lines of evidence demonstrate that trans-
planted tumor cells can be inhibited when placed in a tissue with onto-
logical developmental capacity. For instance, teratocarcinoma cells
implanted in a mouse blastocyst may be physiologically incorporated
into the developing embryo and function normally, rather than induc-
ing carcinogenesis.[24,25] After introduction into normal blastocysts,
malignant carcinoma cells give rise to a large variety of normal, fully
differentiated and functional tissues in the chimera progeny, with high
specificity for the strain of the host. While tumor generally kills the
host by 3–4 weeks after transplantation, chimeras produced by inject-
ing carcinoma cells into blastocysts survived over 11 weeks.[26] More
recent findings support the inductive interactions between the embry-
onic components and cancer cells. Melanoma cells exposed to a human
embryonic environment are reprogramed towards a less aggressive
(i.e., clonogenicity and tumorigenicity) and normal melanocyte-specific
phenotype, through the neutralization of the aberrant expression of
Nodal.[27]
The
developmental
activity
of
cells
during
mammalian
embryogenesis—similarly to cells that participate in amphibian
regeneration—is highly regulated by a series of signals that prime
the surrounding cells to cooperate towards the same ultimate goal of
normal morphogenesis. Such a precise molecular and cellular machin-
ery in mammalian embryos senses potentially abnormal (“danger”)
signals, such as an aberrantly developing cell, and it is capable of
actively reprograming it towards the main developmental function,
or eliminating it. In fact, besides the DNA repair mechanisms active
in mammalian embryonic cells, other processes including cellular
apoptosis and senescence have classically been reported as effective
tumor suppressive systems able to remove cells at risk of aberrant
growth.[28]
Senescence is a programed and conserved mechanism that can be
activated in response to DNA damage. It contributes to cellular bal-
ance in a tissue, eventually recruiting macrophages to clear dysfunc-
tional cells. Although senescent cells are non-proliferative, senescence
is an essential feature for tissue regeneration during embryonic devel-
opment. In salamanders, a large number of senescent cells are found in
a regenerating limb,[29] which disappear by the time the regenerative
process has been fully completed, undergoing a fate of cell death and
immune-mediated clearance.[30,31]
Further, when normal and senescent cells are differentially
implanted into a salamander, the senescent population is quickly
cleared away by macrophages, thereby improving tissue function
and potentially extending lifespan.[29] Senescent cells can also be
found in various tissues of mammalian embryos at mid-to-late stages
of development (mouse embryonic days [E] 9.5–17.5). These areas
with senescent cells include the developing limb, tip of the tail, brain
vesicles, closing neural tube, otic vesicle, gut endoderm, and the fusing
sternum at the midline. This pattern has been consistently found in
virtually 100% of mice studied, and it resolves with the disappearance
of senescence by E17.5 (about a day before birth). Recently, the ability
of the embryonic environment to normalize tumor cells has been
experimentally demonstrated by injecting embryonal carcinoma cells
into the mouse blastocyst at post-implantation stages. The probability
of developing tumors after birth following carcinoma cell injection into
the embryo was observed to be positively correlated with the time
of injection.[32] Moreover, tumor cells evidently remained latent and
could still be demonstrated in adult tissues. The maternal- specific or
intrinsic embryonic immune response contributes to removal of cellu-
lar debris, embryologic growth, and development. The aforementioned
transient mechanisms, with features that disappear at birth, have
also been associated with the recruitment of macrophages in adult
mammals for clearance of suppressed cells.[31,33] The latter aspect is
of particular interest because the presence of such inflammatory cells
at the site of action is essential for the final outcome, whether during
tissue morphogenesis, regeneration, or cancer progression.
MAMMALIAN EMBRYOS, WOUND HEALING, AND
TUMORS: THE PARALLELS
The interplay of embryos and malignant tumors has long been well
established in contemporary “mythology”, so to speak. Over four
decades ago, the American writer Sontag published an acclaimed
academic book about the language used to describe human diseases.
The book is entitled “Illness as Metaphor” and describes the tumor
as “a fetus with its own will”.[34] Far more recently, Johnson wrote a
popular lay media article based on Sontag’s previous work in which
he deemed a tumor to be “the embryo’s evil twin”[35] by virtue of its
rapid proliferation and spread of cells, the subversion of the maternal
immune system, and the embryonal capability to act as a parasite for
supply of nutrients. Indeed, Dvorak’s original insight to the effect that
“tumors are wounds that do not heal”[7] has been supported by a large
body of work revealing that tumors activate a latent wound-healing
program of the host for a prolonged duration.[36,37] Further, many
of the genes that orchestrate embryogenesis and the wound healing
process are also important regulators of cancer growth. Among the
most striking morphological changes that embryogenesis entails is
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), often regarded as one

4 of 11
CORRADETTI ET AL.
of the main characteristics of aggressive cancers. During EMT, cancer
cells lose cell-cell contacts, acquire a fibroblast-like (mesenchymal)
morphology, and express mesenchyme-associated proteins that confer
a crucial phenotype for invasive growth and metastasis. By acquiring
EMT, cancer cells seem to reactivate a latent behavioral program usu-
ally confined to embryonic development and tissue repair, although it
occurs in an exaggerated and uncontrolled manner in diseases such as
cancer. In contrast, once settled in another anatomical location, tumor
cells that undergo EMT resemble stem cells, capable of re-establishing
their epithelial phenotype via mesenchymal-epithelial transition
(MET). MET also occurs following completion of wound repair, when
keratinocytes revert from their mesenchymal phenotype to their
epithelial phenotype, thus returning to their normal proliferation
state. Furthermore, they are also activated during early embryoge-
nesis and following injury of certain epithelial cells.[38,39] Thus, the
realization of the central importance of EMT and MET as related
phenomena is arguably among the most important contributions in the
field of cancer biology over the past decades.
As is the case with normal embryonic cells, tumor cells tend to follow
an already well-trodden path. From an immunological point of view, the
embryo can be considered as an allogeneic transplant within the mater-
nal body. As such–and similarly to a tumor–the mass of cells has to be
tolerated by the mother’s immune system to develop, grow, and infil-
trate new tissues, as well as to create new blood vessels in a harsh and
potentially hostile environment. The embryo “learns” to escape detec-
tion by the maternal immune system, and apparently even launches its
own “counterattack” by inducing apoptosis in cytotoxic effectors.[40]
While embryogenesis and tumorigenesis retain peculiar and common
functional attributes, they obviously differ in the outcome of the mech-
anisms they adopt.
IMMUNE CELLS: SENTINELS THAT GUIDE TISSUE
MORPHOGENESIS AND REGENERATION
Several questions remain open-ended at this juncture: One might ask
what drives the final outcome of embryogenesis, tumorigenesis, and
regeneration. What are the minimal elements needed to develop or
restore a tissue, or induce its disruption? Neoplastic transformation
in adults is often associated with persistent inflammation.[41] Because
inflammation in tumors is not self-limiting, continuous activation of
the wound-healing program is accompanied by altered DNA repair,
apoptosis, senescence, and/or cell cycle checkpoint control, ultimately
inducing the production of high levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS).
As a consequence of an impaired wound healing process, chronic
inflammation leads to fibrotic scar formation. While its role is still vig-
orously debated, some investigators consider fibrosis as a driving force
for anatomical polarity in tissues undergoing aberrant regeneration,
and consequently a potential etiology of tumorigenesis following an
injury.[42]
By the same token, the accumulation of replicatively senescent cells
represents a rich source of pro-inflammatory factors, which together
represent the so-called senescence-associated secretory phenotype
(SASP). SASP constitutes a cocktail of cytokines and chemokines that
essentially induce a wound-healing response. The cause of senes-
cent cell disappearance has been identified in the cluster of immune
cells that have been found to surround them, both in salaman-
ders during tissue regeneration and in mammalian embryos during
morphogenesis.[43,44] These cells are putative macrophages, capable
of effecting the clearance of dysfunctional (deemed unnecessary) “for-
eign” cells. Indeed, macrophages surrounding senescent cells have
been reported to incorporate apoptotic bodies in this setting.[31]
Senescence becomes detrimental when the immune system appears
unable to dispose of effectively of senescent cells properly, thus con-
tributing to high levels of pro-inflammatory mediators, and leading to
tumor initiation.
Macrophages also play a crucial role in both constructive and detri-
mental biological processes. Within their dual roles and multiple func-
tions, they might hide cues behind the uncontrolled tumorigenic condi-
tion frequently observed in adult mammals, and in the controlled cas-
cade of events leading to embryonic development. Thus, it is perhaps
not surprising that current tissue engineering approaches have a goal
of recruiting and localizing macrophages at sites of implants in order to
restore tissue functions while avoiding scar formation.[45] Our group,
among many others, has been successful in monitoring the molecu-
lar and cellular cascades activated by the implant of biomimetic and
immunomodulatory materials.[46,47] With the admixture of the bioac-
tive macromolecule chondroitin sulfate and the architectural complex-
ity and mechanical properties of the scaffold material, we have devel-
oped a pro-regenerative environment able to localize macrophages at
the site of implantation. Analysis of macrophages colonizing our devel-
oped scaffold material shows the presence of alternatively-activated
cells (anti-inflammatory macrophages, or M2 macrophages), which we
tentatively believe are responsible for activating the biological pro-
cesses associated with the extracellular matrix (ECM) formation, colla-
gen fibril reorganization, angiogenesis, and tissue morphogenesis, ulti-
mately leading to the complete integration of the scaffold within the
tissue.[48]
Interestingly, the approach developed in adult mammals reca-
pitulated the immune response activated in highly regenerative
vertebrates such as the salamander, during undifferentiated cell
cluster formation and limb regrowth.[20] Embryonic macrophages
in mammals during early stages of development can also repair
skin wounds, or cardiac muscle after ischemic injury, in a scarless
manner.[49] Intriguingly, macrophage-depleted neonatal mice are
unable to effect such a mechanism of repair. Conversely, they form
fibrotic scars with reduced angiogenesis and poor cardiac function.[50]
In adult tissues, conventional tumor-associated macrophages (TAM)
displaying an anti-inflammatory phenotype are known to be potent
suppressors of anti-tumor immunity. They create a highly vascularized
environment, which results in advanced sustaining of cancer progres-
sion; in contrast, classically activated macrophages have been reported
to lead to cancer-related inflammation and killing of tumor cells.[51]
Recent studies on immune signaling early in amphibian regeneration
have revealed that both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory
signaling
are
up-regulated
simultaneously,
suggesting
that
the

CORRADETTI ET AL.
5 of 11
synchronous balance between inflammatory mediators is essential in
ultimately determining the success and quality of regeneration.[20,52]
Studies on regenerating limbs of newts also suggest that macrophages
mediate immunosurveillance and clearance of senescent cells gener-
ated during undifferentiated cell cluster formation,[30] and prevent
the lysis of de-differentiating cells induced by NK cells.[53] While
macrophages
acquire
this
functional
role
in
pro-regenerative
environments,
including
embryogenesis,
they
lose
it
during
tumorigenesis.
These observations raise the intriguing yet unresolved question as
to the origin of the macrophagic populations responsible for the afore-
mentioned processes in prenatal and adult organisms. In mice, primi-
tive macrophages are produced in the extra-embryonic yolk sac (YS)
from E6.5 to E11, even before the appearance of the first multipo-
tent hematopoietic stem cells,[54,55] thus representing the only white
hematopoietic cells found in the embryo during that specific stage
of development.[55] Between E10 to E13, the placenta becomes the
major organ where active hematopoiesis occurs.[56,57] Although the
precise ontogeny and specific function of these cells are still under
debate, during embryogenesis macrophages have been detected in
most organs and developing tissues including the brain, heart, liver,
and skeletal muscle, where they persist during adulthood. Acting via
the highly controlled secretion of paracrine signals that modulate the
activity of tissue-resident cells, these macrophages are involved in a
large number of developmental events including those leading to the
reactivation of the regenerative machinery in adult organisms. For a
long time, the majority of macrophages in injured mature mouse tis-
sues were reported to originate from mononuclear cells generated in
adult bone marrow of the mouse.[58,59] In the last two decades, how-
ever, the development of new murine models allowing specific genetic
and imaging-based approaches to trace monocytes/macrophages pre-
cursors in vivo has revealed that the macrophages responsible for
tissue homeostasis following an injury or an insult mainly derive
from embryonic development.[60] Ofnote, three developmental origins
have been attributed so far to tissue-resident macrophages found in
adult mice, including the YS-derived, fetal liver-derived tissue-resident,
and infiltrating bone marrow-derived macrophages.[61] Though they
emerge at different points during development, these macrophages
are maintained locally from early development onwards. In an attempt
to identify specific functions of YS-derived macrophages, Lakhdari
et al. have recently demonstrated that fetal anti-inflammatory F4/80HI
macrophages play important roles in removing apoptotic or necrotic
cells during tissue morphogenesis, and express a major promoter of
both developmental morphogenesis, tissue repair and regeneration
(e.g., the insulin-like growth factor 1, IGF-1); while pro-inflammatory
CD11bHI macrophages respond to microbial products and innate
immune activators.[62] This finding suggests that the embryonic regen-
erative potential mediated by macrophages could potentially be
translated in time and space; however, the lack of proinflammatory
macrophages early in development prevents the robust innate immune
response, which is amplified in adult tissues.
Similarly, anti-inflammatory macrophages secrete tumor growth
factor (TGF)-β, a pleiotropic growth factor and key regulator of embry-
onic development and mammalian wound healing[63] that constitutes
an important signaling pathway in salamander limb regeneration.[64]
If stromal TGF-β-driven inflammation may also be responsible for
carcinogenesis[65] or resistance to carcinogenesis in adult mammals,
the relative lack of chronic inflammatory reactivity in regeneration-
proneorganismscouldperhapsbeafactorthatpreventstumorgrowth.
This hypothesis is supported by the lack of an established adaptive
immunity in highly regenerative organisms, which—by contrast—is
present in adult mammalian tissues.[66] Despite their vigorous innate
immune system, salamanders are considered relatively immune-
deficient, and skin wounding experiments have recently revealed an
age-dependent loss of the scar-free repair and regeneration capacities
in young froglets, associated with the immune system maturation and
an altered wound healing response.[67] Likewise, the adult adaptive
immune system starts developing soon after birth in mice,[68,69] while
it can only be detected at gestational week 10 in humans. The fetal
immune system has the striking capacity to detect non-inherited
antigens and to induce tolerance.[70] Loss of tolerance with emergence
of the adult adaptive immune response may contribute to the loss of
regeneration in later stages of mammalian development. In mouse
embryos, skin scarring commences at E18.5–E19 days (the day of birth)
and at ∼24 weeks of gestation in humans,[71,72] marking the transition
point from scar-free healing to scarring in the skin.[73] Amphibians
also lack lymph nodes, such that antigen presentation and tolerance
may occur entirely within the skin and other peripheral tissues.[74,75]
In contrast to amphibians, mammalian embryos manifest lymph node
organogenesis at early stages in a highly regulated fashion, which
involves embryonic lymphatic endothelial cells as main lymphoid tissue
organizers. In experimental mouse models, this poorly studied popu-
lation of endothelial cells is recruited very early in the developmental
phases, around mouse embryonic E10,[76,77] allowing for a tightly
controlled development of the lymphatic system. This difference
might further mark the important role of a completely developed
immune system in contrasting and/or opposing the capacity for tissue
regeneration.
THE ADVANCED REGENERATIVE PROGRAM IS
LOST DURING EVOLUTION
The phylogenetic distribution of regeneration suggests that the regen-
erative ability is present in diverse metazoan phyla.[78] Thus, the exis-
tence of this ancestral trait has likely been suppressed in many lin-
eages during evolution. Certain regenerating species experience a high
frequency of loss of body parts, most commonly from predation.[79]
In such taxa, regeneration is likely to be maintained as a repara-
tive response. A structural loss has been associated with a possible
pleiotropic breakdown between regeneration and other developmen-
tal process, allowing regeneration to be lost if it is not under direct
selection.[8,80,81] Researchers have long hypothesized that vertebrate
limb regeneration occurs only when embryonic limb development is
self-organized and does not imply interactions with transient (i.e., non-
limb) structures, making redeployment at post-embryonic timepoints

6 of 11
CORRADETTI ET AL.
FIGURE 1
Phylogenetic tree and regenerative potential across different vertebrate species. Schematic representation of the common
phylogenetic roots of salamanders, other amphibians, and mammals. Through evolution these organisms diversified regenerative and immune
systems that may play a central role in the onset of cancer
possible.[79] Accordingly,thelossofthisconditionabrogatestheregen-
erative ability in reptiles, birds, and mammals, whereas its persistence
in amphibians allows for tissue regrowth in those phyla. The pleiotropy
hypothesis posits that the ability to regenerate a particular structure is
retained because it is tightly coupled with specific developmental phe-
nomena, including growth and embryogenesis.
In addition, there is now extensive evidence from a range of
taxa that tissue loss and regeneration can impart severe functional,
energetic, reproductive, and survival costs.[82] Non-energetic trade-
offs might also mediate the restriction of the regenerative ability,
and correlations have been found between poor regeneration and
endothermy (in mammals and birds), suggesting that phylogenetic
patterns underly regeneration failure.[83] Specifically, species in
which regeneration fails commonly tend to lack good wound healing
and fail to form the needed initial cluster of undifferentiated cells
(Figure 1).
In terms of evolutionary biology, the ability of a given organism
to develop an embryonic structure is critically important as a tran-
sient tool for later establishment of a regenerative function.[84] In this
view, regeneration seems both to contribute to the source of abnor-
mal growth and to provide a means to prevent and/or correct growth
abnormalities. A second, alternative, hypothesis conversely suggests
that if induced cellular proliferation during regeneration is followed
by morphogenesis, regeneration has the potential to prevent abnor-
mal growth and, even more startling, to reverse tumorigenesis and
regain morphostasis.[8] This biological phenomenon has mostly been
observed in animals with immense regenerative potential. Such obser-
vations led to the assumption that susceptibility to cancer develop-
ment in adult mammals could perhaps be determined by the evolution-
ary loss of an advanced regenerative capability.[85] The processes of
lens and limb regeneration in newts demonstrate an incredible degree
of plasticity, where both differentiated pigment epithelial cells from the
dorsal iris (but not the ventral iris) and limb mesenchyme reverse their
differentiated state by re-entering the cell cycle.[86]
This cellular dedifferentiation implies a loss of tissue-specific char-
acteristics (bringing cells close to the undifferentiated state) followed
by re-differentiation into cells of the same type or even a different
lineage.[87] While this process can be repeated over time without
variation in such species, it is apparently missing in mammalian models
where chronic local wound repair can lead to certain epithelial cancers.
Here, the need for some regenerative potential exists as a trade-off
against cancer protection. This leads to the lack of an efficient control
system in adult mammals,[11] which is still accomplished moderately
in mammalian embryos, where the ancestral memory (for tissue
regeneration) has been somewhat retained. The molecular and cellular
mechanisms activated in the embryonic environment resemble the
complex processes that amphibians employ to functionally regenerate
damaged tissues. Therefore, an improved understanding of this evo-
lutionary process will hopefully help conceive effective regenerative
mechanism-based insights against cancer.

CORRADETTI ET AL.
7 of 11
FIGURE 2
Cellular automata model simulations for healthy tissue. Snapshots of model simulation shows the growth of (A) mouse embryonic
stem cells at blastocyst stage (E4), (B) mouse embryonic fibroblasts at the end of gestation (E19) and, (C) adult somatic cells at end of one postnatal
year. (D) Cellular count kinetics for the growing tissue is shown for healthy and mutated cells. During proliferation, cells either remain healthy or
accumulate spontaneous mutations. Scale bars: 2 mm
FIGURE 3
Cellular automaton model simulations for tumor tissue. (A) Snapshot of model simulation shows the growth of adult cancer cells at
end of one year. (B) Cellular count kinetics for the growing tissue is shown for healthy and mutated cells. During proliferation, cells either remain
healthy or accumulate spontaneous mutations. ‘‘Mutated’’ refers to the accumulation of one spontaneous mutation in a cell, ‘‘Mutated++’’ refers to
the accumulation of 2 mutations, and ‘‘Mutated+++’’ to three mutations. Scale bar: 2 mm
COMPUTATIONAL MODELING HIGHLIGHT THE
ANTI-TUMORIGENIC EFFECTS OF A PROTECTIVE
ENVIRONMENT
The paragraphs above have discussed the role of the immune system
in preventing tumor initiation, which can be attributed to removal of
tumorous cells or improved DNA repair efficiency. We performed a
simplified modeling exercise to demonstrate implicitly the effect of
immune system in controlling tumor initiation and growth in embryonic
stem cells versus embryonic fibroblasts. Based on an extensive liter-
ature review, we found that the spontaneous mutation frequency in
mouse embryonic stem cells is about two orders of magnitude smaller
than in differentiated cells such as mouse embryonic fibroblasts.[88]
This served to inform a two-dimensional cellular automaton model
of tissue growth in mice (Figure 2A-C and Figure 3A). A cellular
automaton is an agent-based model that works on a two-dimensional
rectangular lattice composed of square elements (side length 20 μm),
representing individual cells, which evolve through a set of possible

8 of 11
CORRADETTI ET AL.
TABLE 1
Cellular automata model parameters
Mouse embryonic
stem cells
Mouse embryonic
fibroblasts
Mouse adult
somatic cells
Tumor cells
References
Mutation frequency
10-5
10-7
1.7*10-5
10-2
[85,92,93]
Doubling time (H)
4
24
48
48
[94]
states in discrete time steps based on a set of rules.[89–94] The cells
undergo division to form daughter cells, and based on a probability
of mutation can acquire mutations or repair them along the way. The
model was parameterized with data gathered from the literature
(Table 1), and was used quantitatively to study the effect of differential
proliferation and mutation rates on the genomic stability of embryonic
and adult mice tissues.
Figure 2 shows the model simulations over a period of 384 days,
from inception to growth up to one year after birth. Simulation results
demonstrated that, despite a much faster proliferation rate, embryonic
stem cells and embryonic fibroblasts gather no mutations until gesta-
tion, and subsequently start to accumulate mutations only after birth.
This observation is in contrast to cancer cells in adults (Figure 3) by
at least 3–4 orders of magnitude. Although in the simplified modeling
approach introduced here we do not correlate cellular mutation load
with malignant transformation, it could still be inferred that the embry-
onic microenvironment elicits a protective effect capable of strictly
maintaining genomic stability and functionality to minimize the risk of
malignant transformations.
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
During morphogenesis, the correct patterning for tissue growth is
ensured by the precise recapitulation of specific developmental steps
along with the immature status of the immune system and the interplay
with neighboring cells. Comparison of the immunological relationship
between embryo and tumor with that between embryo and the initial
cluster of undifferentiated cells at the regeneration site in regenerat-
ing amphibians raises apparent paradoxes. If the investigation of these
open questions can be formalized into an experimental hypothesis-
generating model, we may be able to identify key mechanisms that
are capable of inducing tissue development in contrast to supporting
tumor progression. Such an approach, based on comparative evolution-
ary biology, could yield effective regenerative medicine-based strate-
gies to prevent and fight human cancer.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Bruna Corradetti acknowledges support through the Sêr Cymru II
program, funded by the European Commission through the Horizon
2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Skłodowska-
Curie Actions (MSCA) COFUND scheme and the Welsh European
Funding Office (WEFO) under the European Regional Development
Fund (ERDF) (grant agreement 663830) and Houston Methodist
Hospital. Simone Pisano is sponsored by the Swansea University
(UK)/Houston Methodist Research Institute (US) joint PhD Initia-
tive. Renata Pasqualini and Wadih Arap received research awards
from the Gillson-Longenbaugh Foundation. This work has also been
supported in part by the National Science Foundation Grant DMS-
1930583 (Zhihui Wang, Vittorio Cristini), the National Institute of
Health (NIH) Grants 1U01CA196403 (Zhihui Wang, Vittorio Cristini),
1U01CA213759 (Zhihui Wang, Vittorio Cristini), 1R01CA226537
(Zhihui Wang, Renata Pasqualini, Wadih Arap, Vittorio Cristini),
1R01CA222007 (Zhihui Wang, Vittorio Cristini), and U54CA210181
(Zhihui Wang, Mauro Ferrari, Shu-hsia Chen, Vittorio Cristini).
Authors acknowledge Dr. Angelo Corti for critical reading of the
manuscript.
CONFLICT OF INTERESTS
The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Bruna Corradetti and Vittorio Cristini conceived the perspective;
Bruna Corradetti drafted the manuscript; Prashant Dogra devel-
oped the mathematical model and contributed to manuscript draft-
ing; Simone Pisano assisted with the preparation of the schematic;
Zhihui Wang assisted the development of the mathematical model;
Wadih Arap, Renata Pasqualini, and Richard L. Sidman participated to
manuscript preparation; Mauro Ferrari and Shu-hsia Chen provided
advice. All authors approved the final draft.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data sharing not applicable – no new data generated.
ORCID
BrunaCorradetti
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0345-4847
REFERENCES
1. Iismaa, S. E., Kaidonis, X., Nicks, A. M., Bogush, N., Kikuchi, K., Naqvi, N.,
Harvey, R. P., Husain, A. & Graham, R. M. (2018). Comparative regen-
erative mechanisms across different mammalian tissues. NPJ Regener-
ative Medicine, 3, 6.
2. Oviedo, N. J., & Beane, W. S. (2009). Regeneration: The origin of cancer
or a possible cure? Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology, 20, 557–
564.
3. Coussens, L. M., & Werb, Z. (2002). Inflammation and cancer. Nature,
420, 860–867.
4. Kluwe, J., Mencin, A., & Schwabe, R. F. (2009). Toll-like receptors,
wound healing, and carcinogenesis. Journal of Molecular Medicine, 87,
125–138.
5. Rose, S. M., & Wallingford, H. M. (1948). Transformation of renal
tumors of frogs to normal tissues in regenerating limbs of salamanders.
Science, 107, 457.

CORRADETTI ET AL.
9 of 11
6. Fior, J. (2014). Salamander regeneration as a model for developing
novel regenerative and anticancer therapies. Journal of Cancer, 5, 715–
719.
7. Flier, J. S., Underhill, L. H., & Dvorak, H. F. (1986). Tumors: Wounds that
do not heal. New England Journal of Medicine, 315, 1650–1659.
8. Lambrou, G. I., & Remboutsika, E. (2014). Proliferation versus regener-
ation: The good, the bad and the ugly. Frontiers in Physiology, 5, 10.
9. Rakoff-Nahoum, S. (2006). Why cancer and inflammation?. Yale Journal
of Biology and Medicine, 79, 123–30.
10. Sarig, R., & Tzahor, E. (2017). The cancer paradigms of mammalian
regeneration: Can mammals regenerate as amphibians? Carcinogenesis,
38, 359–366.
11. Stocum, D. L. (2017). Mechanisms of urodele limb regeneration. Regen-
eration, 4, 159–200.
12. Tanaka, E. M. (2003). Cell differentiation and cell fate during urodele
tail and limb regeneration. Current Opinion in Genetics & Development,
13, 497–501.
13. Neff, A. W., Dent, A. E., & Armstrong, J. B. (1996). Heart development
and regeneration in urodeles. International Journal of Developmental
Biology, 40, 719–25.
14. González-Rosa,J.M.,Burns,C.E.,&Burns,C.G.(2017).Zebrafishheart
regeneration: 15 years of discoveries, Regeneration (Oxford, England), 4,
105–23.
15. Pfefferli, C., & Jaźwińska, A. (2015). The art of fin regeneration in
zebrafish. Regeneration (Oxford, England), 2, 72–83.
16. Sandoval-Guzmán, T., Wang, H., Khattak, S., Schuez, M., Roensch, K.,
Nacu, E., Tazaki, A., Joven, A., Tanaka, E. M., & Simon, A. (2014). Funda-
mental differences in dedifferentiation and stem cell recruitment dur-
ing skeletal muscle regeneration in two salamander species. Cell Stem
Cell, 14, 174–187.
17. Brockes, J. P. (1997). Amphibian limb regeneration: Rebuilding a com-
plex structure. Science, 276, 81–87.
18. Echeverri, K. (2002). Ectoderm to mesoderm lineage switching during
axolotl tail regeneration. Science, 298, 1993–1996.
19. Godwin, J. W., & Rosenthal, N. (2014). Scar-free wound healing and
regeneration in amphibians: Immunological influences on regenerative
success. Differentiation, 87, 66–75.
20. Godwin, J. W., Pinto, A. R., & Rosenthal, N. A. (2013). Macrophages
are required for adult salamander limb regeneration. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 110, 9415–9420.
21. Tsonis, P. A. (1983). Effects of carcinogens on regenerating and non-
regenerating limbs in amphibia (review). Anticancer Research, 3, 195–
202.
22. Blau, H. M., & Pomerantz, J. H. (2011). Re"evolutionary" regenerative
medicine. JAMA, 305, 87–8.
23. Tanaka, E. M. (2003). Regeneration: If they can do it, why can’t we? Cell,
113, 559–562.
24. Illmensee, K., & Mintz, B. (1976). Totipotency and normal differenti-
ation of single teratocarcinoma cells cloned by injection into blasto-
cysts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 73, 549–553.
25. Brinster, R. L. (1974). The effect of cells transferred into the
mouse blastocyst on subsequent development. Journal of Experimental
Medicine, 140, 1049–1056.
26. Pierce, G. B., Pantazis, C. G., Caldwell, J. E., & Wells, R. S. (1982).
Specificity of the control of tumor formation by the blastocyst. Cancer
Research, 42, 1082–7.
27. Postovit, L.-M., Margaryan, N. V., Seftor, E. A., Kirschmann, D. A.,
Lipavsky, A., Wheaton, W. W., Abbott, D. E., Seftor, R. E. B., & Hendrix,
M. J. C. (2008). Human embryonic stem cell microenvironment sup-
presses the tumorigenic phenotype of aggressive cancer cells. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
105, 4329–4334.
28. Pawelec, G., Goldeck, D., & Derhovanessian, E. (2014). Inflamma-
tion, ageing and chronic disease. Current Opinion in Immunology, 29,
23–28.
29. Yun, M. H., Gates, P. B., & Brockes, J. P. (2013). Regulation of p53 is
critical for vertebrate limb regeneration. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 110, 17392–17397.
30. Yun, M. H., Davaapil, H., & Brockes, J. P. (2015). Recurrent turnover of
senescent cells during regeneration of a complex structure. Elife, 4, 1–
16.
31. Storer, M., Mas, A., Robert-Moreno, A., Pecoraro, M., Ortells, M. C.,
Di Giacomo, V., Yosef, R., Pilpel, N., Krizhanovsky, V., Sharpe, J., &
Keyes, W. M. (2013). Senescence is a developmental mechanism that
contributes to embryonic growth and patterning. Cell, 155, 1119–
1130.
32. Astigiano, S., Damonte, P., Fossati, S., Boni, L., Barbieri, O. (2005). Fate
of embryonal carcinoma cells injected into postimplantation mouse
embryos. Differentiation, 73, 484–490.
33. Muñoz-Espín, D., Cañamero, M., Maraver, A., Gómez-López, G., Con-
treras, J., Murillo-Cuesta, S., Rodríguez-Baeza, A., Varela-Nieto, I.,
Ruberte, J., Collado, M., & Serrano, M. (2013). Programmed cell senes-
cence during mammalian embryonic development. Cell, 155, 1104–
1118.
34. Sontag, S. (1978). Illness as Metaphor. New York Rev. Books,
35. Johnson, G. (2014). A Tumor, the Embryo’s Evil Twin. New York Times.
36. Rybinski, B., Franco-Barraza, J., & Cukierman, E. (2014). The wound
healing, chronic fibrosis, and cancer progression triad. Physiological
Genomics, 46, 223–244.
37. Foster, D. S., Jones, R. E., Ransom, R. C., Longaker, M. T., & Norton, J. A.
(2018). The evolving relationship of wound healing and tumor stroma.
JCI Insight, 3, 1–17.
38. Stone, R. C., Pastar, I., Ojeh, N., Chen, V., Liu, S., Garzon, K. I., & Tomic-
Canic, M. (2016). Epithelial-mesenchymal transition in tissue repair
and fibrosis. Cell and Tissue Research, 365, 495–506.
39. Pei, D., Shu, X., Gassama-Diagne, A., & Thiery, J. P. (2019).
Mesenchymal–epithelial
transition
in
development
and
repro-
gramming. Nature Cell Biology, 21, 44–53.
40. Nancy, P., Tagliani, E., Tay, C.-S., Asp, P., Levy, D. E., & Erlebacher,
A. (2012). Chemokine gene silencing in decidual stromal cells lim-
its t cell access to the maternal-fetal interface. Science, 336, 1317–
1321.
41. De Visser, K. E., Eichten, A., & Coussens, L. M. (2006). Paradoxical roles
of the immune system during cancer development. Nature Reviews Can-
cer, 6, 24–37.
42. Corradetti, B., Dogra, P., Ferrari, M., & Cristini, V. (2018). Regenerative
medicine to trump cancer. Open Access Governmaent 1–2.
43. Demaria, M., Ohtani, N., Youssef, S. A., Rodier, F., Toussaint, W.,
Mitchell, J. R., Laberge, R.-M., Vijg, J., Van Steeg, H., Dollé, M. E. T., Hoei-
jmakers, J. H. J., De Bruin, A., Hara, E., & Campisi, J. (2014). An essential
role for senescent cells in optimal wound healing through secretion of
PDGF-AA. Developmental Cell, 31, 722–733.
44. Watanabe, S., Kawamoto, S., Ohtani, N., & Hara, E. (2017). Impact
of senescence-associated secretory phenotype and its potential as a
therapeutic target for senescence-associated diseases. Cancer Science,
108, 563–569.
45. Badylak, S. F. (2016). A scaffold immune microenvironment. Science,
352, 298–298.
46. Corradetti, B., Taraballi, F., Giretti, I., Bauza, G., Pistillo, R. S.,
Banche Niclot, F., Pandolfi, L., Demarchi, D., & Tasciotti, E. (2017).
Heparan Sulfate: A potential candidate for the development of
biomimetic immunomodulatory membranes. Frontiers in Bioengineering
and Biotechnology, 5, 1–12.
47. Corradetti, B., Taraballi, F., Minardi, S., Van Eps, J., Cabrera, F., Francis,
L. W., Gazze, S. A., Ferrari, M., Weiner, B. K., & Tasciotti, E. (2016). Chon-
droitin sulfate immobilized on a biomimetic scaffold modulates inflam-
mation while driving chondrogenesis. Stem Cells Translational Medicine,
5, 670–682.
48. Corradetti, B., Taraballi, F., Corbo, C., Cabrera, F., Pandolfi, L., Minardi,
S., Wang, X., Van Eps, J., Bauza, G., Weiner, B., & Tasciotti, E. (2017).

10 of 11
CORRADETTI ET AL.
Immune tuning scaffold for the local induction of a pro-regenerative
environment. Scientific Reports, 7, 17030.
49. Corradetti, B., Taraballi, F., Corbo, C., Cabrera, F., Pandolfi, L., Minardi,
S., Wang, X., Van Eps, J., Bauza, G., Weiner, B., & Tasciotti, E. (2018). Par-
allels between vertebrate cardiac and cutaneous wound healing and
regeneration. NPJ Regenerative Medicine, 3, 21.
50. Aurora, A. B., Porrello, E. R., Tan, W., Mahmoud, A. I., Hill, J. A., Bassel-
Duby, R., Sadek, H. A., & Olson, E. N. (2014). Macrophages are required
for neonatal heart regeneration. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 124,
1382–1392.
51. Poh, A. R., & Ernst, M. (2018). Targeting macrophages in cancer: From
bench to bedside. Frontiers in Oncology, 8, 1–16.
52. King, M. W., Neff, A. W., & Mescher, A. L. (2012). The developing Xeno-
pus limb as a model for studies on the balance between inflammation
and regeneration. Anatomical Record Advances in Integrative Anatomy
and Evolutionary Biology., 295, 1552–1561.
53. Godwin, J., Kuraitis, D., & Rosenthal, N. (2014). Extracellular matrix
considerations for scar-free repair and regeneration: Insights from
regenerative diversity among vertebrates. International Journal of Bio-
chemistry & Cell Biology, 56, 47–55.
54. Ginhoux, F., Greter, M., Leboeuf, M., Nandi, S., See, P., Gokhan, S.,
Mehler, M. F., Conway, S. J., Ng, L. G., Stanley, E. R., Samokhvalov, I. M.,
& Merad, M. (2010). Fate mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia
derive from primitive macrophages. Science, 330, 841–845.
55. Ginhoux, F., & Guilliams, M. (2016). Tissue-resident macrophage
ontogeny and homeostasis. Immunity, 44, 439–449.
56. Dzierzak, E., & Robin, C. (2010). Placenta as a source of hematopoietic
stem cells. Trends in Molecular Medicine, 16, 361–367.
57. Lee, L. K., Ueno, M., Van Handel, B., & Mikkola, H. K. (2010). Placenta as
a newly identified source of hematopoietic stem cells. Current Opinion
in Hematology, 17, 313–318.
58. Konigsmark, B. W., & Sidman, R. L. (1963). Origin of brain macrophages
in the mouse. Journal of Neuropathology and Experimental Neurology, 22,
643–676.
59. Van Furth, R., & Cohn, Z. A. (1968). The origin and kinetics of
mononuclear phagocytes. Journal of Experimental Medicine, 128, 415–
435.
60. Epelman, S., Lavine, K. J., Beaudin, A. E., Sojka, D. K., Carrero, J. A.,
Calderon, B., Brija, T., Gautier, E. L., Ivanov, S., Satpathy, A. T., Schilling,
J. D., Schwendener, R., Sergin, I., Razani, B., Forsberg, E. C., Yokoyama,
W. M., Unanue, E. R., Colonna, M., Randolph, G. J., & Mann, D. L. (2014).
Embryonic and adult-derived resident cardiac macrophages are main-
tained through distinct mechanisms at steady state and during inflam-
mation. Immunity, 40, 91–104.
61. Theret, M., Mounier, R., & Rossi, F. (2019). The origins and non-
canonical functions of macrophages in development and regeneration.
Development, 146, 1–14.
62. Lakhdari, O., Yamamura, A., Hernandez, G. E., Anderson, K. K., Lund, S.
J., Oppong-Nonterah, G. O., Hoffman, H. M., & Prince, L. S. (2019). Dif-
ferential immune activation in fetal macrophage populations. Scientific
Reports, 9, 1–13.
63. Leask, A., & Abraham, D. J. (2004). TGF-β signaling and the fibrotic
response. FASEB Journal, 18, 816–827.
64. Lévesque, M., Gatien, S., Finnson, K., Desmeules, S., Villiard, É., Pilote,
M., Philip, A., & Roy, S. (2007). Transforming growth factor: Β signaling
is essential for limb regeneration in axolotls. PLoS One, 2, 1–14.
65. Costanza, B., Umelo, I., Bellier, J., Castronovo, V., & Turtoi, A. (2017).
Stromal modulators of TGF-β in cancer. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 6,
1–25.
66. Mescher, A. L. (2017). Macrophages and fibroblasts during inflamma-
tion and tissue repair in models of organ regeneration. Regeneration, 4,
39–53.
67. Bertolotti, E., Malagoli, D., & Franchini, A. (2013). Skin wound heal-
ing in different aged Xenopus laevis. Journal of Morphology, 274, 956–
964.
68. Chaouat, G., & Voisin, G. A. (1979). Regulatory T cell subpopulations
in pregnancy. I. Evidence for suppressive activity of the early phase of
MLR. Journal of Immunology, 122, 1383–8.
69. Haynes, B. F., Martin, M. E., Kay, H. H., & Kurtzberg, J. (1988). Early
events in human T cell ontogeny. Phenotypic characterization and
immunohistologic localization of T cell precursors in early human
fetal tissues. [published erratum appears in J Exp Med 1989 Feb 1,
169(2),603]. Journal of Experimental Medicine, 168, 1061–1080.
70. Trowsdale, J., & Betz, A. G. (2006). Mother’s little helpers: Mechanisms
of maternal-fetal tolerance. Nature Immunology, 7, 241–246.
71. Lorenz, H. P., Lin, R. Y., Longaker, M. T., Whitby, D. J., & Adzick, N.
S (1995). The fetal fibroblast: The effector cell of scarless fetal skin
repair. Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, 96, 1251-1259; discussion
1260–1261.
72. Colwell, A. S., Krummel, T. M., Longaker, M. T., & Lorenz, H. P. (2006).
An in vivo mouse excisional wound model of scarless healing. Plastic
and Reconstructive Surgery, 117, 2292–2296.
73. Xia, H., Li, X., Gao, W., Fu, X., Fang, R. H., Zhang, L., & Zhang, K. (2018).
Tissue repair and regeneration with endogenous stem cells. Nature
Reviews Materials, 3, 174–193.
74. Mescher, A. L., & Neff, A. W. (2006). Limb regeneration in amphibians:
Immunological considerations. Scientific World Journal, 6, 1–11.
75. Balls, M. (1962). Spontaneous neoplasms in amphibia: A review and
descriptions of six new cases. Cancer Research, 22, 1142–54.
76. Onder, L., & Ludewig, B. (2018). A fresh view on lymph node organo-
genesis. Trends in Immunology, 39, 775–787.
77. Onder, L., Mörbe, U., Pikor, N., Novkovic, M., Cheng, H.-W., Hehlgans,
T., Pfeffer, K., Becher, B., Waisman, A., Rülicke, T., Gommerman, J.,
Mueller, C. G., Sawa, S., Scandella, E., & Ludewig, B. (2017). Lymphatic
endothelial cells control initiation of lymph node organogenesis. Immu-
nity, 47, 80–92.e4.e4.
78. Tiozzo, S., & Copley, R. R. (2015). Reconsidering regeneration in meta-
zoans: An evo-devo approach. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution., 3
79. Galis, F., Wagner, G. P., & Jockusch, E. L. (2003). Why is limb regener-
ation possible in amphibians but not in reptiles, birds, and mammals?
Evolution & Development, 5, 208–220.
80. Bely, A. E., & Nyberg, K. G. (2010). Evolution of animal regeneration:
Re-emergence of a field. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 25, 161–170.
81. Bely, A. E., & Sikes, J. M. (2010). Latent regeneration abilities persist
following recent evolutionary loss in asexual annelids. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 107,
1464–1469.
82. Maginnis, T. L. (2006). The costs of autotomy and regeneration in ani-
mals: A review and framework for future research. Behavioral Ecol-
ogy: Official Journal of the International Society for Behavioral Ecology, 17,
857–872.
83. Polymeropoulos, E. T., Oelkrug, R., & Jastroch, M. (2018). Editorial: The
evolution of endothermy—From patterns to mechanisms. Frontiers in
Physiology, 9.
84. Poss, K. D. (2010). Advances in understanding tissue regenerative
capacity and mechanisms in animals. Nature Reviews Genetics, 11, 710–
722.
85. Golemis, E. A., Scheet, P., Beck, T. N., Scolnick, E. M., Hunter, D. J., Hawk,
E., & Hopkins, N. (2018). Molecular mechanisms of the preventable
causes of cancer in the United States. Genes & Development, 32, 868–
902.
86. Vergara, M. N., Tsissios, G., & Del Rio-Tsonis, K. (2018). Lens regener-
ation: A historical perspective. International Journal of Developmental
Biology, 62, 351–361.
87. Alvarado, A. S., & Tsonis, P. A. (2006). Bridging the regeneration gap:
Genetic insights from diverse animal models. Nature Reviews Genetics,
7, 873–884.
88. Hong, Y., Cervantes, R. B., Tichy, E., Tischfield, J. A., & Stambrook, P.
J. (2007). Protecting genomic integrity in somatic cells and embryonic
stem cells. Mutation Research, 614, 48–55.

CORRADETTI ET AL.
11 of 11
89. Cristini,V.,Koay,E.,&Wang,Z.Anintroductiontophysicaloncology :How
mechanistic mathematical modeling can improve cancer therapy outcomes
Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2017.
90. Wang, Z., Butner, J. D., Kerketta, R., Cristini, V., & Deisboeck, T. S.
(2015). Simulating cancer growth with multiscale agent-based model-
ing. Seminars in Cancer Biology, 30, 70–78.
91. Wang, Z., Birch, C. M., Sagotsky, J., & Deisboeck, T. S. (2009). Cross-
scale, cross-pathway evaluation using an agent-based non-small cell
lung cancer model. Bioinformatics, 25, 2389–2396.
92. Wang, Z., Butner, J. D., Cristini, V., & Deisboeck, T. S. (2015). Integrated
PK-PD and agent-based modeling in oncology. Journal of Pharmacoki-
netics and Pharmacodynamics, 42, 179–189.
93. Deisboeck, T. S., Wang, Z., Macklin, P., & Cristini, V. (2011). Multiscale
cancer modeling. Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering, 13, 127–155.
94. Dogra, P., Butner, J. D., Chuang, Y.-L., Caserta, S., Goel, S., Brinker, C.
J., Vittorio, C., & Wang, Z. (2019). Mathematical modeling in cancer
nanomedicine: A review. Biomedical Microdevices, 21.
How to cite this article: Corradetti, B., Dogra, P., Pisano, S.,
Wang, Z., Ferrari, M., Chen, S. -h., Sidman, R. L., Pasqualini, R.,
Arap, W., & Cristini, V. (2021). Amphibian regeneration and
mammalian cancer: Similarities and contrasts from an
evolutionary biology perspective. BioEssays, e2000339.
https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.202000339

===== Courtine2019_NatMed_SCI-review =====
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-019-0475-6
1Center for Neuroprosthetics and Brain Mind Institute, School of Life Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), Geneva, Switzerland. 
2Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Lausanne (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland. 3Department of Neurobiology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. *e-mail: gregoire.courtine@epfl.ch
T
he US national SCI statistical center estimates that the annual 
incidence of SCI in the United States is approximately 54 
cases per million people, or approximately 17,000 new cases 
each year1. The World Health Organization (WHO) approximates 
that between 250,000 and 500,000 people suffer from a SCI each 
year2. SCI has an immediate and devastating impact on the con-
trol of movement and many essential physiological functions. Over 
the past century, progress in the understanding of injury mecha-
nisms has transformed the clinical management of SCI. Surgical 
procedures, supportive measures and rehabilitation protocols have 
improved functional outcomes and decreased morbidity in patients 
with SCI2. However, at this time no randomized clinical trial has 
demonstrated the efficacy of a repair strategy for improving func-
tional recovery from SCI. Due to the limited ability of the cen-
tral nervous system (CNS) to repair itself following injury, many 
deficits remain permanent. Half of the affected individuals remain 
paralyzed, with life expectancies of decades with permanent dis-
abilities3,4. The estimated lifetime cost attributable to SCI ranges 
from US$1 to 5 million per person depending on the location of the 
injury along the spinal cord and its severity1.
While a cure that could repair the injured spinal cord is unfore-
seeable, recent advances in biological and engineering strategies 
have opened promising avenues for improving function after SCI. 
Over the past decade, advances have occurred not only in tradi-
tional research areas such as axon regeneration, inflammation, 
scar formation and engraftment of neural and supporting cells, 
but also in the identification of mechanisms underlying spontane-
ous circuit reorganization, spinal cord automaticity and recovery 
after SCI. These new findings have redefined our understanding of 
requirements for restoration of function after SCI and have altered 
concepts regarding the design of repair interventions (Box 1). 
Additionally, advances in engineering have led to the emergence 
of a new research area — broadly termed neuroprosthetics — that 
leverages our understanding of motor control principles to tap into 
circuits and residual neural pathways spared from injury in order to 
enable and restore function.
Various experimental therapies are moving toward or are already 
in clinical trials — opening a new era for SCI medicine. Here, we 
review these advances in animal models, and where relevant, their 
translation in human patients. The majority of preclinical stud-
ies and experimental read-outs are focused on motor functions. 
Consequently, we primarily discuss motor recovery, but it worth 
noting that the recovery of autonomic and sexual functions are 
among the top priorities of people with SCI3. We first describe the 
main biological approaches and mechanisms for spinal cord repair. 
We then explain the principles through which researchers seek to 
use engineering strategies to enable function and augment recov-
ery with neurotechnologies and rehabilitation. Finally, we consider 
the great potential, but also highlight the complexity, of combining 
biological and engineering approaches in order to target the mul-
tifaceted mechanisms underlying spinal cord repair and recovery.
Biological approaches to SCI repair
Developing mechanism-based approaches to spinal cord repair will 
require understanding the biology of SCI lesions and of the diverse 
axonal growth responses that occur after injuries5. SCI lesions are 
heterogeneous in their severity and cellular organization, and both 
of these factors have implications for developing repair strategies. 
For example, anatomically complete lesions span the entire breadth 
of the spinal cord, thereby eliminating all neural communication 
across the site of transection (Fig. 1). Their repair will require 
restoring neural connectivity across large and hostile non-neural 
lesion cores, which will require invasive treatments. In contrast, 
anatomically incomplete SCI are formed by smaller or discontinu-
ous lesions that spare sufficient neural tissue to support commu-
nication across the injury. Anatomically incomplete SCI are often 
associated with partial recovery that can benefit from strategies to 
augment spontaneous circuit reorganization and improve the con-
ductivity and function of residual neural connections, including by 
non-invasive means.
Diverse SCI compartments and axonal growth responses. 
Regardless of their size or severity, mature lesions exhibit three tis-
sue compartments that present markedly different cellular composi-
tion and functional interactions5–11 (Fig. 1). Non-neural lesion cores 
consist of perivascular-fibroblast-derived stromal cells, meningeal 
fibroblasts and pericytes that proliferate in areas undergoing CNS 
cell death6–8. Reactive astrocyte scar borders formed by newly pro-
liferated astrocytes surround non-neural lesion cores and protect 
adjacent functional neural tissue by corralling inflammatory cells 
within areas of damaged tissue9,10. Spared but reactive neural tissue 
that surrounds astrocyte scar borders contains all cellular elements 
Spinal cord repair: advances in biology and 
technology
Grégoire Courtine   1,2* and Michael V. Sofroniew   3
Individuals with spinal cord injury (SCI) can face decades with permanent disabilities. Advances in clinical management have 
decreased morbidity and improved outcomes, but no randomized clinical trial has demonstrated the efficacy of a repair strat-
egy for improving recovery from SCI. Here, we summarize recent advances in biological and engineering strategies to augment 
neuroplasticity and/or functional recovery in animal models of SCI that are pushing toward clinical translation.
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
898

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
found in functioning neural tissue, including hypertrophic reactive 
astrocytes and microglia that retain their interactions with neurons 
and synapses undergoing circuit reorganization and remodelling5,11.
Diverse forms of axonal growth responses have been identified 
that can occur spontaneously or be induced after SCI. There is a 
growing consensus that the concepts of ‘neural regeneration’ and 
‘axon regeneration’ after SCI should be expanded to encompass 
multiple forms of axonal growth responses that can restore func-
tion, ranging from synaptic remodeling in spared and reorganizing 
neural tissue to axon regrowth across non-neural lesion core tis-
sue5,11,12 (Fig. 2). Understanding how different cellular and molecu-
lar mechanisms regulate different growth responses in different 
lesion compartments over specific temporal windows is essential to 
devising mechanism-based approaches to SCI repair.
Modulating circuit reorganization after incomplete SCI. The iden-
tification of spontaneous circuit reorganization in animal models 
of SCI has provided valuable insights into repair strategies (see 
Box 1). After incomplete injuries, intraspinal projection neurons 
form new ‘detour circuits’ that relay supraspinal information from 
above to below the lesion13–16. In turn, corticospinal and reticulospinal 
tract neurons sprout onto these intraspinal relay neurons that con-
nect to regions below the lesion14–17 (Fig. 1). In general, all descend-
ing systems with residual axons that have been studied in animal 
models exhibit pronounced reorganization after SCI18. For example, 
after lateral hemisection injury in non-human primates, spared cor-
ticospinal axons descending in the contralateral white matter extend 
axon collaterals across the spinal cord midline and sprout into 
functional spinal cord areas below injury19,20. Similar observations 
Box 1 | Requirements for restoration of function
It was long assumed that recovery from SCI would require pre-
cise reconstitution of the neural connectivity present before 
damage. However, several decades of basic research have chal-
lenged this view5.
In the brain, loss of one set of synaptic inputs spontaneously leads 
to the formation of new synapses derived from unaffected afferent 
connections. After forebrain damage, this spontaneous structural 
and functional plasticity allows the brain to reroute neural 
information through alternative circuits to regain functions170. 
Similar circuit reorganization spontaneously takes place after 
incomplete SCI14,15,17,19. For example, a lateral hemisection of the 
spinal cord (Brown–Sequard syndrome) triggers reorganization 
of intraspinal14,16,109, brainstem and corticospinal tract25,26,109 
projection circuits that supports remarkable levels of spontaneous 
recovery, including voluntary skilled movements in humans20. 
Projection neurons spontaneously form detour circuits that 
relay supraspinal information to spinal circuits below the injury. 
Such circuit reorganization can reroute task-specific cortical 
commands to the lumbar execution centers even when all direct 
descending supraspinal connections are interrupted13,15,109. 
These observations have important implications for spinal cord 
repair, as they suggest that intraspinal relay neurons, even when 
newly derived from grafted cells90, may be sufficient to mediate 
meaningful recovery.
Another important consideration is the automaticity of neural 
operations from spinal cord execution centers95,100. These circuits 
have traditionally been referred to as central pattern generators 
(CPGs) that produce stereotypical motor patterns100. This view 
has advanced over the past decade171. It is now recognized that 
the spinal cord acts as a smart information-processing interface 
that translates task-specific sensory information and supraspinal 
inputs into muscle activation patterns that continuously meet 
behavioral goals and environmental constraints35,101. Even after 
the complete loss of supraspinal inputs, spinal circuits remain 
capable of using sensory information as a source of control 
for producing complex motor behaviors, including standing, 
walking over a range of speeds and directions and even climbing 
a staircase31,35,105,172,173. These results suggest that passing a limited 
amount of information to the spinal cord below injury may be 
sufficient to restore meaningful motor control after SCI.
Concepts of spinal cord automaticity, axonal plasticity and 
circuit reorganization after SCI have established the framework 
that is steering emerging biological and technological strategies 
for spinal cord repair and recovery174.
Incomplete injuries
Partial function recovery
Beneficial plasticity of spared circuits
Lesion compartment zoom
Detrimental plasticity of
spinal circuits below injury
Increase
: reverse inhibition
  for excitation
Normal
tissue
Blood
vessels
Surviving
functioning
neurons
Spared but
reactive
neural tissue
Non-neural
lesion core
Surviving
axons
Astrocytes
scar border
Degenerating 
axons
Synapse
reorganization
Lumbar circuit
Proprioceptive cues
Steering circuit reorganization
Retractation
bulbs
Mnα
Mnα
New
detrimental
growth
Proprioceptive
feedback
circuits 
Muscle
Cl¯
Cl¯
Cl¯
Cl¯
Cl¯
Intraspinal
relay circuit
Sprouting
of spared
descending
pathways onto 
spinal circuits
Spinal 
sensorimotor
circuits
Residual connections
New connections
Spared descending pathways
Cl–
Leukocytes
Blood vessels
and progenitors
Pericytes
and fibroblast-
lineage cells
Fluid-filled
cystic cavity
Complete injury
No function 
Detrimental plasticity of spared circuits
Fig. 1 | SCI biology and spontaneous recovery mechanisms. Spinal 
cord damage can be broadly divided into two categories: complete and 
incomplete SCI. A complete SCI is obtained experimentally by a full 
transection of the spinal cord or a complete crush. Anatomically complete 
SCI is less common in humans. A clinically complete SCI is essentially 
defined functionally, when no motor and sensory functions can be detected 
below the SCI, but this can occur in spite of the presence of some spared 
tissue and connections. After such lesions, detrimental changes continue 
taking place for decades below the SCI. An incomplete SCI spares tissue 
bridges containing a variety of ascending and descending pathways, 
depending on the location of the injury. The anatomical and functional 
reorganization of these pathways and circuits below the injury support 
various degrees of functional recovery. Both complete and incomplete SCIs 
exhibit three distinct lesion compartments: (1) a central non-neural lesion 
core often referred to as a fibrotic, mesenchymal or connective tissue 
scar that often contains cystic cavities; (2) a narrow border of reactive 
astroglia and other cells that intimately surrounds the lesion core; and (3) 
a surrounding zone of viable neural tissue that is spared and functional but 
is also reactive and reorganizing. Some of the mechanisms highlighted in 
this figure have been uncovered in animal models, and it is not yet certain 
whether human SCI involves similar mechanisms.
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
899

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
have been described for the reticulospinal, rubrospinal and sero-
tonergic descending systems17,21,22. Indirect evidence suggests that 
similar reorganization and sprouting of descending pathways take 
place in humans20,23,24.
Studies in animal models have established causality between 
sprouting of corticospinal25,26 and reticulospinal27 tract neurons 
and motor recovery. This plasticity within the spinal cord leads to a 
remapping of motor cortex output to spinal circuits; this pronounced 
reorganization confers an essential role to the motor cortex in produc-
ing movement after injury. Intraspinal projection circuits also play a 
critical role in mediating recovery14,15 (Box 1). This dense network of 
ascending and descending connections within the spinal cord28 may 
be a particularly suitable target for SCI repair29. Even when multiple 
incomplete lesions transect all direct descending supraspinal inputs 
to lumbar execution centers, neurons with intraspinal projections 
can establish detour circuits that bypass the injuries and relay suf-
ficient information from the brain to restore rudimentary voluntary 
locomotor functions in rodents13,15. In this model, reducing local 
inhibition within the spinal cord regions embedding these relay 
pathways augments their ability to mediate locomotor recovery29. 
Similarly, intraspinal relay circuits can mediate voluntary fine finger 
movements after loss of direct corticospinal tract input to cervical 
motor centers in nonhuman primates30. Together, these observations 
provide a compelling rationale for conceiving repair strategies that 
seek either to augment spontaneous relay circuit formation after 
incomplete SCI, or to restore neural connectivity by bridging axon 
regrowth across anatomically complete SCI lesions even for short 
distances into functioning neural tissue, as discussed below.
While SCI deprives spinal circuits from all or some of the supra-
spinal signals, the spinal cord below the injury continues receiving 
and interpreting sensory information. Inputs from sensory afferents 
that remain intact below lesions become an essential source of con-
trol in the production of motor behaviors after SCI31. Sensory infor-
mation steers many of the beneficial but also detrimental changes 
that take place below the lesion. For example, inputs from proprio-
ceptive organs are essential to guide the anatomical and functional 
reorganization of supraspinal and intraspinal projection neurons 
that restores locomotion after SCI. Mice with SCI that lack func-
tional proprioceptive circuits display defective rearrangements of 
descending projection circuits, which abolishes recovery16. In turn, 
the depletion of synapses from descending pathways triggers an 
aberrant sprouting of sensory afferents onto the available synaptic 
targets32,33. Due to the absence of signals directing this homeostatic 
plasticity, these changes often lead to degradation of neuronal func-
tions below the SCI, which has been reported in animal models of 
SCI32 and in humans34.
The modification of synapse function and increase of synaptic 
plasticity represent a promising approach to augment the beneficial 
effects of rehabilitation and biochemical manipulations. For exam-
ple, the presence of serotonin, noradrenalin or dopamine agonists 
augment activity-dependent plasticity during training in various 
animal models of SCI35. In addition, transient exposure of rats to 
reduced oxygen levels (intermittent hypoxia) activates midbrain 
raphe serotonergic neurons, the primary source of serotonin to the 
spinal cord, and triggers brain-derived neurotrophin (BDNF) syn-
thesis in the spinal cord, which together induce serotonin-depen-
dent plasticity of spinal projections36. A clinical study has suggested 
that the combination of rehabilitation and repetitive intermittent 
hypoxia may improve walking in humans with incomplete SCI37. 
However, confirmation of these results would require a phase 3 
clinical trial with a large number of patients.
New advances are also revealing cellular mechanisms of synapse 
plasticity. For example, the classical complement signals C1q, C3 
and C3R have been shown to regulate microglia-modulated synapse 
pruning38,39, while molecules such as thrombospondins, glypicans, 
secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) and SPARC like 
1 (also known as Hevin), produced by astrocytes, are partly respon-
sible for synaptic formation40–43. In turn, chondroitin sulfate proteo-
glycans (CSPGs) and tenascins produced by neurons and astrocytes 
form perineuronal nets that constrain this synaptic plasticity and 
associated circuit reorganization44. Signaling related to reticulon 4 
(RTN4, also known as NOGO) and its receptors also restricts syn-
aptic plasticity via perineuronal net molecules during development 
and after injury45. Accumulating evidence suggests that strategies 
against CSPGs or RTN4 receptors primarily target perineuronal nets 
and synaptic plasticity in spared but reactive neural tissue45–48 rather 
than axon regeneration across lesions. Axon guidance molecules, 
such as repulsive Wnt receptors, are also potent inhibitors of axo-
nal growth49. In rat models of incomplete SCI, the use of antibodies 
against these receptors led to a pronounced sprouting from the prox-
imal segments of corticospinal tract axons26, which augmented func-
tional recovery. More work is needed to identify strategies capable of 
modulating synapse plasticity and circuit reorganization after SCI.
Restoring connectivity across complete SCI. Anatomically com-
plete SCI lesions in humans are dominated by large areas of non-
neural lesion core tissue that do not support axon regrowth11,50,51 
Spared but
reactive
neural tissue
Non-neural
lesion core
Surviving axons
Astrocytes 
scar border
Normal
tissue
Spared but
reactive
neural tissue
Non-neural
lesion core
Surviving
functioning
neurons
Retractation
bulbs
Neuron intrinsic
PTEN, mTOR, STAT3,
SOCS3, cAMP, RHOA,
c-Myc, Jun, KLFs, SOX11,
ATF3, MAPKs, MAP3K13
Oligodendrocyte
NOGO, Mag
New
axon
growth
Growth cone intrinsic
Microtubules, DCLK,
NgRs, CSPG-Rs, NTF-Rs
Microglia
C1q
NG2-OPC
Spinal 
sensorimotor
circuits
Local or
systemic
delivery of
modulators
Intraspinal 
projection 
neuron
Descending 
projections
Sensory
input steering 
circuit reorganization
Normal
tissue
Axon
regeneration
Axonal
sprouting
Synapse
formation
Astrocyte
Thrombospondin,
Sparc, Hevin,
C3R, NTFs, PNN,
CSPGs, laminins
Not produced
Chemoattractant NTFs
Astrocyte scar and lesion
core cells
Repellent: CSPGs,
ephrins, sema, slit, plxn,
Wnts, myelin debris
Permissive: laminins, NCAM
syndecans, lgal
Relay 
neuron*
Neuroglia*
* graft-
derived
cells
a
b
Cells and molecules influencing 
synapse and axon growth potential 
Mechanisms underlying
spinal cord repair 
Fig. 2 | Biological strategies and mechanisms for spinal cord repair.  
a, Summary of the diverse types of cells and molecules that are known 
to influence and regulate the potential growth of axons and synapses in 
the different compartments of a SCI. RHOA, ras homolog family member 
a; ATF3, activating transcription factor 3; SOX11, Sry-box 11; NTFs, 
neurotrophic factors; PNN, peri-neuronal net; NgRs, NOGO receptors. 
b, Many mechanisms can be targeted to improve functional recovery, 
including modulation of axonal sprouting and synapse formation in spared 
and reorganizing neural tissue, promoting axon regeneration into and 
beyond non-neural lesion cores, placement of neural-stem-cell-derived 
grafts providing new relay neurons or neuroglia that supports host axon 
growth, and modulation of sensory input steering circuit reorganization.
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
900

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
(Fig. 1). Biological approaches to restoring connectivity across 
such lesions are currently focused on stimulating endogenous axon 
regrowth through the lesions or grafting new neurons into lesions to 
re-establish communication through new relay circuits.
Multiple mechanisms regulate axon regrowth after SCI. After 
development, CNS neurons downregulate their capacity for axon 
growth. Although spontaneous re-activation of intrinsic growth 
programs after injury is limited, a steadily growing amount of evi-
dence shows that manipulating neuron-intrinsic signaling through 
multiple transcriptional regulator pathways in animal models in vivo 
can stimulate the capacity for axon regrowth of various neuron phe-
notypes. These pathways notably include phosphatase and tensin 
homolog (PTEN), mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), sig-
nal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), suppres-
sor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3), Kruppel-like factors (Klfs), 
c-Myc, cAMP, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 13 
(MAP3K13) and others52–58. Axon-regrowth capacity can be pow-
erfully activated when tissue around mature neuronal cell bodies 
is stimulated with inflammatory mediators, such as oncomodulin, 
zymosan and agonists of toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and C-type lectin 
domain family 7 member A (also known as Dectin-1) receptors59,60, 
or by stimulation with growth factors such as insulin-like growth fac-
tor 1 (IGF1), osteopontin and ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF)61,62.
Axonal growth in the CNS is also regulated by the presence or 
absence of chemoattractive or chemorepellent growth factors, or of 
substrates that support or repel growth. For example, developmental 
axon growth critically depends on the availability of chemoattrac-
tive growth factors such as brain-derived neurotrophin (BDNF) and 
neurotrophin-3 (NT3)63–65 and on supportive substrates such as lam-
inins, syndecans and heparan sulfate proteoglycans65–69. Although 
growth-repellent molecules, such as myelin-associated molecules 
and CSPGs, can influence axon regrowth in vitro and may modu-
late synapse remodeling after SCI46–49, there is at present no compel-
ling evidence that they play major roles in regulating axon regrowth 
across SCI lesions, as discussed in detail elsewhere5. The support 
or repulsion of growing axons by specific molecular cues has been 
studied in detail in vitro and is determined by relative proportions 
of attractive and repellent molecules, such that increasing the con-
centration of one type of cue can overcome the effects of another70.
Multiple cell types influence axon regrowth in SCI lesions. 
Activated macrophages cause axon retraction and dieback71. 
Pericytes and fibroblast lineage cells in the non-neural lesion core6 
do not spontaneously support axon regrowth, perhaps because they 
do not secrete molecules that stimulate axon growth. Consistent 
with this interpretation, fibroblast cell grafts support robust axon 
regeneration after SCI only when they produce specific factors that 
are chemoattractive to axons72. ‘Scars’ formed by astrocytes along 
lesion borders have long been thought to be the primary cause for 
axon regeneration failure in the CNS73,74. Recent genetic loss-of-
function studies in mice challenge this notion. Neither preventing 
the formation of, nor removing, the astrocyte scar borders in SCI 
lesions resulted in regrowth of descending motor, ascending sen-
sory or serotonin axons65. Furthermore, in both mice and rats, acti-
vated and chemoattracted sensory axons regrew robustly despite 
the presence of astrocyte scar borders65,75, and preventing or remov-
ing these borders reduced stimulated regrowth, suggesting that 
astrocyte borders can support, rather than prevent, axon growth65. 
Intrinsically activated CNS axons also regenerate robustly despite 
astrocyte scar border formation in the rodent optic nerve52,54,59,62. 
Axons grow directly along astrocytes during development76–78 and 
when appropriately stimulated after CNS damage in adult mam-
mals65,75,79 and lower vertebrates80. These combined findings provide 
strong evidence that astrocyte scar borders are not a primary cause 
for the failure of axons to regrow across SCI lesions and that strate-
gies other than simply manipulating these borders will be needed to 
achieve this type of regrowth.
Given the multiple time-dependent mechanisms that influence 
axon regrowth across lesions, rational strategies for therapy after SCI 
will likely require simultaneous targeting of multiple mechanisms 
with distinct temporal windows. There is substantial evidence indi-
cating that using a combination of multiple therapeutic strategies 
increases axon growth. For example, the activation of sensory neu-
rons in animal models of SCI has long been recognized to increase 
growth into permissive cell grafts or across lesions63,81,82. Notably, 
activated neurons do not grow well through non-neural lesion cores 
but do grow well along supportive cues present in spared neural tis-
sue62,79,83. Recent gain- and loss-of-function studies in mouse and rat 
models of anatomically complete SCI showed that neuronal activa-
tion, substrate support and chemoattraction were each required for 
recovery, but only together were these strategies sufficient to pro-
duce robust regrowth of sensory axons65 and propriospinal axons75 
through non-neural lesion cores. Findings from these two neuronal 
systems suggest that achieving robust regrowth of endogenous axons 
across lesion cores will likely have three requirements: (1) activating 
intrinsic neuronal growth programs, (2) availability of axon-sup-
portive growth substrate and (3) providing growth factors that are 
chemoattractive to axons75. It is important to note that the necessary 
axon-chemoattractive factors were different for each of the two neu-
ral systems studied, sensory and propriospinal neurons, indicating 
that more work will be needed to identify specific molecular targets 
that are able to stimulate and attract the growth of axons from the 
heterogeneous populations of brain, brainstem and intraspinal pro-
jection neurons that may be of functional interest after SCI.
In various animal models, cell grafts that repopulate non-neural 
cores with growth-supportive neuroglia, such as Schwann cells84,85 
or astroglia86,87, facilitate the growth of host axons across non-neu-
ral lesion cores and improve the functionality of residual fibers88. 
Clinical trials are evaluating the safety and efficacy of autolo-
gous Schwann cell grafts for SCI89. Another approach to promote 
the formation of relay circuits consists of grafting sources of new 
intraspinal neurons. In the presence of growth factors and support-
ing matrices, caudalized neural progenitor grafts not only survive 
in the hostile non-neural environment, but also differentiate into 
a variety of neurons and glia that repopulate the lesion core and 
send extensive axonal projections into host tissue both caudal and 
rostral to the injury in rodents90. The cell adhesion molecule neu-
ronal growth regulator 1 (NEGR1) is one of the factors enabling 
permissive axon–myelin interactions, which allows myelin to stim-
ulate axonal outgrowth from the grafted cells. Moreover, the grafted 
neurons release various growth factors91 that attract an impressive 
number of synapses from all of the host’s systems that innervate 
the spinal cord, including robust regeneration of the recalcitrant 
corticospinal tract92. Neural progenitor grafts form de novo relay 
circuits that restored a partial communication across anatomically 
complete SCI64,90,92,93. Interestingly, host axons exhibit function-
ally appropriate preferences when forming contacts with grafted 
neurons. Despite this striking reconstitution of spinal cord tissues 
observed in rodents90 and nonhuman primates94, however, func-
tional recovery has remained limited. These results thus provide 
important proof-of-concept information, but additional studies 
are necessary to understand how to guide, control and functionally 
integrate the grafted neurons into the host motor-circuit communi-
cation matrix95 to restore meaningful function.
Biomaterials to improve biological repair. Biomaterials hold 
considerable promise in augmentation of SCI repair. For example, 
injectable and resorbable polypeptide hydrogels can provide tem-
porary depots for the prolonged release of growth factors that 
chemoattract regrowing axons65,75. Such depots, when temporally 
and sequentially placed, can chemoattract axons to regrow across 
complete SCI lesions and into spared neural tissue to contact neu-
rons75. Hydrogel–collagen networks can be engineered to provide 
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
901

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
oriented scaffolds that facilitate the alignment of grafted cells and 
thereby direct axon regrowth96. Bioengineered scaffolds with linear 
guidance channels might prevent regenerating axons from develop-
ing tortuous trajectories12, instead directing their outgrowth along 
linear paths across the lesion site97. Survival and differentiation of 
grafted cells can be enhanced and directed by biomaterial vehicles 
that provide substrate and growth factors90. Biomaterial approaches 
to CNS repair are slowly but steadily advancing98,99.
Technological approaches
Major advances, but also failures, in the fields of neurosurgery, 
robotics, computational neuroscience and neuroengineering have 
populated SCI medicine with a flurry of wearable and implantable 
neurotechnologies to enable and augment function. These treat-
ments have historically been divided into restoration therapies, 
replacement strategies and rehabilitation procedures. However, the 
marriage of these engineering strategies is occurring at such a rapid 
pace that these categories are progressively becoming obsolete, 
if not misleading. Indeed, all current promising strategies share a 
common theme: capitalize on the intrinsic capacity of spared cir-
cuits to produce movement, and on the remarkable ability of these 
circuits to reorganize with training to augment recovery. Early 
achievements of these bourgeoning neuroprosthetic treatments are 
providing a glimpse at the therapeutic potential of technological 
approaches after SCI.
Engineering strategies to enable motor control. Sensorimotor 
circuits embedded in the spinal cord can translate task-specific 
sensory feedback into organized patterns of muscle activity under-
lying a broad repertoire of motor behaviors31,100,101 (Box 1). These 
circuits are often intact after SCI but lack the supraspinal sources of 
modulation and excitation essential for enabling their functionality. 
This understanding has triggered the development of various neu-
romodulation therapies that seek to compensate for these missing 
supraspinal inputs to reactivate spinal circuits. For example, in rats 
with partial SCI, deep brain stimulation of the midbrain locomo-
tor region can engage reticulospinal neurons that retain connec-
tions across the injury. The resulting descending drive leads to the 
activation of spinal circuits, which improves paretic locomotion102. 
However, this neurosurgical intervention is contingent on synaptic 
inputs from reticulospinal neurons, which limits the spectrum of 
SCI severities that might be addressed with this approach. Moreover, 
the relevance of this ancestral brainstem locomotor system for voli-
tional walking activities remains unclear in humans.
To address more severe injuries, both pharmacological and elec-
trical neuromodulation therapies have been delivered directly to 
spinal cord regions containing sensorimotor circuits involved in 
movement production (Fig. 3). Monoaminergic medications31,103,104 
and electrical stimulation protocols applied transcutaneously104, 
epidurally105–112, subdurally113 and intraspinally114–116 have enabled 
unexpected levels of leg and hand motor control in animal models 
and humans with paralysis106,116–118. Electrical stimulation protocols 
may also improve cardiovascular and respiratory functions119,120. 
The underlying mechanisms remain debated121,122, but evidence 
suggests that these electrical stimulations converge on a common 
target. Indeed, dorsally applied electrical fields spread toward dor-
sal roots, where sensory afferents reside123. Due to their lower resis-
tance to electrical currents, large-diameter proprioceptive fibers are 
the first neural structures recruited by the stimulation121. Intraspinal 
stimulation likely relies on the same mechanisms124. If similar out-
comes are confirmed, this technology, which requires arrays of elec-
trodes penetrating the spinal cord gray matter, would become less 
attractive than other strategies.
Due to their broad integration within sensorimotor networks, 
recruitment of proprioceptive afferents increases excitability of spi-
nal circuits, which augments their responsiveness to task-specific 
sensory information and residual signals from the brain. During 
spinal cord stimulation, individuals with motor complete paralysis 
regained the ability to activate paralyzed muscles and initiate iso-
lated movements of the leg106,117,125. In rats with severe contusions, 
pharmacological and electrical neuromodulation therapies applied 
to the lumbar spinal cord instantly enable the motor cortex to trig-
ger and modulate robust locomotor movements of paralyzed legs27. 
Because these injuries abolish all corticospinal tract projections, the 
cortical command is transferred downstream through glutamater-
gic projections originating from the ventral gigantocellular reticular 
nucleus. Due to their distributed topology in the white matter, these 
pathways systematically survive the injury, regardless of the inher-
ently variable location of damage. The anatomy and function of 
reticulospinal pathways are well-conserved across mammals126, and 
reticulospinal systems likely contribute to improving recovery from 
Mnα 
Mnα 
Motor cortex 
Pyramidal
cells
Projection
in the
brainstem
New
relay
circuit
Spinal 
sensorimotor
circuits
Spinal 
sensorimotor
circuits
Intraspinal
relay circuit
Spinal 
sensorimotor
circuits
Electrochemical
neuromodulation
After neuroprosthetic
neurorehabilitation
Spontaneous
Ia 
Spared
but silent
neural 
connections
Respond to
task-specific
sensory input
 No functional 
state
Electrode
array
5HT
Chemical
stimulation
Electrical
stimulation
Supraspinal
control of movement
during neuromodulation
Cortex dependent
recovery without
neuromodulation
Respond to
residual 
supraspinal
input
Silent 
pathways
becoming
functional
Proprioceptive
circuits
Spared but
nonfunctional
pathways and circuits 
Axon growth
and synapse
formation
Mnα 
Mnα 
Immediate
Long-term
Fig. 3 | Engineering strategies to enable immediate and long-term 
recovery of motor functions. After a severe but incomplete SCI, the 
sensorimotor circuits producing motor activity are spared, but they lack the 
essential source of modulation and excitation to be functional. Descending 
pathways are partly spared but fail to activate these circuits in order to 
mediate muscle contractions. The delivery of chemical and/or electrical 
neuromodulation therapies to the lumbar or cervical spinal cord below 
the injury immediately enables spinal sensorimotor circuits to respond 
to task-specific sensory input and residual supraspinal input in order to 
produce functional movements. In conjunction with neurorehabilitation, 
this intervention promotes an extensive reorganization of spared circuits 
and residual connections in the brainstem and spinal cord that mediates 
functional recovery. After training, motor control occurs without the need 
of the electrochemical neuromodulation therapies.
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
902

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
SCI in humans24. These results suggest that clinically complete inju-
ries often spare descending projections, in particular reticulospinal 
pathways, but these residual neural connections are insufficient to 
voluntarily elicit detectable muscle contractions106,117,127,128.
These clinical research results have triggered a surge of interest 
in the development of spinal cord stimulation technologies105,129. 
These new strategies aim to activate the proprioceptive fibers in the 
posterior roots122,123. Consequently, targeting proprioceptive fibers 
located in a given lumbosacral posterior root using a spatially selec-
tive electrode configuration provides preferential access to the pre-
motor neurons and motoneurons130,131 embedded in the segment 
innervated by this root122,123. This translates into closed-loop stimu-
lation protocols whereby short bursts of spatially selective electrical 
stimulation are delivered with a timing that coincides with natural 
activation of motoneurons132. These spatiotemporal neuromodula-
tion therapies enable a refined control over the movements of para-
lyzed legs in animal models and humans105,129. For example, if the 
algorithms that control this neuromodulation are adjusted on the 
basis of real-time movement feedback, this enables rats with com-
plete SCI to climb staircases of various heights and lengths with pre-
cision and fluidity133. Residual supraspinal inputs can also modify 
the impact of the electrical stimulation on the spinal cord execu-
tive centers, both positively and negatively, in order to modulate the 
movements voluntarily27,109,111,117.
Compared to continuous stimulation, spatiotemporal stimu-
lation increases the amplitude and robustness of leg movements, 
which enabled the sustained production of full weight-bearing loco-
motion in animal models and humans105,129,133. These spatiotempo-
ral stimulation protocols enabled graded control over the activity 
of otherwise paralyzed muscles during walking, thus providing the 
opportunity to engage activity-dependent mechanisms during reha-
bilitation, as discussed below.
Engineering strategies to bypass lesions. A brain–computer inter-
faces (BCI) decodes motor or cognitive intentions from a neural 
sensing interface and translates these predictions into executive 
commands for actuators. Historically, BCI treatments have focused 
on connecting people who have lost the ability to speak or move 
with assistive devices. These neurotechnologies allow people with 
paralysis to type words at a fast pace134,135 and to operate multi-
articulated prosthetic arms to execute activities of daily living using 
neural signals recorded directly from the brain136,137.
BCI research is now undergoing a rapid transition from sub-
stitution to restoration therapies. The new waves of BCIs aim at 
re-establishing bidirectional communication between the brain 
and denervated body parts129,138–142 (Fig. 4). For example, cortical 
signals have been directly linked to neuromuscular stimulation 
protocols to reanimate paralyzed muscles. These neural bypasses 
enabled functional upper limb movements in two persons with tet-
raplegia138,139. Conversely, encoding touch pressure information into 
somatosensory cortex stimulation protocols allowed a paralyzed 
person to recognize pressure-like sensations in individual fingers 
of a robotic hand142. Leg motor cortex activity has been interfaced 
wirelessly to spinal cord stimulation protocols to establish a brain–
spine interface that restores natural locomotor movements of para-
lyzed limbs in rodent143 and non-human primate129 models of SCI. 
Similar approaches may improve upper limb functions115,118, but the 
more sophisticated control of manual dexterity and the permanent 
gray matter damage associated with cervical injuries add signifi-
cant challenges. However, contrary to the high threshold required 
to attain useful locomotor function recovery, even relatively mod-
est improvements in hand function can translate into a meaningful 
increase in quality of life3.
The translation of these breakthroughs into common medical 
treatments for people with paralysis is facing a series of practical, 
financial and technological roadblocks144. Practically, the functional 
benefit of BCI devices remains relatively modest in comparison 
with their manifold technical challenges and financial burdens for 
society144. Advanced BCI treatments employ Utah arrays that are 
inserted into the cerebral cortex to record neural activity. Conceived 
in the 1990s, this grid of silicone-based electrodes is the only intra-
cortical neural probe approved for clinical use. However, the quality 
of neural signals extinguishes rapidly. Cortical grids placed epidur-
ally or subdurally allow more stable neural recordings (Fig. 4), but 
their spatial resolution may be insufficient for advanced prosthetic 
control144. Moreover, daily use of these neural prostheses will only 
be possible with the support of wireless recording technologies 
and brain-decoding algorithms that do not require constant reca-
libration. Likewise, current technologies to modulate the human 
CNS do not meet the requirements of prosthetic applications145. 
Advanced therapies rely on implantable stimulation technologies 
endowed with real-time wireless communication, and on next-
generation interfaces targeting specific neural structures with elec-
trical, chemical and even optical stimulation modalities. Multiple 
academic institutions, foundations and companies are addressing 
these challenges.
Engineering rehabilitation to augment recovery. Activity-based 
therapies are common in medical practice for enhancing recovery 
from SCI. The underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear, 
but it is now accepted that the repeated activation of the sensorimo-
tor system augments activity-dependent plasticity of spared circuits 
and residual neural connections, which leads to functional improve-
ments18,35,146,147. Consequently, a large number of neurotechnologies 
have been developed to augment activity, and thus plasticity, after 
SCI. For example, motor cortex electrical stimulation promotes 
activity-dependent sprouting of spared corticospinal tract axons, 
which improved skilled locomotion in rodent models of partial 
SCI148,149. Despite conflicting results, transcranial magnetic stimula-
tion applied over both the leg and arm regions of the human motor 
cortex also enhance the transmission along residual neural path-
ways, which has improved motor functions and reduced spasticity 
Surface or deep 
brain stimulation
Epidural
electrical
stimulation
Transcutaneous
electrical
stimulation
T11
T12
L1
L2
EEG
Interface
Recording
Neuromodulation
S1 stimulation
(restore sensation)
Epidural
ECoG
Subdural
ECoG
Intracortical
microelectrode array
Kinematic
Muscle
activity
Inertial
measurement
units
Resolution
Spatial coverage
Functional
electrical 
muscle stimulation
(FES)
Peripheral nerve 
stimulation
(PNS)
Brain activity
Low
High
High
Low
Movement feedback 
Fig. 4 | Engineering technologies to interface motor intentions with 
denervated body parts. Current brain recording technologies impose a 
trade-off between resolution, spatial coverage and invasiveness. Motor 
intentions or motor states decoded from neural recordings or movement 
feedback signals can be interfaced to neuromodulation therapies or 
stimulation protocols to enable or induce movements and sensations. EEG, 
electroencephalogram; ECoG, electrocorticogram.
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
903

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
in paraplegic and tetraplegic patients150,151. Similarly, paired associa-
tive stimulation of neural structures above and below SCI promote 
lasting augmentation of cortical and spinal circuit outputs, both 
in animal models and humans with SCI152,153. Electrical stimula-
tion of the spinal cord by single corticospinal tract neurons also 
triggers a durable modification of neural connectivity154–156. This 
activity-dependent stimulation increases the strength of terminal 
projections from single neurons through spike-timing-dependent 
plasticity157. These approaches may increase recovery after partial 
injuries that spare corticospinal tract projections, which is a key 
predictor of spontaneous recovery after acute SCI158. For this rea-
son, various groups are evaluating whether long-term use of the 
neural bypasses described above during rehabilitation may augment 
plasticity and recovery143,159.
Experiments in animal models of SCI illustrate that the extent of 
activity-based plasticity correlates with the volume and intensity of 
that activity147. Due to the depressed excitability of spinal circuits, the 
severely injured spinal cord does not respond robustly to task-spe-
cific sensory information, thus limiting the benefit of activity-based 
therapies147,160. However, neuromodulation therapies restore the abil-
ity of motor execution centers located in the spinal cord to process 
sensory information to produce movement111,112,117,156, which pro-
vides the possibility to train with high levels of activity. Encouraging 
contribution of supraspinal centers is essential to restore volitional 
motor control. Step training on a treadmill, which does not require 
supraspinal contribution in animal models31, mediates robust 
activity-dependent plasticity of spinal circuits31,35 but fails to restore 
functional interactions with supraspinal centers109. Instead, reha-
bilitation in a robotic body weight support system that favors these 
interactions restores volitional motor functions. After injuries lead-
ing to permanent leg paralysis, both rats and humans trained with 
such robotic support and neuromodulation therapies regained the 
ability to transform contextual cues into task-specific motor com-
mands to walk over ground over a range of speeds or adjust their 
step height as needed to climb a staircase27,109,111. However, volitional 
movements also returned without neuromodulation, both in ani-
mal models27 and humans111,161. Unbiased anatomical experiments 
of whole-brain and spinal cord in animal models showed that this 
recovery relies on an extensive and ubiquitous plasticity of residual 
connections whereby the cortical command is rerouted to lumbar 
circuits through de novo brainstem pathways27 and/or intraspinal 
relays109. The mechanisms responsible for this activity-dependent 
plasticity remain enigmatic. Neural activity triggers growth factor 
synthesis162, calcium-dependent myelin sheath formation163, chlo-
ride homeostasis regulation164, synaptic plasticity and many other 
molecular mechanisms that most likely contribute to neural repair.
Accumulating evidence suggests that the interplay between top-
down supraspinal signals and bottom-up proprioceptive informa-
tion plays a critical role in mediating this recovery. The absence of 
proprioceptive information prevents descending pathway reorgani-
zation after injury16. In turn, electrical stimulation enables motor 
control through the activation of proprioceptive pathways122,123. 
Many descending systems that are engaged during rehabilitation 
converge on these circuits27,109. This conceptual framework is steer-
ing the development of new engineering strategies that forcefully 
link top-down and bottom-up signaling pathways during rehabilita-
tion. For example, paraplegic individuals were trained in an exoskel-
eton that was actuated based on non-invasive brain recordings165. 
Artificial sensory feedbacks were delivered to both arms in order to 
feed proprioceptive information from both legs to the spinal cord 
above the injury. Over time, this closed-loop system restored sen-
sation in some of the originally denervated dermatomes. Likewise, 
brain-controlled stimulation of the spinal cord below the injury 
augmented the beneficial impact of rehabilitation on the recovery 
of locomotion in rats with severe SCI143. These rehabilitation pro-
grams closing the loop between circuits located above and below 
the injury may further increase use-dependent plasticity of residual 
connections155,159, but more work is needed to uncover the underly-
ing mechanisms.
While various engineering approaches have yielded impressive 
outcomes in laboratory environments, it is important to realize that 
patients still favor wheelchairs over other alternatives to ambulate166. 
For example, various insurances reimburse the purchase of lower 
limb exoskeletons to patients with SCI. However, current technolo-
gies involve high energy requirements, unpractical setting proce-
dures and complex operations to ambulate at relatively low speed 
compared to wheelchairs. These limitations emphasize the need to 
refine current technologies. For example, implanted devices that 
can be operated with a voice controller open practical perspectives 
for use in daily life. These technologies also offer the opportunity 
to continue effective rehabilitative training at home or in special-
ized gyms in order to take advantage of the continuing potential for 
plasticity that expands beyond the transient rehabilitation programs 
currently delivered to individuals with SCI.
Future directions
Current biological and engineering strategies have shown therapeu-
tic potential in animal models, but their ability to mediate clinically 
important improvements after severe SCI remains elusive. Since 
these treatments target distinct mechanisms, their combinations 
are expected to be synergistic. While logical, merging fundamen-
tally different approaches has turned out to be more complex than 
originally thought. For example, activity-based therapy in the pres-
ence of plasticity-enhancing strategies uncovered complex inter-
actions between both interventions47,167–169. These studies revealed 
that the specific relationships between the practiced exercises and 
the temporal windows for delivering each therapy determined the 
balance between beneficial and detrimental plasticity. Moreover, 
many failed combinatorial attempts still linger in laboratory note-
books. Despite these unexpected outcomes, dubious combinations 
of unproven cell treatments, immature engineering strategies and 
intense exercise programs have unfortunately flourished in clinics 
offering medical tourism.
Thus far, combinatorial attempts were designed algebraically, 
expecting simply additive results without considering the interac-
tions between their respective mechanisms. Based on the knowl-
edge summarized in this review, various combinatorial strategies 
could be envisaged that activate intrinsic neuronal growth pro-
grams, establish a permissive growth environment, deliver chemo-
tropic gradients to encourage axonal regeneration into and beyond 
the environment, graft neural stem cells that form new relay cir-
cuits and deploy engineering solutions that foster the integration of 
regenerating axons and de novo relay circuits into CNS operations 
through rehabilitation. However, this vision may be simplistic and 
deceptively incremental.
With appropriately targeted approaches, however, biological 
and engineering strategies may interact to catalyze each other. For 
example, biological interventions that modulate axonal growth, 
lesion environments and even learning and memory may increase 
the anatomical and functional reorganization of the circuits that 
underlies the recovery of voluntary motor functions in response 
to neuroprosthetic rehabilitation. In turn, engineering strategies 
involving brain-controlled modulation129,143 of genetically targeted 
neurons29 may critically engage neurons with regrowing axons and 
thus facilitate the integration of newly formed connections, which 
have been stimulated to regrow by biological interventions, into the 
operations of the CNS.
The SCI research community must reflect on exploiting engi-
neering solutions to target mechanisms that will amplify biologi-
cal repair treatments, and inversely, envision mechanism-based 
biological strategies able to augment the effects of technological 
interventions. These combinatorial therapies will need to obey strict 
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
904

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
temporal windows. This translational strategy requires a careful 
selection of rodent SCI models and, in many instances, a necessary 
work in nonhuman primate models (Box 2).
We thus advocate tailoring combinations of biological and engi-
neering strategies derived from the identified interactions between 
their respective mechanisms over the course of recovery from SCI. 
Only through these combinatorial, time-dependent interventions 
will we appropriately target multiple facets of spinal cord repair and 
mediate clinically meaningful functional improvements. These con-
cepts may apply to other CNS disorders. While there are challenges 
ahead, only through this partnership between biologists and engi-
neers will treatments be conceived to advance and maybe win the 
fight against paralysis.
Received: 29 January 2018; Accepted: 1 May 2019;  
Published online: 3 June 2019
References
	1.	
National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center. Spinal cord injury (SCI) facts 
and figures at a glance https://www.nscisc.uab.edu/Public/Facts%202016.pdf 
(2016).
	2.	
Fehlings, M. G. et al. A clinical practice guideline for the management of 
acute spinal cord injury: introduction, rationale, and scope. Global Spine J. 
7 Suppl, 84S–94S (2017).
	3.	
Anderson, K. D. Targeting recovery: priorities of the spinal cord-injured 
population. J. Neurotrauma 21, 1371–1383 (2004).
	4.	
Fawcett, J. W. et al. Guidelines for the conduct of clinical trials for spinal 
cord injury as developed by the ICCP panel: spontaneous recovery after 
spinal cord injury and statistical power needed for therapeutic clinical 
trials. Spinal Cord 45, 190–205 (2007).
	5.	
Sofroniew, M. V. Dissecting spinal cord regeneration. Nature 557, 
343–350 (2018).
	6.	
Göritz, C. et al. A pericyte origin of spinal cord scar tissue. Science 333, 
238–242 (2011).
	7.	
Zhu, Y. et al. Hematogenous macrophage depletion reduces the fibrotic scar 
and increases axonal growth after spinal cord injury. Neurobiol. Dis. 74, 
114–125 (2015).
	8.	
Burda, J. E. & Sofroniew, M. V. Reactive gliosis and the multicellular 
response to CNS damage and disease. Neuron 81, 229–248 (2014).
	9.	
Herrmann, J. E. et al. STAT3 is a critical regulator of astrogliosis and scar 
formation after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 28, 7231–7243 (2008).
	10.	
Sofroniew, M. V. Astrocyte barriers to neurotoxic inflammation. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 16, 249–263 (2015).
	11.	
O’Shea, T. M., Burda, J. E. & Sofroniew, M. V. Cell biology of spinal cord 
injury and repair. J. Clin. Invest. 127, 3259–3270 (2017).
	12.	
Tuszynski, M. H. & Steward, O. Concepts and methods for the study of 
axonal regeneration in the CNS. Neuron 74, 777–791 (2012).
	13.	
Murray, K. C. et al. Recovery of motoneuron and locomotor function after 
spinal cord injury depends on constitutive activity in 5-HT2C receptors. 
Nat. Med. 16, 694–700 (2010).
	14.	
Bareyre, F. M. et al. The injured spinal cord spontaneously forms a new 
intraspinal circuit in adult rats. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 269–277 (2004).
	15.	
Courtine, G. et al. Recovery of supraspinal control of stepping via indirect 
propriospinal relay connections after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 14, 
69–74 (2008).
	16.	
Takeoka, A., Vollenweider, I., Courtine, G. & Arber, S. Muscle spindle 
feedback directs locomotor recovery and circuit reorganization after spinal 
cord injury. Cell 159, 1626–1639 (2014).
	17.	
Ballermann, M. & Fouad, K. Spontaneous locomotor recovery in spinal 
cord injured rats is accompanied by anatomical plasticity of reticulospinal 
fibers. Eur. J. Neurosci. 23, 1988–1996 (2006).
	18.	
Raineteau, O. & Schwab, M. E. Plasticity of motor systems after incomplete 
spinal cord injury. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 263–273 (2001).
	19.	 Rosenzweig, E. S. et al. Extensive spontaneous plasticity of corticospinal 
projections after primate spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 13,  
1505–1510 (2010).
	20.	
Friedli, L. et al. Pronounced species divergence in corticospinal tract 
reorganization and functional recovery after lateralized spinal cord injury 
favors primates. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 302ra134 (2015).
	21.	
Belhaj-Saïf, A. & Cheney, P. D. Plasticity in the distribution of the red 
nucleus output to forearm muscles after unilateral lesions of the pyramidal 
tract. J. Neurophysiol. 83, 3147–3153 (2000).
	22.	
Müllner, A. et al. Lamina-specific restoration of serotonergic projections 
after Nogo-A antibody treatment of spinal cord injury in rats. Eur. J. 
Neurosci. 27, 326–333 (2008).
	23.	
Oudega, M. & Perez, M. A. Corticospinal reorganization after spinal cord 
injury. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 590, 3647–3663 (2012).
	24.	
Baker, S. N. & Perez, M. A. Reticulospinal contributions to gross hand 
function after human spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 37, 9778–9784 (2017).
	25.	
Hilton, B. J. et al. Re-establishment of cortical motor output maps and 
spontaneous functional recovery via spared dorsolaterally projecting 
corticospinal neurons after dorsal column spinal cord injury in adult mice. 
J. Neurosci. 36, 4080–4092 (2016).
	26.	
Hollis, E. R. II et al. Ryk controls remapping of motor cortex during 
functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 697–705 (2016).
	27.	
Asboth, L. et al. Cortico-reticulo-spinal circuit reorganization enables 
functional recovery after severe spinal cord contusion. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 
576–588 (2018).
	28.	
Ruder, L., Takeoka, A. & Arber, S. Long-distance descending spinal neurons 
ensure quadrupedal locomotor stability. Neuron 92, 1063–1078 (2016).
	29.	
Chen, B. et al. Reactivation of dormant relay pathways in injured spinal 
cord by KCC2 manipulations. Cell 174, 521–535 e513 (2018).
	30.	
Kinoshita, M. et al. Genetic dissection of the circuit for hand dexterity in 
primates. Nature 487, 235–238 (2012).
	31.	
Courtine, G. et al. Transformation of nonfunctional spinal circuits into 
functional states after the loss of brain input. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 
1333–1342 (2009).
	32.	
Beauparlant, J. et al. Undirected compensatory plasticity contributes to 
neuronal dysfunction after severe spinal cord injury. Brain 136, 
3347–3361 (2013).
	33.	
Jiang, Y. Q., Zaaimi, B. & Martin, J. H. Competition with primary sensory 
afferents drives remodeling of corticospinal axons in mature spinal motor 
circuits. J. Neurosci. 36, 193–203 (2016).
	34.	
Dietz, V. Behavior of spinal neurons deprived of supraspinal input.  
Nat. Rev. Neurol. 6, 167–174 (2010).
Box 2 | Relevant animal models of SCI
Effective therapeutic developments require selecting experimen-
tal models that are appropriate for evaluating the impact of the 
tested intervention on the targeted repair mechanisms and are 
still relevant for clinical perspectives. The majority of current 
interventions are conducted in rodent models that undergo a 
partial cut of the spinal cord. These precise injuries are useful 
to decipher the mechanisms of recovery since the interrupted 
tracts are well characterized. Moreover, they lead to spontaneous 
functional recovery, which allows monitoring therapy-mediated 
improvements. However, this type of lesion fails to reproduce 
many of the features that characterize the majority of spinal cord 
damage in humans. After partial cut injuries, humans exhibit ex-
tensive spontaneous functional recovery.
Instead, severe contusion or crush SCI in rodent models 
presents all the key hallmarks of the more frequently observed 
injuries in humans, including permanent paralysis. Moreover, 
recovery from contusion SCI appears to rely on mechanisms that 
are distinct from those involved in movement restoration after 
cut injuries27. Due to variable outcomes and severity of deficits, 
however, contusion injuries are not always used in animal 
models for preclinical tests of potential interventions. We believe 
that spinal cord repair interventions should therefore be tested in 
both cut and contusion or crush models, with severities that are 
relevant clinically.
Another key consideration is the importance of nonhuman 
primate models of SCI. The technical difficulties, complex 
logistics, exuberant costs and intimidating ethical issues are 
refraining translational scientists from testing and optimizing 
their therapies in this model. However, we argue that there is 
much to gain in solidifying preclinical results in primate models, 
and adapting procedures and technologies to the size and 
specificities of primate species. Considering the staggering cost 
of clinical trials, we feel that a tremendous amount of information 
may derive from small, well-structured studies in nonhuman 
primate models of SCI before contemplating applications 
in humans.
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
905

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
	35.	
Edgerton, V. R., Tillakaratne, N. J., Bigbee, A. J., de Leon, R. D. & Roy, R. 
R. Plasticity of the spinal neural circuitry after injury. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 
27, 145–167 (2004).
	36.	
Lovett-Barr, M. R. et al. Repetitive intermittent hypoxia induces respiratory 
and somatic motor recovery after chronic cervical spinal injury. J. Neurosci. 
32, 3591–3600 (2012).
	37.	
Navarrete-Opazo, A., Alcayaga, J., Sepúlveda, O., Rojas, E. & Astudillo, C. 
Repetitive intermittent hypoxia and locomotor training enhances walking 
function in incomplete spinal cord injury subjects: a randomized, triple-
blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J. Neurotrauma 34, 1803–1812 (2017).
	38.	
Stevens, B. et al. The classical complement cascade mediates CNS synapse 
elimination. Cell 131, 1164–1178 (2007).
	39.	
Schafer, D. P. et al. Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity 
and complement-dependent manner. Neuron 74, 691–705 (2012).
	40.	
Kucukdereli, H. et al. Control of excitatory CNS synaptogenesis by 
astrocyte-secreted proteins Hevin and SPARC. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
108, E440–E449 (2011).
	41.	
Christopherson, K. S. et al. Thrombospondins are astrocyte-secreted 
proteins that promote CNS synaptogenesis. Cell 120, 421–433 (2005).
	42.	
Allen, N. J. et al. Astrocyte glypicans 4 and 6 promote formation of 
excitatory synapses via GluA1 AMPA receptors. Nature 486, 410–414 (2012).
	43.	
Tyzack, G. E. et al. Astrocyte response to motor neuron injury promotes 
structural synaptic plasticity via STAT3-regulated TSP-1 expression. Nat. 
Commun. 5, 4294 (2014).
	44.	
Wang, D. & Fawcett, J. The perineuronal net and the control of CNS 
plasticity. Cell Tissue Res. 349, 147–160 (2012).
	45.	
Schwab, M. E. & Strittmatter, S. M. Nogo limits neural plasticity and 
recovery from injury. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 27, 53–60 (2014).
	46.	
Bradbury, E. J. & McMahon, S. B. Spinal cord repair strategies: why do they 
work? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 644–653 (2006).
	47.	
García-Alías, G., Barkhuysen, S., Buckle, M. & Fawcett, J. W. 
Chondroitinase ABC treatment opens a window of opportunity for 
task-specific rehabilitation. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1145–1151 (2009).
	48.	
Mironova, Y. A. & Giger, R. J. Where no synapses go: gatekeepers of circuit 
remodeling and synaptic strength. Trends Neurosci. 36, 363–373 (2013).
	49.	
Onishi, K., Hollis, E. & Zou, Y. Axon guidance and injury-lessons from 
Wnts and Wnt signaling. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 27, 232–240 (2014).
	50.	
Norenberg, M. D., Smith, J. & Marcillo, A. The pathology of human spinal 
cord injury: defining the problems. J. Neurotrauma 21, 429–440 (2004).
	51.	
Fleming, J. C. et al. The cellular inflammatory response in human spinal 
cords after injury. Brain 129, 3249–3269 (2006).
	52.	
Park, K. K. et al. Promoting axon regeneration in the adult CNS by 
modulation of the PTEN/mTOR pathway. Science 322, 963–966 (2008).
	53.	
Liu, K. et al. PTEN deletion enhances the regenerative ability of adult 
corticospinal neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 1075–1081 (2010).
	54.	
Sun, F. et al. Sustained axon regeneration induced by co-deletion of PTEN 
and SOCS3. Nature 480, 372–375 (2011).
	55.	
He, Z. & Jin, Y. Intrinsic control of axon regeneration. Neuron 90, 
437–451 (2016).
	56.	
Chen, Q. et al. Carcinoma-astrocyte gap junctions promote brain metastasis 
by cGAMP transfer. Nature 533, 493–498 (2016).
	57.	
Chandran, V. et al. A systems-level analysis of the peripheral nerve intrinsic 
axonal growth program. Neuron 89, 956–970 (2016).
	58.	
Yoon, C. & Giger, R. J. Inside out: core network of transcription factors 
drives axon regeneration. Neuron 89, 881–884 (2016).
	59.	
de Lima, S. et al. Full-length axon regeneration in the adult mouse optic 
nerve and partial recovery of simple visual behaviors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 109, 9149–9154 (2012).
	60.	
Baldwin, K. T., Carbajal, K. S., Segal, B. M. & Giger, R. J. 
Neuroinflammation triggered by β-glucan/dectin-1 signaling enables CNS 
axon regeneration. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 2581–2586 (2015).
	61.	
Ozdinler, P. H. & Macklis, J. D. IGF-I specifically enhances axon outgrowth 
of corticospinal motor neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 1371–1381 (2006).
	62.	
Bei, F. et al. Restoration of visual function by enhancing conduction in 
regenerated axons. Cell 164, 219–232 (2016).
	63.	 Alto, L. T. et al. Chemotropic guidance facilitates axonal regeneration 
and synapse formation after spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 
1106–1113 (2009).
	64.	
Bonner, J. F. et al. Grafted neural progenitors integrate and restore synaptic 
connectivity across the injured spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 31, 4675–4686 (2011).
	65.	
Anderson, M. A. et al. Astrocyte scar formation aids central nervous system 
axon regeneration. Nature 532, 195–200 (2016).
	66.	
Plantman, S. et al. Integrin-laminin interactions controlling neurite outgrowth 
from adult DRG neurons in vitro. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 39, 50–62 (2008).
	67.	
Edwards, T. J. & Hammarlund, M. Syndecan promotes axon regeneration by 
stabilizing growth cone migration. Cell Reports 8, 272–283 (2014).
	68.	
Farhy Tselnicker, I., Boisvert, M. M. & Allen, N. J. The role of neuronal 
versus astrocyte-derived heparan sulfate proteoglycans in brain 
development and injury. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 42, 1263–1269 (2014).
	69.	
Masu, M. Proteoglycans and axon guidance: a new relationship between old 
partners. J. Neurochem. 139 Suppl 2, 58–75 (2016).
	70.	
Baier, H. & Bonhoeffer, F. Axon guidance by gradients of a target-derived 
component. Science 255, 472–475 (1992).
	71.	
Horn, K. P., Busch, S. A., Hawthorne, A. L., van Rooijen, N. & Silver, J. 
Another barrier to regeneration in the CNS: activated macrophages induce 
extensive retraction of dystrophic axons through direct physical 
interactions. J. Neurosci. 28, 9330–9341 (2008).
	72.	 Blesch, A. & Tuszynski, M. H. Transient growth factor delivery  
sustains regenerated axons after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 27, 
10535–10545 (2007).
	73.	
Adams, K. L. & Gallo, V. The diversity and disparity of the glial scar.  
Nat. Neurosci. 21, 9–15 (2018).
	74.	
Windle, W. F., Clemente, C. D. & Chambers, W. W. Inhibition of formation 
of a glial barrier as a means of permitting a peripheral nerve to grow into 
the brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 96, 359–369 (1952).
	75.	
Anderson, M. A. et al. Required growth facilitators propel axon 
regeneration across complete spinal cord injury. Nature 561,  
396–400 (2018).
	76.	
Brosius Lutz, A. & Barres, B. A. Contrasting the glial response to  
axon injury in the central and peripheral nervous systems. Dev. Cell 28, 
7–17 (2014).
	77.	
Mason, C. A., Edmondson, J. C. & Hatten, M. E. The extending astroglial 
process: development of glial cell shape, the growing tip, and interactions 
with neurons. J. Neurosci. 8, 3124–3134 (1988).
	78.	
Raper, J. & Mason, C. Cellular strategies of axonal pathfinding. Cold Spring 
Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2, a001933 (2010).
	79.	
Zukor, K. et al. Short hairpin RNA against PTEN enhances regenerative 
growth of corticospinal tract axons after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 33, 
15350–15361 (2013).
	80.	
Mokalled, M. H. et al. Injury-induced ctgfa directs glial bridging and spinal 
cord regeneration in zebrafish. Science 354, 630–634 (2016).
	81.	
Richardson, P. M. & Issa, V. M. Peripheral injury enhances central 
regeneration of primary sensory neurones. Nature 309, 791–793 (1984).
	82.	
Hutson, T. H. et al. Cbp-dependent histone acetylation mediates axon 
regeneration induced by environmental enrichment in rodent spinal cord 
injury models. Sci. Transl. Med. 11, eaaw2064 (2019).
	83.	
Neumann, S. & Woolf, C. J. Regeneration of dorsal column fibers into 
and beyond the lesion site following adult spinal cord injury. Neuron 23, 
83–91 (1999).
	84.	
Pearse, D. D. et al. cAMP and Schwann cells promote axonal growth and 
functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 10, 610–616 (2004).
	85.	
Williams, R. R., Henao, M., Pearse, D. D. & Bunge, M. B. Permissive 
Schwann cell graft/spinal cord interfaces for axon regeneration. Cell 
Transplant. 24, 115–131 (2015).
	86.	
Shih, C. H., Lacagnina, M., Leuer-Bisciotti, K. & Pröschel, C. Astroglial-
derived periostin promotes axonal regeneration after spinal cord injury.  
J. Neurosci. 34, 2438–2443 (2014).
	87.	
Zhang, S., Alvarez, D. J., Sofroniew, M. V. & Deming, T. J. Design and 
synthesis of nonionic copolypeptide hydrogels with reversible 
thermoresponsive and tunable physical properties. Biomacromolecules 16, 
1331–1340 (2015).
	88.	
Assinck, P., Duncan, G. J., Hilton, B. J., Plemel, J. R. & Tetzlaff, W.  
Cell transplantation therapy for spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 
637–647 (2017).
	89.	
Anderson, K. D. et al. Safety of autologous human schwann cell 
transplantation in subacute thoracic spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 34, 
2950–2963 (2017).
	90.	
Lu, P. et al. Long-distance growth and connectivity of neural stem cells after 
severe spinal cord injury. Cell 150, 1264–1273 (2012).
	91.	
Lu, P., Jones, L. L., Snyder, E. Y. & Tuszynski, M. H. Neural stem cells 
constitutively secrete neurotrophic factors and promote extensive host 
axonal growth after spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol. 181, 115–129 (2003).
	92.	
Kadoya, K. et al. Spinal cord reconstitution with homologous neural grafts 
enables robust corticospinal regeneration. Nat. Med. 22, 479–487 (2016).
	93.	
Abematsu, M. et al. Neurons derived from transplanted neural stem cells 
restore disrupted neuronal circuitry in a mouse model of spinal cord injury. 
J. Clin. Invest. 120, 3255–3266 (2010).
	94.	
Rosenzweig, E. S. et al. Restorative effects of human neural stem cell grafts 
on the primate spinal cord. Nat. Med. 24, 484–490 (2018).
	95.	
Pivetta, C., Esposito, M. S., Sigrist, M. & Arber, S. Motor-circuit 
communication matrix from spinal cord to brainstem neurons revealed by 
developmental origin. Cell 156, 537–548 (2014).
	96.	
Winter, C. C. et al. Transplantable living scaffolds comprised of micro-tissue 
engineered aligned astrocyte networks to facilitate central nervous system 
regeneration. Acta Biomater. 38, 44–58 (2016).
	97.	
Gao, M. et al. Templated agarose scaffolds for the support of motor axon 
regeneration into sites of complete spinal cord transection. Biomaterials 34, 
1529–1536 (2013).
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
906

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
	98.	
Elliott Donaghue, I., Tam, R., Sefton, M. V. & Shoichet, M. S. Cell and 
biomolecule delivery for tissue repair and regeneration in the central 
nervous system. J. Control. Release 190, 219–227 (2014).
	99.	
O’Shea, T. M. et al. In Smart Materials for Tissue Engineering Applications 
(ed. Wang, Q.) 529–557 (Royal Society of Chemistry, 2017).
	100.	 Grillner, S. Biological pattern generation: the cellular and computational 
logic of networks in motion. Neuron 52, 751–766 (2006).
	101.	 Kiehn, O. Locomotor circuits in the mammalian spinal cord. Annu. Rev. 
Neurosci. 29, 279–306 (2006).
	102.	 Bachmann, L. C. et al. Deep brain stimulation of the midbrain locomotor 
region improves paretic hindlimb function after spinal cord injury in rats. 
Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 208ra146 (2013).
	103.	 Radhakrishna, M. et al. Double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized 
phase I/IIa study (safety and efficacy) with buspirone/levodopa/carbidopa 
(SpinalonTM) in subjects with complete AIS A or motor-complete AIS B 
spinal cord injury. Curr. Pharm. Des. 23, 1789–1804 (2017).
	104.	 Gerasimenko, Y. P. et al. Noninvasive reactivation of motor descending 
control after paralysis. J. Neurotrauma 32, 1968–1980 (2015).
	105.	 Wenger, N. et al. Spatiotemporal neuromodulation therapies engaging 
muscle synergies improve motor control after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 
22, 138–145 (2016).
	106.	 Grahn, P. J. et al. Enabling task-specific volitional motor functions via 
spinal cord neuromodulation in a human with paraplegia. Mayo Clin. Proc. 
92, 544–554 (2017).
	107.	 Angeli, C., Edgerton, V. R., Gerasimenko, Y. & Harkema, S. Reply: No dawn 
yet of a new age in spinal cord rehabilitation. Brain 138, e363 (2015).
	108.	 Herman, R., He, J., D’Luzansky, S., Willis, W. & Dilli, S. Spinal cord 
stimulation facilitates functional walking in a chronic, incomplete spinal 
cord injured. Spinal Cord 40, 65–68 (2002).
	109.	 van den Brand, R. et al. Restoring voluntary control of locomotion after 
paralyzing spinal cord injury. Science 336, 1182–1185 (2012).
	110.	 Danner, S. M. et al. Human spinal locomotor control is based on flexibly 
organized burst generators. Brain 138, 577–588 (2015).
	111.	 Wagner, F. B. et al. Targeted neurotechnology restores walking in humans 
with spinal cord injury. Nature 563, 65–71 (2018).
	112.	 Gill, M. L. et al. Neuromodulation of lumbosacral spinal networks  
enables independent stepping after complete paraplegia. Nat. Med. 24, 
1677–1682 (2018).
	113.	 Minev, I. R. et al. Biomaterials. Electronic dura mater for long-term 
multimodal neural interfaces. Science 347, 159–163 (2015).
	114.	 Holinski, B. J. et al. Intraspinal microstimulation produces over-ground 
walking in anesthetized cats. J. Neural Eng. 13, 056016 (2016).
	115.	 Zimmermann, J. B., Seki, K. & Jackson, A. Reanimating the arm and hand 
with intraspinal microstimulation. J. Neural Eng. 8, 054001 (2011).
	116.	 Kasten, M. R., Sunshine, M. D., Secrist, E. S., Horner, P. J. & Moritz, C. T. 
Therapeutic intraspinal microstimulation improves forelimb function after 
cervical contusion injury. J. Neural Eng. 10, 044001 (2013).
	117.	 Angeli, C. A., Edgerton, V. R., Gerasimenko, Y. P. & Harkema, S. J. Altering 
spinal cord excitability enables voluntary movements after chronic complete 
paralysis in humans. Brain 137, 1394–1409 (2014).
	118.	 Lu, D. C. et al. Engaging cervical spinal cord networks to reenable volitional 
control of hand function in tetraplegic patients. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 
30, 951–962 (2016).
	119.	 Phillips, A. A. et al. An autonomic neuroprosthesis: noninvasive electrical 
spinal cord stimulation restores autonomic cardiovascular function in 
individuals with spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 35, 446–451 (2017).
	120.	 Hachmann, J. T. et al. Electrical neuromodulation of the respiratory system 
after spinal cord injury. Mayo Clin. Proc. 92, 1401–1414 (2017).
	121.	 Minassian, K., McKay, W. B., Binder, H. & Hofstoetter, U. S. Targeting 
lumbar spinal neural circuitry by epidural stimulation to restore motor 
function after spinal cord injury. Neurotherapeutics 13, 284–294 (2016).
	122.	 Moraud, E. M. et al. Mechanisms underlying the neuromodulation of spinal 
circuits for correcting gait and balance deficits after spinal cord injury. 
Neuron 89, 814–828 (2016).
	123.	 Capogrosso, M. et al. A computational model for epidural electrical 
stimulation of spinal sensorimotor circuits. J. Neurosci. 33,  
19326–19340 (2013).
	124.	 Gaunt, R. A., Prochazka, A., Mushahwar, V. K., Guevremont, L. & Ellaway, 
P. H. Intraspinal microstimulation excites multisegmental sensory afferents 
at lower stimulus levels than local alpha-motoneuron responses.  
J. Neurophysiol. 96, 2995–3005 (2006).
	125.	 Barolat, G., Myklebust, J. B. & Wenninger, W. Enhancement of voluntary 
motor function following spinal cord stimulation—case study. Appl. 
Neurophysiol. 49, 307–314 (1986).
	126.	 Nudo, R. J. & Masterton, R. B. Descending pathways to the spinal cord: a 
comparative study of 22 mammals. J. Comp. Neurol. 277, 53–79 (1988).
	127.	 Minassian, K. et al. Stepping-like movements in humans with complete 
spinal cord injury induced by epidural stimulation of the lumbar cord: 
electromyographic study of compound muscle action potentials. Spinal 
Cord 42, 401–416 (2004).
	128.	 Carhart, M. R., He, J., Herman, R., D’Luzansky, S. & Willis, W. T. Epidural 
spinal-cord stimulation facilitates recovery of functional walking following 
incomplete spinal-cord injury. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 12, 
32–42 (2004).
	129.	 Capogrosso, M. et al. A brain–spine interface alleviating gait deficits after 
spinal cord injury in primates. Nature 539, 284–288 (2016).
	130.	 Tripodi, M., Stepien, A. E. & Arber, S. Motor antagonism exposed by spatial 
segregation and timing of neurogenesis. Nature 479, 61–66 (2011).
	131.	 Levine, A. J. et al. Identification of a cellular node for motor control 
pathways. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 586–593 (2014).
	132.	 Formento, E. et al. Electrical spinal cord stimulation must preserve 
proprioception to enable locomotion in humans with spinal cord injury. 
Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1728–1741 (2018).
	133.	 Wenger, N. et al. Closed-loop neuromodulation of spinal sensorimotor 
circuits controls refined locomotion after complete spinal cord injury.  
Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 255ra133 (2014).
	134.	 Gilja, V. et al. Clinical translation of a high-performance neural prosthesis. 
Nat. Med. 21, 1142–1145 (2015).
	135.	 Jarosiewicz, B. et al. Virtual typing by people with tetraplegia using a 
self-calibrating intracortical brain-computer interface. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 
313ra179 (2015).
	136.	 Hochberg, L. R. et al. Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a 
neurally controlled robotic arm. Nature 485, 372–375 (2012).
	137.	 Collinger, J. L. et al. High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an 
individual with tetraplegia. Lancet 381, 557–564 (2013).
	138.	 Bouton, C. E. et al. Restoring cortical control of functional movement in a 
human with quadriplegia. Nature 533, 247–250 (2016).
	139.	 Ajiboye, A. B. et al. Restoration of reaching and grasping movements 
through brain-controlled muscle stimulation in a person with tetraplegia: a 
proof-of-concept demonstration. Lancet 389, 1821–1830 (2017).
	140.	 Ethier, C., Oby, E. R., Bauman, M. J. & Miller, L. E. Restoration of grasp 
following paralysis through brain-controlled stimulation of muscles. Nature 
485, 368–371 (2012).
	141.	 Moritz, C. T., Perlmutter, S. I. & Fetz, E. E. Direct control of paralysed 
muscles by cortical neurons. Nature 456, 639–642 (2008).
	142.	 Flesher, S. N. et al. Intracortical microstimulation of human somatosensory 
cortex. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 361ra141 (2016).
	143.	 Bonizzato, M. et al. Brain-controlled modulation of spinal circuits improves 
recovery from spinal cord injury. Nat. Commun. 9, 3015 (2018).
	144.	 Borton, D., Micera, S., Millán, JdelR. & Courtine, G. Personalized 
neuroprosthetics. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 210rv2 (2013).
	145.	 Lacour, S. P., Courtine, G. & Guck, J. Materials and technologies for soft 
implantable neuroprostheses. Nat. Rev. Mater. 1, 16063 (2016).
	146.	 Côté, M. P., Murray, M. & Lemay, M. A. Rehabilitation strategies after 
spinal cord injury: inquiry into the mechanisms of success and failure.  
J. Neurotrauma 34, 1841–1857 (2017).
	147.	 Torres-Espín, A., Beaudry, E., Fenrich, K. & Fouad, K. Rehabilitative 
training in animal models of spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 35, 
1970–1985 (2018).
	148.	 Carmel, J. B. & Martin, J. H. Motor cortex electrical stimulation augments 
sprouting of the corticospinal tract and promotes recovery of motor 
function. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 8, 51 (2014).
	149.	 Zareen, N. et al. Motor cortex and spinal cord neuromodulation promote 
corticospinal tract axonal outgrowth and motor recovery after cervical 
contusion spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol. 297, 179–189 (2017).
	150.	 Tazoe, T. & Perez, M. A. Effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation on recovery of function after spinal cord injury. Arch. Phys. 
Med. Rehabil. 96, S145–S155 (2015).
	151.	 Long, J., Federico, P. & Perez, M. A. A novel cortical target to enhance 
hand motor output in humans with spinal cord injury. Brain 140, 
1619–1632 (2017).
	152.	 Mishra, A. M., Pal, A., Gupta, D. & Carmel, J. B. Paired motor cortex and 
cervical epidural electrical stimulation timed to converge in the spinal cord 
promotes lasting increases in motor responses. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 595, 
6953–6968 (2017).
	153.	 Dixon, L., Ibrahim, M. M., Santora, D. & Knikou, M. Paired associative 
transspinal and transcortical stimulation produces plasticity in human 
cortical and spinal neuronal circuits. J. Neurophysiol. 116, 904–916 (2016).
	154.	 Jackson, A., Mavoori, J. & Fetz, E. E. Long-term motor cortex plasticity 
induced by an electronic neural implant. Nature 444, 56–60 (2006).
	155.	 Nishimura, Y., Perlmutter, S. I., Eaton, R. W. & Fetz, E. E. Spike-timing-
dependent plasticity in primate corticospinal connections induced during 
free behavior. Neuron 80, 1301–1309 (2013).
	156.	 Nishimura, Y., Perlmutter, S. I. & Fetz, E. E. Restoration of upper limb 
movement via artificial corticospinal and musculospinal connections in a 
monkey with spinal cord injury. Front. Neural Circuits 7, 57 (2013).
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
907

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
	157.	 Holtmaat, A. & Svoboda, K. Experience-dependent structural synaptic 
plasticity in the mammalian brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 647–658 (2009).
	158.	 Freund, P. et al. MRI investigation of the sensorimotor cortex and the 
corticospinal tract after acute spinal cord injury: a prospective longitudinal 
study. Lancet Neurol. 12, 873–881 (2013).
	159.	 McPherson, J. G., Miller, R. R. & Perlmutter, S. I. Targeted, activity-
dependent spinal stimulation produces long-lasting motor recovery in 
chronic cervical spinal cord injury. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 
12193–12198 (2015).
	160.	 Harkema, S. J. Plasticity of interneuronal networks of the functionally 
isolated human spinal cord. Brain Res. Rev. 57, 255–264 (2008).
	161.	 Rejc, E., Angeli, C. A., Atkinson, D. & Harkema, S. J. Motor recovery after 
activity-based training with spinal cord epidural stimulation in a chronic 
motor complete paraplegic. Sci. Rep. 7, 13476 (2017).
	162.	 Gómez-Pinilla, F., Ying, Z., Roy, R. R., Hodgson, J. & Edgerton, V. R. 
Afferent input modulates neurotrophins and synaptic plasticity in the spinal 
cord. J. Neurophysiol. 92, 3423–3432 (2004).
	163.	 Baraban, M., Koudelka, S. & Lyons, D. A. Ca2+ activity signatures of myelin 
sheath formation and growth in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 19–23 (2018).
	164.	 López-Álvarez, V. M., Modol, L., Navarro, X. & Cobianchi, S. Early 
increasing-intensity treadmill exercise reduces neuropathic pain by 
preventing nociceptor collateral sprouting and disruption of chloride 
cotransporters homeostasis after peripheral nerve injury. Pain 156, 
1812–1825 (2015).
	165.	 Donati, A. R. et al. Long-term training with a brain-machine interface-
based gait protocol induces partial neurological recovery in paraplegic 
patients. Sci. Rep. 6, 30383 (2016).
	166.	 Gorgey, A. S. Robotic exoskeletons: the current pros and cons. World J. 
Orthop. 9, 112–119 (2018).
	167.	 Maier, I. C. et al. Differential effects of anti-Nogo-A antibody treatment and 
treadmill training in rats with incomplete spinal cord injury. Brain 132, 
1426–1440 (2009).
	168.	 Fouad, K., Bennett, D. J., Vavrek, R. & Blesch, A. Long-term viral 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor delivery promotes spasticity in rats with a 
cervical spinal cord hemisection. Front. Neurol. 4, 187 (2013).
	169.	 Chen, K. et al. Sequential therapy of anti-Nogo-A antibody treatment and 
treadmill training leads to cumulative improvements after spinal cord injury 
in rats. Exp. Neurol. 292, 135–144 (2017).
	170.	 Overman, J. J. & Carmichael, S. T. Plasticity in the injured brain: more than 
molecules matter. Neuroscientist 20, 15–28 (2014).
	171.	 Arber, S. & Costa, R. M. Connecting neuronal circuits for movement. 
Science 360, 1403–1404 (2018).
	172.	 Rossignol, S., Dubuc, R. & Gossard, J. P. Dynamic sensorimotor interactions 
in locomotion. Physiol. Rev. 86, 89–154 (2006).
	173.	 Dominici, N. et al. Versatile robotic interface to evaluate, enable and train 
locomotion and balance after neuromotor disorders. Nat. Med. 18, 
1142–1147 (2012).
	174.	 World Health Organisation (WHO). International perspectives on  
spinal cord injury http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/94190/ 
9789241564663_eng.pdf (2013).
Acknowledgements
The authors kindly thank J. B. Mignardot for drafting the figures. This work was 
supported by a Consolidator Grant from the European Research Council (ERC-2015-
CoG HOW2WALKAGAIN 682999 to G.G.), the Swiss National Science Foundation 
including a bonus of Excellence (310030B_166674) and the National Center of 
Competence in Research (NCCR) Robotics (to G.C.), the US National Institutes of 
Health R01NS084030 (to M.S.), the Dr Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Medical 
Foundation (to M.S.) and Wings for Life (to G.C. and M.S.).
Competing interests
G.C. holds various patents in relation to the reviewed work, and is a founder and 
shareholder of GTX medical, a company developing a therapy for spinal cord injury.
Additional information
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence should be addressed to G.C.
Peer review information: Hannah Stower was the primary editor(s) on this article 
and managed its editorial process and peer review in collaboration with the rest of the 
editorial team.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© Springer Nature America, Inc. 2019
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
908

===== Cox2019_Development_LimbRegeneration =====
SPOTLIGHT
Can laboratory model systems instruct human limb regeneration?
Ben D. Cox1, Maximina H. Yun2,3,* and Kenneth D. Poss1,*
ABSTRACT
Regeneration has fascinated scientists since well before the 20th
century revolutions in genetics and molecular biology. The field of
regenerative biology has grown steadily over the past decade,
incorporating advances in imaging, genomics and genome editing to
identify key cell types and molecules involved across many model
organisms. Yet for many or most tissues, it can be difficult to predict
when and how findings from these studies will advance regenerative
medicine. Establishing technologies to stimulate regrowth of a lost or
amputated limb with a patterned replicate, as salamanders do
routinely, is one of the most challenging directives of tissue
regeneration research. Here, we speculate upon what research
avenues the field must explore to move closer to this capstone
achievement.
Limb regeneration starts with a blastema
Traditional laboratory model systems and atypical models alike
have informed key concepts and mechanisms of limb regeneration.
Human limb regeneration remains a dream of medical science,
but it is a pressing and growing need – it has been estimated that
1.6 million people in the USA alone are living with limb loss, with
the potential of that number to more than double by the mid-century
point (Ziegler-Graham et al., 2008). In considering the possibility of
human limb regeneration, we choose to focus our speculative piece
on vertebrate models that have regeneration-competent major
appendages (e.g. limbs, fins), as well as vertebrates with scant
regenerative capacity resembling that of humans. The former can be
interrogated for information on the molecular underpinnings of
successful innate events, while the latter represent a canvas upon
which manipulations, often informed by studies of the former, can
push the limits of regenerative capacity and open doors to medical
applications. We will primarily consider regeneration of hindlimbs,
forelimbs and their equivalents. A striking example of mammalian
appendage regeneration, deer antler renewal, does not restore a
replicate of the original appendage and responds to hormone levels
rather than to injury, and is reviewed elsewhere (Kierdorf et al.,
2007). Regeneration of internal tissues such as liver and intestinal
lining, and attempts to augment regeneration in poorly regenerative
tissues other than limbs, have been well summarized in other
reviews (Iismaa et al., 2018; Tzahor and Poss, 2017).
Teleost fish like zebrafish and urodele salamanders such as
newts and axolotls (Box 1) are capable of complete regeneration after
fin or limb amputation. Vertebrate appendages are complex structures
composed of interdependent tissues. Thus, faithful regeneration
involves not only replenishing the mass of large structures such as
bone and skin, but also precise vascularization and innervation to
achieve proper metabolism and function. Adult Xenopus limb
amputation partially
restores
limb
mass in the
form of a
cartilaginous spike, but fails to reconstitute morphology and
function (Dent, 1962). These failures elevate the virtues of models
like teleosts and newts, the impressive regenerative capabilities of
which depend on a structure called a blastema: a transient mass of
proliferative cells that forms at the site of injury and provides the
source material for eventual regeneration of lost structures. The
blastema has been referred to as the link between healing, a universal
response to damage, and morphogenesis of a new appendage, which
is the exclusive domain of a subset of species with elevated
regenerative abilities (Seifert and Muneoka, 2018).
A wound epidermis forms after injury and acts as a signaling
hub for blastema formation; without these signals, mesenchymal
cells at the injury site fail to assemble the blastema (Tassava and
Garling, 1979; Thornton, 1957). The structure and composition of
the wound epidermis are particularly important for successful
regeneration, as apico-basal polarization of wound epidermal cells
is essential for proper expression and delivery of regenerative
signaling factors (Chablais and Jazwinska, 2010; Chen et al., 2015;
Shibata et al., 2016; Stoick-Cooper et al., 2007). Molecules
distinguishing an activated regeneration epidermis have been
identified through diverse experimental methods, including yeast
two-hybrid assay screens, forward genetic screens and candidate
gene approaches. These approaches have identified factors ranging
from signaling pathway members such as Fgf20a to extracellular
matrix components and regulators such as laminin β1a and newt
anterior gradient protein (Chen et al., 2015; Kumar et al., 2007;
Shibata et al., 2016; Whitehead et al., 2005). Yet we are far from
fully comprehending the breadth, dynamics and relative importance
of regeneration factors. Moving forward, recent technologies
such as single cell transcriptome sequencing will help refine the
genetic makeup of the wound epidermis and elaborate its crucial
role as a structural and signaling center for the blastema (Aztekin
et al., 2019).
Advocating developmental biology
This article is part of Development’s Advocacy collection – a series of
review
articles
that
make
compelling
arguments
for
the
field’s
importance. The series is split into two: one set of articles addresses
the question ‘What has developmental biology ever done for us?’ We
want to illustrate how discoveries in developmental biology have had a
wider scientific and societal impact, and thus both celebrate our field’s
history and argue for its continuing place as a core biological discipline. In
a complementary set of articles, we asked authors to explore ‘What are
the big open questions in the field?’ Together, the articles will provide a
collection of case studies that look back on the field’s achievements and
forwards to its potential, a resource for students, educators, advocates
and researchers alike. To see the full collection as it grows, go to: https://
dev.biologists.org/content/advocating-developmental-biology.
1Regeneration Next, Department of Cell Biology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA. 2Technische Universitä t Dresden, CRTD/
Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Dresden 01307, Germany. 3Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden 01307, Germany.
*Authors for correspondence (maximina.yun@tu-dresden.de;
kenneth.poss@duke.edu)
M.H.Y., 0000-0001-9019-2453
1
© 2019. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2019) 146, dev181016. doi:10.1242/dev.181016
DEVELOPMENT

Understanding the origins and fates of blastemal progenitor cells is
a key step toward achieving limb regeneration. No vertebrate has yet
been shown to engage a true pluripotent stem cell during regeneration;
rather, fate-mapping experiments indicate that appendage blastemas
are composed of restricted progenitor cell populations, each
responsible for one or a small number of cell types (Ando et al.,
2017; Fei et al., 2017; Gerberet al., 2018; Kragl et al., 2009; Lehoczky
et al., 2011; Rinkevich et al., 2011; Shibata et al., 2018; Tu and
Johnson, 2011). Notably, recent studies also indicate that when one
progenitor population is experimentally eliminated, other progenitors
can be recruited or repurposed as an ancillary source. For example,
bone-forming osteoblasts normally dedifferentiate – that is, reduce
their characteristic functional properties – and divide to contribute new
osteoblasts in zebrafish fins, but if osteoblasts are ablated, joint-
associated progenitors ramp up osteoblast production (Ando et al.,
2017; Singh et al., 2012). Like osteoblasts, cardiomyocytes of
zebrafish can and do re-enter the cell cycle to serve as progenitors
(Knopf et al., 2011; Singh et al., 2012; Sousa et al., 2011). This
strategy is also found among salamanders: satellite cells serve as
progenitors in axolotl blastemas, whereas myofibers dedifferentiate
and fragment in adult newt limb stumps to facilitate muscle
regeneration (Sandoval-Guzmán et al., 2014; Tanaka et al., 2016).
In summary, appendage regeneration does not employ a pluripotent
stem cell, but system plasticity can enable multiple origins for mature
tissues – a concept relevant to human limb regeneration.
Understanding how individual blastema cells behave in concert to
create population-level morphogenetic changes is a technically
challenging obligation of the field. Recent studies have improved the
spatiotemporal resolution of regeneration by combining longitudinal
imaging platforms with techniques to permanently label cells,
before or during blastema formation. For example, genetic cell
labeling has been used to detail the recruitment of connective tissue
cells to form the blastema, as well as the extent to which these cells
build different proximodistal skeletal elements (Currie et al., 2016).
Real-time live imaging is being extended to follow differentiated
cell populations and catalog cell shape changes, proliferation
dynamics and cell death rates. Improvements in platforms that
maintain animal health and stability for long periods during
imaging, as well as longitudinal studies using permanent lineage
tracing, have enabled capture of novel biology during appendage
regeneration in fish and axolotls (Cox et al., 2018; Currie et al.,
2016; Tornini et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2015). Community initiatives
will be key to efficiently generate knock-in fluorescent fusion
proteins, thereby allowing visualization of endogenous activity of
molecular regulators. Mapping spatiotemporal changes in cell
behavior in tandem with assessment of dynamic gene expression
can illuminate the blueprints for appendage regeneration.
Induction of a mammalian limb blastema is a major challenge to
consider at present, requiring methods to activate latent progenitor
populations (if they exist) to stimulate dedifferentiation of cells in
spared tissue to increase proliferative capacity or modify fate, and/or
to deliver exogenous progenitor cells that will colonize the limb
stump and form a functional structure. There is evidence that
transplantation of embryonic limb cells enhances regeneration from
adult Xenopus laevis limb stumps; thus, it is conceivable that
transplantation of induced pluripotent stem cell-derived limb
progenitors could facilitate limb regeneration (Lin et al., 2013).
Alternatively, one can envisage clinical regeneration initiated
by removing skin from the limb stump and targeting delivery of
factors unique to a functional regeneration epidermis (Dawson et al.,
2017; Seyedhassantehrani et al., 2017). Blastema formation could
be motivated in turn by delivery of additional factors that might
induce dedifferentiation and proliferation in the remaining tissue,
and/or by transplantation of the proper distribution of patient-
derived cells representing the precursors of all necessary cell types
(Fig. 1). Given that it is possible for a blastema to form in certain
mammalian contexts like mouse digit tips (discussed in the
following section), the prospect of inducing blastema formation in
other weakly or non-regenerative mammalian tissues seems not so
far-fetched.
Instructing regeneration with pro-regenerative factors
Salamander blastemas contain all of the positional information
necessary to pattern new limbs; i.e. a shoulder blastema transplanted
to a limb will generate a full limb, and a transplanted wrist blastema
will form distal components (Maden, 1980; Pescitelli and Stocum,
1980; Roensch et al., 2013). It is possible that a perfected
therapeutic blastema will self-pattern, although it seems more
likely that this striking feature would have to be replicated through
additional
manipulations.
For
example,
salamander
limb
regeneration depends on re-innervation of axons severed during
amputation; without nerves, the stump generates a blastema with
reduced proliferation and differentiation capacities (Mescher and
Tassava, 1975; Singer and Craven, 1948). Molecular genetic
experiments have identified molecular factors accounting for the
nerve dependence of regeneration in salamanders and Xenopus;
hyperinnervation has been shown to have small positive effects on
regeneration in adult Xenopus (Kumar et al., 2007; Zhang et al.,
2018). Additionally, an ectopic blastema – and eventual limb – can
be induced to sprout from an unamputated limb by creating a
small skin wound, deviating a nerve to the site and applying a
skin graft to provide positional information (Endo et al., 2004;
Seyedhassantehrani et al., 2017). This accessory limb model has
been used to model how factors encode positional information or
substitute for innervation (Makanae et al., 2014; Nacu et al., 2016;
Vieira et al., 2019). It has also highlighted the role of extracellular
factors such as heparan sulfate in patterning (Phan et al., 2015).
These discoveries offer proof of concept for the hypothesis that the
environment necessary for regeneration can be recreated by
manipulation of sources of signaling molecules.
Many classic developmental signaling pathways are known to play
roles in patterning regenerating appendages (Currie et al., 2016;
Dawson et al., 2017; Grotek et al., 2013; Kujawski et al., 2014;
Whitehead et al., 2005). Broad similarities between ontogenetic and
regenerative development led to the initial compilation of molecular
factors that influence regeneration. The more recent generation of
experiments has incorporated unbiased surveys of regenerating adult
tissues or proxies for these tissues. Lineage tracing and single cell
sequencing studies have highlighted that it is an oversimplification to
assume that adult tissue regeneration merely recapitulates a genetic
program of earlier development (Gerber et al., 2018; Tsai et al.,
2019). These surveys have broadened the scope of factor discovery,
e.g. implicating melanocortin 4 receptor (Mc4r) signaling, which is
classically studied in energy metabolism, as a factor that can augment
limb regeneration in Xenopus during stages in which it is typically
defective (Zhang et al., 2018). Transcriptomic analysis of entire
tissues and single cells has been employed in appendage regeneration
in a variety of species to reveal candidates based on gene expression
dynamics (Leigh et al., 2018; Nachtrab et al., 2013). Libraries of
transcripts can in many cases be functionally assayed in cell culture;
e.g. successive subfractionation of pooled cDNAs capable of
inducing cell cycle entry in cultured salamander cells recently
identified MARCKS-like protein as a factor with in vivo mitogenic
properties in limb tissues (Sugiura et al., 2016).
2
SPOTLIGHT
Development (2019) 146, dev181016. doi:10.1242/dev.181016
DEVELOPMENT

Contrasting the effects of factors on poorly versus effectively
regenerating tissues or species can yield insights into how genetic
responses to injury may differ among vertebrates. For example, cell
culture experiments have demonstrated that regeneration-competent
myotubes from newts increase ERK signaling and re-enter the cell
cycle upon serum stimulation, whereas mouse myotubes are unable
to sustain ERK signaling or cell cycle entry, even when harboring
mutations that constitutively activate the ERK pathway (Yun et al.,
2014). These contrasting responses imply that there is complex
genetic and epigenetic regulation of regeneration genes, which we
discuss in the next section; as a result, individual molecules may be
potent, but not sufficient to induce complete regeneration. Relief of
cell cycle inhibition is also closely tied to regeneration competence:
p53 activity is dampened in the salamander blastema (Yun et al.,
2013). Likewise, the mouse Acomys cahirinus is able to regenerate
hole punches in ear tissue, and cell cycle re-entry correlates with a
lack of nuclear localization of the cell cycle inhibitors p21 and p27
in the ear hole blastema. By contrast, common mice (Mus musculus)
maintain each of these inhibitors in muscle nuclei, and studies in
cultured mouse myoblasts have found that knockdown of cell cycle
regulators can modulate proliferation and indicators of regenerative
capacity (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Pajcini et al., 2010; Wang et al.,
2015). Thus, it is not just the presence and activity of pro-
regenerative factors that determine regenerative competence, but
also the attenuation of inhibitory factors. Correspondingly, a
balance of triggers and breaks, produced by drug or gene therapy
cocktails, is likely to be needed for consideration of human limb
regeneration therapies.
The capacity of mouse limb structures to regenerate upon
amputation is limited to the digits, specifically the distal half of the
third phalangeal element (P3), which consists of bone surrounded
by connective tissue and a nail (Seifert and Muneoka, 2018).
Human fingertips also have some regenerative capacity, especially
in children, so the mouse digit tip model could aid in identifying
methods for augmenting limited human regeneration (Dolan et al.,
2018; Illingworth, 1974). Immediately anterior to P3 in the mouse is
the second phalangeal element (P2), which does not regenerate but
instead truncates bone and heals skin upon amputation. Treatment
with bone morphogenetic protein (Bmp) family members has been
shown to induce regeneration of the P2 bone to its original length
after amputation, but the regenerated region lacked hair follicles and
articular cartilage, and did not initiate regeneration of the distal P3
segment (Dawson et al., 2017). Furthermore, P2 digits that were
amputated and failed to regenerate could be induced to undergo
modest regeneration by re-amputation and Bmp pathway activation.
Similarly, while Acomys species are able to regenerate small full-
thickness skin wounds, including hair follicles, common mice
normally fail to regenerate hair follicles after this injury but can be
induced to do so by Hedgehog signaling activation (Seifert et al.,
2012). Thus, a limited number of molecules can potentially
initiate
an
otherwise
failed
regenerative
response,
and
the
regeneration window can be reopened through a second injury
and properly timed application of regeneration factors. The latter is
an important practical consideration, as it might not be feasible to
perform a clinical limb regeneration procedure immediately upon
injury.
Animal models 
New factors  
Chemical/genetic screens  
RNA/proteome profiling 
Cell behaviors 
Live imaging
Lineage tracing 
Gene regulation 
Chromatin profiling 
Transcriptional programs  
Application 
Specialize the wound epidermis 
Instruct blastema formation 
Deliver patterning signals 
Modulate the immune system  
Induction of
progenitor cells
from patient tissue
Delivery of factors
using biomaterials
(e.g. hydrogels)
Precise control of proliferation and patterning
using viral vectors to deliver or enhance machinery
Discovery
Fig. 1. From highly regenerative model systems to regenerative therapies. A possible pipeline for how discovery in lab model systems can influence
applications for regenerative therapies of complex structures like limbs.
3
SPOTLIGHT
Development (2019) 146, dev181016. doi:10.1242/dev.181016
DEVELOPMENT

Recent innovative approaches combining molecular factors
with bioengineering methodology have improved Xenopus limb
regeneration beyond a cartilaginous spike. Slack and colleagues
regenerated a forelimb containing multiple digits with partial
mineralization by application of a fibrin patch containing larval limb
progenitor cells and supplemented with additional growth factors
(Lin et al., 2013). Levin and colleagues developed a wearable
bioreactor that delivered progesterone in the 24 h after amputation:
this induced regeneration of an appendage that lacked bone
and digits but was thicker, contained more nerve bundles and
vasculature than controls, and had an improved range of motion
(Herrera-Rincon et al., 2018). Other engineering methods of drug
and factor delivery, including the use of hydrogels, present
interesting possibilities, as their protean composition could allow
the creation of microenvironments for multiple cell types, thereby
reproducing the different conditions amenable to formation of
cartilage, bone and other tissue types over the course of regeneration
(Moreira Teixeira et al., 2014). Hydrogels made from either
naturally occurring molecules or synthetic polymers engineered
for breakdown by naturally occurring enzymes could possibly be
supplemented with regeneration-promoting factors and seeded with
cells to mimic a regeneration blastema (Fig. 1). Furthermore, the
immune system is a target of many current studies in tissue
regeneration research, and it has become clear that there is important
interplay between cells like macrophages and regulatory T cells with
the regeneration machinery, ostensibly via both phagocytitic and
paracrine mechanisms (Godwin et al., 2013; Hui et al., 2017;
Mescher, 2017; Simkin et al., 2017). Immunomodulatory and
immunoengineering approaches are thus of significant interest for
the field of appendage regeneration, as they are for other fields.
Engineering and manipulation of pro-regenerative factors have
been shown to significantly stimulate regeneration in multiple
contexts, and CRISPR/Cas9 will likely accelerate the discovery of
new pro-regenerative factors. However, the appendages regenerated
in these studies typically fall short of the originals in form and
function. Although a perfect replicate of a lost limb is the gold
standard for regenerative therapy, this will not be achieved in the
earliest cases of clinical limb regeneration. Thus, as an aside, there
are likely to be many years during which patients balance the
tradeoffs of mini-limbs or missing digits with prosthetics, or during
which hybrid alternatives may be favored.
Regeneration is an epigenomic phenomenon
A two-step formula for creating a blastema and instructing its pattern
underestimates the complexity of the epigenetic landscape for
regeneration. The central questions might be: is the regenerative
capacity of a tissue like the limb hard-wired, and have hundreds
of millions of years of evolution permanently turned off or removed
the machinery in mammals? Or, is the machinery there to be
awakened? Recent work indicates that regeneration contexts are
associated with large-scale changes in the expression of broad
regulators of DNA and histone methylation, as well as histone
acetylation (Hirose et al., 2013; Pfefferli et al., 2014; Takayama
et al., 2014). These chromatin-level changes are the cause and/or
consequence of changes in the expression levels of many hundreds
of genes that have been cataloged in various models of appendage
regeneration (Bryant et al., 2017; Johnston et al., 2016; Leigh et al.,
2018; Rabinowitz et al., 2017). Disrupting the expression dynamics
of individual or combinations of genes to find a cocktail capable of
inducing
regeneration
would
be
a
gargantuan
undertaking.
Alternatively, hacking into the epigenetic regulation to reboot the
choreography of gene expression and interactions might represent
an efficient shortcut to regeneration, with a large potential payout.
Epigenetic profiling has led to discovery of short DNA elements
capable of regulating one or more genes in response to injury and/or
regeneration. Studies in amputated zebrafish fins and hearts, fractured
mouse bones, and injured Drosophila wing discs have identified
sequences that preferentially direct gene expression upon injury and
during regeneration, in some cases maintaining activated expression
until regeneration is completed (Goldman et al., 2017; Guentheret al.,
2015; Harris et al., 2016; Kang et al., 2016). Interestingly, a DNA
region near the Drosophila wingless (wg) gene contains a silencing
element that increases methylation with development and decreases
induction of wg/wnt, supporting a hypothesis that regenerative
capacity can be controlled through changes at gene regulatory
regions (Harris et al., 2016). Developmental stage-related changes in
regeneration competence have been linked to changes in epigenetic
regulation of signaling factors in other contexts, such as Shh signaling
in Xenopus limb regeneration (Yakushiji et al., 2007). Discovering
how these elements are regulated by injury, and how their regulation
changes upon recoveryof regenerated structures, can ultimately reveal
master upstream control mechanisms for tissue regeneration events.
For example, a recent study of the acoel worm Hofstenia miamia
identified regeneration-responsive chromatin regionsthat are enriched
with binding sites for the early growth response (Egr) gene,
Box 1. The salamander limb: the right model at the right
time – a personal case study by Maximina Yun
While finishing my graduate studies at Cambridge University, I was
invited to teach undergraduates in cell and developmental biology. This
somewhat serendipitous turn took me on a journey of discoveries in the
field of regeneration, and exposed me for the first time to salamanders,
the vertebrates evolutionarily closest to us that are able to regenerate full
limbs as adults. Ever since then I have shared with many of my scientific
muses, from Thomas H. Morgan to Victor C. Twitty, a fascination for this
animal and the will to uncover the molecular and cellular basis of
regeneration. The latter became my primary scientific aim, driving my
subsequent studies and career moves – something that, at the time,
some considered a commendable yet daunting prospect. As it was
bluntly put to me by a well-respected scientist during my first interview for
a group leader position, ‘salamanders have been used in regeneration
studies for many decades; however, significant translational progress
based on this model is yet to be seen’.
Perhaps he was right then, given the ingeniously crafted yet limited
tools available in the system. But a mere 5 years later, and the tide has
turned. Transgenic techniques have become established, allowing
crucial functional studies; advanced imaging approaches are being
used for in vivo analysis of progenitor behaviors; and the giant genomes
for two experimental salamander models, the axolotl and the Spanish
ribbed newt, have recently become available, with all the wealth of
experimental and theoretical approaches this implies (Elewa et al., 2017;
Nowoshilow et al., 2018). Thus, the salamanders are finally catching up
with more conventional research models such as zebrafish. And while
they do so, they bring a great deal of interesting biology – besides
regeneration – to the table.
And now, every day I spend in my lab I marvel at how these techniques
are
revolutionizing
salamander
studies
and
speeding
up
our
understanding of the choreography of molecular and cellular events
that result in the regeneration of a complex structure such as a limb. In
particular, they are enabling our investigations into important issues such
as the nature of the mechanisms controlling cellular plasticity in
regeneration, the role of the immune-senescent cell interplay in this
process and the basis for interspecies differences in regenerative
capacity (Czarkwiani and Yun, 2018; Yun et al., 2015). Thus, I believe we
are at an inflexion point in regeneration research, as technical advances
have finally emerged to allow us to unlock the mysteries of the extreme
regenerative abilities found in these captivating animals.
4
SPOTLIGHT
Development (2019) 146, dev181016. doi:10.1242/dev.181016
DEVELOPMENT

implicating Egr as a pioneer factor that regulates gene expression
during head or tail regeneration (Gehrke et al., 2019). Advances in
genome assembly have paralleled epigenetic profiling and have
highlighted features in the genomes of regenerative amphibians
that may account for their enhanced capacity, e.g. expansion of
transposable elements and genes encoding microRNAs (Elewa et al.,
2017; Nowoshilow et al., 2018). These findings emphasize the
importance of non-coding elements, some of them likely to be unique
to highly regenerative animals, in the orchestration of large-scale
changes in gene expression during regeneration.
Understanding the epigenetic control of regeneration may also
reveal applications that reduce off-target effects of gene delivery
mechanisms to induce regeneration. Gene therapy using non-
integrating, non-replicative vectors like adeno-associated viruses
has received recent attention as a means to deliver wild-type gene
productsinmodels oractual cases of human geneticdisease(Amoasii
et al., 2018; Mendell et al., 2017). This is effective in particular
when the system can tolerate variable doses and tissue location
of the therapeutic factor. Gene therapy for a broad application
like regeneration is conceivable, although in this case potent
developmental factors would be employed to reprogram tissue to a
regenerative state. A major concern is therefore restricting the
intended effect to the desired tissue for the appropriate length of time.
This issue also exists when considering the idea of drugging limb
regeneration: it is hard to imagine how one could target regenerative
growth and avoid large-scale havoc wreaked by systemic application
of potent developmentally interventional compounds.
Regulatory regions that activate exclusively during regeneration
suggest methods to resolve this issue. For example, the activity of an
enhancer linked to the zebrafish leptin b gene tracks closely with
regeneration, with little or no transcriptional activation during
animal development or in uninjured adult tissue, but sustained
activation of gene expression in regenerating hearts or fins (Kang
et al., 2016). This genetic element was used in proof of principle
experiments to boost growth factor expression and local tissue
regeneration in zebrafish. Conceivably, injury- and regeneration-
specific enhancers could be used in adeno-associated viruses to
target expression of therapeutic factors to the correct tissues and
contexts when attempting to induce regeneration (Fig. 1).
Concluding remarks
Regenerating a human limb is a monumental challenge. The path to
this endpoint will be dogged, and success may lie several decades
away or more. Discovery science in the field of appendage
regeneration has merged classic experimental methods like tissue
grafting and genetic screens with modern technologies that
deconstruct
regeneration
to
context-dependent
behaviors
of
individual cells, gene products and DNA regulatory sequences.
Holistic ideas are also revealing insights into how communication
between distant tissues can influence regeneration (Busse et al.,
2018; Kang et al., 2013; Rodgers et al., 2014). The new mechanistic
vantage points reached by contemporary studies, coupled with the
evolution of delivery methods with better-than-surgical precision,
will provide beacons for the journey ahead.
Acknowledgements
We thank Nutishia Lee for artwork.
Funding
B.D.C. was supported by a Graduate Research Fellowship (1106401) from
the National Science Foundation. M.H.Y. was supported by Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft funds (DFG FZ111, DFG EXC168). K.D.P. was supported
by a grant (R01 GM074057) from the National Institutes of Health.
References
Amoasii, L., Hildyard, J. C. W., Li, H., Sanchez-Ortiz, E., Mireault, A., Caballero,
D., Harron, R., Stathopoulou, T.-R., Massey, C., Shelton, J. M. et al. (2018).
Gene editing restores dystrophin expression in a canine model of Duchenne
muscular dystrophy. Science 362, 86-91. doi:10.1126/science.aau1549
Ando, K., Shibata, E., Hans, S., Brand, M. and Kawakami, A. (2017). Osteoblast
production by reserved progenitor cells in zebrafish bone regeneration and
maintenance. Dev. Cell 43, 643-650.e643. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2017.10.015
Aztekin, C., Hiscock, T. W., Marioni, J. C., Gurdon, J. B., Simons, B. D. and
Jullien, J. (2019). Identification of a regeneration-organizing cell in the Xenopus
tail. Science 364, 653-658. doi:10.1126/science.aav9996
Bryant, D. M., Sousounis, K., Payzin-Dogru, D., Bryant, S., Sandoval, A. G. W.,
Martinez Fernandez, J., Mariano, R., Oshiro, R., Wong, A. Y., Leigh, N. D. et al.
(2017). Identification of regenerative roadblocks via repeat deployment of limb
regeneration in axolotls. NPJ Regener. Med. 2, 30. doi:10.1038/s41536-017-
0034-z
Busse, S. M., McMillen, P. T. and Levin, M. (2018). Cross-limb communication
during Xenopus hindlimb regenerative response: non-local bioelectric injury
signals. Development 145, dev164210. doi:10.1242/dev.164210
Chablais, F. and Jazwinska, A. (2010). IGF signaling between blastema and
wound epidermis is required for fin regeneration. Development 137, 871-879.
doi:10.1242/dev.043885
Chen, C.-H., Merriman, A. F., Savage, J., Willer, J., Wahlig, T., Katsanis, N., Yin,
V. P. and Poss, K. D. (2015). Transient laminin beta 1a induction defines the
wound epidermis during zebrafish fin regeneration. PLoS Genet. 11, e1005437.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1005437
Cox, B. D., De Simone, A., Tornini, V. A., Singh, S. P., Di Talia, S. and Poss, K. D.
(2018). In toto imaging of dynamic osteoblast behaviors in regenerating skeletal
bone. Curr. Biol. 28, 3937-3947.e3934. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2018.10.052
Currie, J. D., Kawaguchi, A., Traspas, R. M., Schuez, M., Chara, O. and Tanaka,
E. M. (2016). Live imaging of axolotl digit regeneration reveals spatiotemporal
choreography of diverse connective tissue progenitor pools. Dev. Cell 39,
411-423. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2016.10.013
Czarkwiani, A. and Yun, M. H. (2018). Out with the old, in with the new: senescence
in development. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 55, 74-80. doi:10.1016/j.ceb.2018.05.014
Dawson, L. A., Yu, L., Yan, M., Marrero, L., Schanes, P. P., Dolan, C., Pela, M.,
Petersen, B., Han, M. and Muneoka, K. (2017). The periosteal requirement and
temporal dynamics of BMP2-induced middle phalanx regeneration in the adult
mouse. Regeneration 4, 140-150. doi:10.1002/reg2.81
Dent, J. N. (1962). Limb regeneration in larvae and metamorphosing individuals of
the South African clawed toad. J. Morphol. 110, 61-77. doi:10.1002/jmor.
1051100105
Dolan, C. P., Dawson, L. A. and Muneoka, K. (2018). Digit tip regeneration:
merging regeneration biology with regenerative medicine. Stem Cells Transl. Med.
7, 262-270. doi:10.1002/sctm.17-0236
Elewa, A., Wang, H., Talavera-López, C., Joven, A., Brito, G., Kumar, A.,
Hameed, L. S., Penrad-Mobayed, M., Yao, Z., Zamani, N. et al. (2017). Reading
and editing the Pleurodeles waltl genome reveals novel features of tetrapod
regeneration. Nat. Commun. 8, 2286. doi:10.1038/s41467-017-01964-9
Endo, T., Bryant, S. V. and Gardiner, D. M. (2004). A stepwise model system for
limb regeneration. Dev. Biol. 270, 135-145. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.02.016
Fei, J.-F., Schuez, M., Knapp, D., Taniguchi, Y., Drechsel, D. N. and Tanaka,
E. M. (2017). Efficient gene knockin in axolotl and its use to test the role of satellite
cells in limb regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, 12501-12506. doi:10.
1073/pnas.1706855114
Gawriluk, T. R., Simkin, J., Thompson, K. L., Biswas, S. K., Clare-Salzler, Z.,
Kimani, J. M., Kiama, S. G., Smith, J. J., Ezenwa, V. O. and Seifert, A. W.
(2016).
Comparative
analysis
of
ear-hole
closure
identifies
epimorphic
regeneration as a discrete trait in mammals. Nat. Commun. 7, 11164. doi:10.
1038/ncomms11164
Gehrke, A. R., Neverett, E., Luo, Y. J., Brandt, A., Ricci, L., Hulett, R. E.,
Gompers, A., Ruby, J. G., Rokhsar, D. S., Reddien, P. W. et al. (2019). Acoel
genome reveals the regulatory landscape of whole-body regeneration. Science
363, eaau6173. doi:10.1126/science.aau6173
Gerber, T., Murawala, P., Knapp, D., Masselink, W., Schuez, M., Hermann, S.,
Gac-Santel, M., Nowoshilow, S., Kageyama, J., Khattak, S. et al. (2018).
Single-cell analysis uncovers convergence of cell identities during axolotl limb
regeneration. Science 362, eaaq0681. doi:10.1126/science.aaq0681
Godwin, J. W., Pinto, A. R. and Rosenthal, N. A. (2013). Macrophages are
required for adult salamander limb regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110,
9415-9420. doi:10.1073/pnas.1300290110
Goldman, J. A., Kuzu, G., Lee, N., Karasik, J., Gemberling, M., Foglia, M. J.,
Karra, R., Dickson, A. L., Sun, F., Tolstorukov, M. Y. et al. (2017). Resolving
heart regeneration by replacement histone profiling. Dev. Cell 40, 392-404.e395.
doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2017.01.013
Grotek, B., Wehner, D. and Weidinger, G. (2013). Notch signaling coordinates
cellular proliferation with
differentiation during zebrafish fin regeneration.
Development 140, 1412-1423. doi:10.1242/dev.087452
Guenther, C. A., Wang, Z., Li, E., Tran, M. C., Logan, C. Y., Nusse, R., Pantalena-
Filho, L., Yang, G. P. and Kingsley, D. M. (2015). A distinct regulatory region of
5
SPOTLIGHT
Development (2019) 146, dev181016. doi:10.1242/dev.181016
DEVELOPMENT

the Bmp5 locus activates gene expression following adult bone fracture or soft
tissue injury. Bone 77, 31-41. doi:10.1016/j.bone.2015.04.010
Harris, R. E., Setiawan, L., Saul, J. and Hariharan, I. K. (2016). Localized
epigenetic silencing of a damage-activated WNT enhancer limits regeneration in
mature Drosophila imaginal discs. eLife 5, e11588. doi:10.7554/eLife.11588
Herrera-Rincon, C., Golding, A. S., Moran, K. M., Harrison, C., Martyniuk, C. J.,
Guay, J. A., Zaltsman, J., Carabello, H., Kaplan, D. L. and Levin, M. (2018).
Brief local application of progesterone via a wearable bioreactor induces long-term
regenerative
response
in
adult
Xenopus
hindlimb.
Cell
Rep.
25,
1593-1609.e1597. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.10.010
Hirose, K., Shimoda, N. and Kikuchi, Y. (2013). Transient reduction of 5-
methylcytosine and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine is associated with active DNA
demethylation during regeneration of zebrafish fin. Epigenetics 8, 899-906.
doi:10.4161/epi.25653
Hui, S. P., Sheng, D. Z., Sugimoto, K., Gonzalez-Rajal, A., Nakagawa, S.,
Hesselson, D. and Kikuchi, K. (2017). Zebrafish regulatory T cells mediate
organ-specific regenerative programs. Dev. Cell 43, 659-672.e655. doi:10.1016/j.
devcel.2017.11.010
Iismaa, S. E., Kaidonis, X., Nicks, A. M., Bogush, N., Kikuchi, K., Naqvi, N.,
Harvey, R. P., Husain, A. and Graham, R. M. (2018). Comparative regenerative
mechanisms across different mammalian tissues. NPJ Regener. Med. 3, 6.
doi:10.1038/s41536-018-0044-5
Illingworth, C. M. (1974). Trapped fingers and amputated finger tips in children.
J. Pediatr. Surg. 9, 853-858. doi:10.1016/S0022-3468(74)80220-4
Johnston, A. P. W., Yuzwa, S. A., Carr, M. J., Mahmud, N., Storer, M. A., Krause,
M. P., Jones, K., Paul, S., Kaplan, D. R. and Miller, F. D. (2016). Dedifferentiated
Schwann cell precursors secreting paracrine factors are required for regeneration
of the mammalian digit tip. Cell Stem Cell 19, 433-448. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2016.
06.002
Kang, J., Nachtrab, G. and Poss, K. D. (2013). Local Dkk1 crosstalk from breeding
ornaments impedes regeneration of injured male zebrafish fins. Dev. Cell 27,
19-31. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2013.08.015
Kang, J., Hu, J., Karra, R., Dickson, A. L., Tornini, V. A., Nachtrab, G.,
Gemberling, M., Goldman, J. A., Black, B. L. and Poss, K. D. (2016).
Modulation of tissue repair by regeneration enhancer elements. Nature 532,
201-206. doi:10.1038/nature17644
Kierdorf, U., Kierdorf, H. and Szuwart, T. (2007). Deer antler regeneration: cells,
concepts, and controversies. J. Morphol. 268, 726-738. doi:10.1002/jmor.10546
Knopf, F., Hammond, C., Chekuru, A., Kurth, T., Hans, S., Weber, C. W.,
Mahatma, G., Fisher, S., Brand, M., Schulte-Merker, S. et al. (2011). Bone
regenerates via dedifferentiation of osteoblasts in the zebrafish fin. Dev. Cell 20,
713-724. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2011.04.014
Kragl, M., Knapp, D., Nacu, E., Khattak, S., Maden, M., Epperlein, H. H. and
Tanaka, E. M. (2009). Cells keep a memory of their tissue origin during axolotl
limb regeneration. Nature 460, 60-65. doi:10.1038/nature08152
Kujawski, S., Lin, W., Kitte, F., Bö rmel, M., Fuchs, S., Arulmozhivarman, G.,
Vogt, S., Theil, D., Zhang, Y. and Antos, C. L. (2014). Calcineurin regulates
coordinated outgrowth of zebrafish regenerating fins. Dev. Cell 28, 573-587.
doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2014.01.019
Kumar, A., Godwin, J. W., Gates, P. B., Garza-Garcia, A. A. and Brockes, J. P.
(2007). Molecular basis for the nerve dependence of limb regeneration in an adult
vertebrate. Science 318, 772-777. doi:10.1126/science.1147710
Lehoczky, J. A., Robert, B. and Tabin, C. J. (2011). Mouse digit tip regeneration is
mediated by fate-restricted progenitor cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108,
20609-20614. doi:10.1073/pnas.1118017108
Leigh, N. D., Dunlap, G. S., Johnson, K., Mariano, R., Oshiro, R., Wong, A. Y.,
Bryant, D. M., Miller, B. M., Ratner, A., Chen, A. et al. (2018). Transcriptomic
landscape of the blastema niche in regenerating adult axolotl limbs at single-cell
resolution. Nat. Commun. 9, 5153. doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
Lin, G., Chen, Y. and Slack, J. M. W. (2013). Imparting regenerative capacity to
limbs by progenitor cell transplantation. Dev. Cell 24, 41-51. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.
2012.11.017
Maden, M. (1980). Intercalary regeneration in the amphibian limb and the rule of
distal transformation. J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol. 56, 201-209.
Makanae, A., Mitogawa, K. and Satoh, A. (2014). Co-operative Bmp- and Fgf-
signaling inputs convert skin wound healing to limb formation in urodele
amphibians. Dev. Biol. 396, 57-66. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.09.021
Mendell, J. R., Al-Zaidy, S., Shell, R., Arnold, W. D., Rodino-Klapac, L. R., Prior,
T. W., Lowes, L., Alfano, L., Berry, K., Church, K. et al. (2017). Single-dose
gene-replacement therapy for spinal muscular atrophy. N Engl. J. Med. 377,
1713-1722. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1706198
Mescher, A. L. (2017). Macrophages and fibroblasts during inflammation and tissue
repair in models of organ regeneration. Regeneration 4, 39-53. doi:10.1002/
reg2.77
Mescher, A. L. and Tassava, R. A. (1975). Denervation effects on DNA replication
and mitosis during the initiation of limb regeneration in adult newts. Dev. Biol. 44,
187-197. doi:10.1016/0012-1606(75)90386-3
Moreira Teixeira, L. S., Patterson, J. and Luyten, F. P. (2014). Skeletal tissue
regeneration: where can hydrogels play a role? Int. Orthop. 38, 1861-1876. doi:10.
1007/s00264-014-2402-2
Nachtrab, G., Kikuchi, K., Tornini, V. A. and Poss, K. D. (2013). Transcriptional
components of anteroposterior positional information during zebrafish fin
regeneration. Development 140, 3754-3764. doi:10.1242/dev.098798
Nacu, E., Gromberg, E., Oliveira, C. R., Drechsel, D. and Tanaka, E. M. (2016).
FGF8 and SHH substitute for anterior-posterior tissue interactions to induce limb
regeneration. Nature 533, 407-410. doi:10.1038/nature17972
Nowoshilow, S., Schloissnig, S., Fei, J.-F., Dahl, A., Pang, A. W. C., Pippel, M.,
Winkler, S., Hastie, A. R., Young, G., Roscito, J. G. et al. (2018). The axolotl
genome and the evolution of key tissue formation regulators. Nature 554, 50-55.
doi:10.1038/nature25458
Pajcini, K. V., Corbel, S. Y., Sage, J., Pomerantz, J. H. and Blau, H. M. (2010).
Transient inactivation of Rb and ARF yields regenerative cells from postmitotic
mammalian muscle. Cell Stem Cell 7, 198-213. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2010.05.022
Pescitelli, M. J., Jr. and Stocum, D. L. (1980). The origin of skeletal structures
during intercalary regeneration of larval Ambystoma limbs. Dev. Biol. 79, 255-275.
doi:10.1016/0012-1606(80)90115-3
Pfefferli, C., Mü ller, F., Jaźwińska, A. and Wicky, C. (2014). Specific NuRD
components are required for fin regeneration in zebrafish. BMC Biol. 12, 30.
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-12-30
Phan, A. Q., Lee, J., Oei, M., Flath, C., Hwe, C., Mariano, R., Vu, T., Shu, C., Dinh,
A., Simkin, J. et al. (2015). Positional information in axolotl and mouse limb
extracellular matrix is mediated via heparan sulfate and fibroblast growth factor
during limb regeneration in the axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum). Regeneration 2,
182-201. doi:10.1002/reg2.40
Rabinowitz, J. S., Robitaille, A. M., Wang, Y., Ray, C. A., Thummel, R., Gu, H.,
Djukovic, D., Raftery, D., Berndt, J. D. and Moon, R. T. (2017). Transcriptomic,
proteomic, and metabolomic landscape of positional memory in the caudal fin of
zebrafish. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, E717-E726. doi:10.1073/pnas.
1620755114
Rinkevich, Y., Lindau, P., Ueno, H., Longaker, M. T. and Weissman, I. L. (2011).
Germ-layer and lineage-restricted stem/progenitors regenerate the mouse digit
tip. Nature 476, 409-413. doi:10.1038/nature10346
Rodgers, J. T., King, K. Y., Brett, J. O., Cromie, M. J., Charville, G. W., Maguire,
K. K., Brunson, C., Mastey, N., Liu, L., Tsai, C.-R. et al. (2014). mTORC1
controls the adaptive transition of quiescent stem cells from G0 to G(Alert). Nature
510, 393-396. doi:10.1038/nature13255
Roensch, K., Tazaki, A., Chara, O. and Tanaka, E. M. (2013). Progressive
specification rather than intercalation of segments during limb regeneration.
Science 342, 1375-1379. doi:10.1126/science.1241796
Sandoval-Guzmán, T., Wang, H., Khattak, S., Schuez, M., Roensch, K., Nacu, E.,
Tazaki, A., Joven, A., Tanaka, E. M. and Simon, A. (2014). Fundamental
differences in dedifferentiation and stem cell recruitment during skeletal muscle
regeneration in two salamander species. Cell Stem Cell 14, 174-187. doi:10.1016/
j.stem.2013.11.007
Seifert, A. W. and Muneoka, K. (2018). The blastema and epimorphic regeneration
in mammals. Dev. Biol. 433, 190-199. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2017.08.007
Seifert, A. W., Kiama, S. G., Seifert, M. G., Goheen, J. R., Palmer, T. M. and
Maden, M. (2012). Skin shedding and tissue regeneration in African spiny mice
(Acomys). Nature 489, 561-565. doi:10.1038/nature11499
Seyedhassantehrani, N., Otsuka, T., Singh, S. and Gardiner, D. M. (2017). The
axolotl limb regeneration model as a discovery tool for engineering the stem cell
niche. Curr. Stem Cell Rep. 3, 156-163. doi:10.1007/s40778-017-0085-5
Shibata, E., Yokota, Y., Horita, N., Kudo, A., Abe, G., Kawakami, K. and
Kawakami, A. (2016). Fgf signalling controls diverse aspects of fin regeneration.
Development 143, 2920-2929. doi:10.1242/dev.140699
Shibata, E., Ando, K., Murase, E. and Kawakami, A. (2018). Heterogeneous fates
and dynamic rearrangement of regenerative epidermis-derived cells during
zebrafish fin regeneration. Development 145, dev162016. doi:10.1242/dev.
162016
Simkin, J., Gawriluk, T. R., Gensel, J. C. and Seifert, A. W. (2017). Macrophages
are necessary for epimorphic regeneration in African spiny mice. eLife 6, e24623.
doi:10.7554/eLife.24623
Singer, M. and Craven, L. (1948). The growth and morphogenesis of the
regenerating forelimb of adult Triturus following denervation at various stages of
development. J. Exp. Zool. 108, 279-308. doi:10.1002/jez.1401080207
Singh, S. P., Holdway, J. E. and Poss, K. D. (2012). Regeneration of amputated
zebrafish fin rays from de novo osteoblasts. Dev. Cell 22, 879-886. doi:10.1016/j.
devcel.2012.03.006
Sousa, S., Afonso, N., Bensimon-Brito, A., Fonseca, M., Simoes, M., Leon, J.,
Roehl, H., Cancela, M. L. and Jacinto, A. (2011). Differentiated skeletal cells
contribute to blastema formation during zebrafish fin regeneration. Development
138, 3897-3905. doi:10.1242/dev.064717
Stoick-Cooper, C. L., Weidinger, G., Riehle, K. J., Hubbert, C., Major, M. B.,
Fausto, N. and Moon, R. T. (2007). Distinct Wnt signaling pathways have
opposing roles in appendage regeneration. Development 134, 479-489. doi:10.
1242/dev.001123
Sugiura, T., Wang, H., Barsacchi, R., Simon, A. and Tanaka, E. M. (2016).
MARCKS-like protein is an initiating molecule in axolotl appendage regeneration.
Nature 531, 237-240. doi:10.1038/nature16974
6
SPOTLIGHT
Development (2019) 146, dev181016. doi:10.1242/dev.181016
DEVELOPMENT

Takayama, K., Shimoda, N., Takanaga, S., Hozumi, S. and Kikuchi, Y. (2014).
Expression patterns of dnmt3aa, dnmt3ab, and dnmt4 during development and fin
regeneration in zebrafish. Gene Expr. Patterns 14, 105-110. doi:10.1016/j.gep.
2014.01.005
Tanaka, H. V., Ng, N. C. Y., Yang Yu, Z., Casco-Robles, M. M., Maruo, F., Tsonis,
P. A. and Chiba, C. (2016). A developmentally regulated switch from stem cells to
dedifferentiation for limb muscle regeneration in newts. Nat. Commun. 7, 11069.
doi:10.1038/ncomms11069
Tassava, R. A. and Garling, D. J. (1979). Regenerative responses in larval axolotl
limbs with skin grafts over the amputation surface. J. Exp. Zool. 208, 97-110.
doi:10.1002/jez.1402080111
Thornton, C. S. (1957). The effect of apical cap removal on limb regeneration in
Amblystoma larvae. J. Exp. Zool. 134, 357-381. doi:10.1002/jez.1401340209
Tornini, V. A., Puliafito, A., Slota, L. A., Thompson, J. D., Nachtrab, G., Kaushik,
A.-L., Kapsimali, M., Primo, L., Di Talia, S. and Poss, K. D. (2016). Live
monitoring of blastemal cell contributions during appendage regeneration. Curr.
Biol. 26, 2981-2991. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.08.072
Tsai, S. L., Baselga-Garriga, C. and Melton, D. A. (2019). Blastemal progenitors
modulate immune signaling during early limb regeneration. Development 146,
dev169128. doi:10.1242/dev.169128
Tu, S. and Johnson, S. L. (2011). Fate restriction in the growing and regenerating
zebrafish fin. Dev. Cell 20, 725-732. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2011.04.013
Tzahor, E. and Poss, K. D. (2017). Cardiac regeneration strategies: staying young
at heart. Science 356, 1035-1039. doi:10.1126/science.aam5894
Vieira, W. A., Wells, K. M., Raymond, M. J., De Souza, L., Garcia, E. and
McCusker, C. D. (2019). FGF, BMP, and RA signaling are sufficient for the
induction of complete limb regeneration from non-regenerating wounds on
Ambystoma mexicanum limbs. Dev. Biol. 451, 146-157. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.
2019.04.008
Wang, H., Lö ö f, S., Borg, P., Nader, G. A., Blau, H. M. and Simon, A. (2015).
Turning
terminally
differentiated
skeletal
muscle
cells
into
regenerative
progenitors. Nat. Commun. 6, 7916. doi:10.1038/ncomms8916
Whitehead, G. G., Makino, S., Lien, C. L. and Keating, M. T. (2005). fgf20 is
essential for initiating zebrafish fin regeneration. Science 310, 1957-1960. doi:10.
1126/science.1117637
Xu, C., Volkery, S. and Siekmann, A. F. (2015). Intubation-based anesthesia for
long-term time-lapse imaging of adult zebrafish. Nat. Protoc. 10, 2064-2073.
doi:10.1038/nprot.2015.130
Yakushiji, N., Suzuki, M., Satoh, A., Sagai, T., Shiroishi, T., Kobayashi, H.,
Sasaki, H., Ide, H. and Tamura, K. (2007). Correlation between Shh expression
and DNA methylation status of the limb-specific Shh enhancer region during limb
regeneration in amphibians. Dev. Biol. 312, 171-182. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.
09.022
Yun, M. H., Gates, P. B. and Brockes, J. P. (2013). Regulation of p53 is critical for
vertebrate limb regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 17392-17397.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1310519110
Yun, M. H., Gates, P. B. and Brockes, J. P. (2014). Sustained ERK activation
underlies reprogramming in regeneration-competent salamander cells and
distinguishes them from their mammalian counterparts. Stem Cell Rep. 3,
15-23. doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.05.009
Yun, M. H., Davaapil, H. and Brockes, J. P. (2015). Recurrent turnover of
senescent cells during regeneration of a complex structure. eLife 4, e05505.
doi:10.7554/eLife.05505
Zhang, M., Chen, Y., Xu, H., Yang, L., Yuan, F., Li, L., Xu, Y., Chen, Y., Zhang, C.
and Lin, G. (2018). Melanocortin receptor 4 signaling regulates vertebrate limb
regeneration. Dev. Cell 46, 397-409.e395. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2018.07.021
Ziegler-Graham, K., MacKenzie, E. J., Ephraim, P. L., Travison, T. G. and
Brookmeyer, R. (2008). Estimating the prevalence of limb loss in the United
States: 2005 to 2050. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 89, 422-429. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.
2007.11.005
7
SPOTLIGHT
Development (2019) 146, dev181016. doi:10.1242/dev.181016
DEVELOPMENT

===== Cui2011_JMolNeurosci_FoxJ1+BrainInjury =====
Increased Expression of Foxj1 after Traumatic Brain Injury
Gang Cui & Zhihua Yu & Zhen Li & Wei Wang & Ting Lu &
Chunhui Qian & Jiliang Li & Yunlin Ding
Received: 25 January 2011 /Accepted: 10 February 2011 /Published online: 24 February 2011
# The Author(s) 2011. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract Foxj1 is a member of the Forkhead/winged-helix
(Fox) family of transcription factors, which is required for
postnatal differentiation of ependymal cells and a subset of
astrocytes in the subventricular zone. The subpopulation of
astrocytes has the ability of self-renew and neurogenic
potential differentiated into astrocytes, oligodendrocytes,
and neurons. However, its expression and function in the
central nervous system lesion are not well understood. In
this study, we performed a traumatic brain injury (TBI)
model in adult rats and investigated the changed expression
of Foxj1 in the brain cortex. Western blot and immunohis-
tochemistry analysis showed that the expression of Foxj1
gradually increased, reached a peak at day 3 after TBI, and
declined during the following days. Double immunofluo-
rescence staining revealed that Foxj1 was co-expressed
with MAP-2 and GFAP. In addition, we detected that Ki67
had the co-localization with NeuN, GFAP, and Foxj1. All
our findings suggested that Foxj1 may be involved in the
pathophysiology of brain after TBI.
Keywords Foxj1 . Traumatic brain injury. Rats .
Neurogenesis
Introduction
In modern times, traumatic brain injury (TBI) contributes
to a major cause of morbidity and mortality all over the
world, especially for children and young adults (Langlois
et al. 2006; Plesnila et al. 2007). More and more people
have been paying attention to the pathophysiology of the
trauma; however, to date, the mechanism of the inner
progress is not yet fully understood and the effect of the
therapeutics remains unsatisfied (Roberts et al. 1998;
McKee et al. 2005). Previous experiment studies in vivo
and in vitro have demonstrated that the event induced by
TBI triggers not only the primary injury which occurs
immediately after the damage, but also the second injury
which develops for a long term proximately several days
or weeks and plays an essential role in morbidity or
mortality (Nortje and Menon 2004; Walker et al. 2009;
Zweckberger et al. 2006). All the steps involved in the
whole process will cause neuronal apoptosis, inflam-
matory reaction, and reactive astrogliosis, which lead to
consequently tissue loss, impaired regeneration, and
functional disabilities (Di Giovanni and Movsesyan
2005; McGraw et al. 2001; Raghupathi 2004). To
investigate the pathological mechanism and the cellular
and the molecular alteration after TBI appears important
for the value in order to improve the outcome in clinical
treatment.
Foxj1 is a member of the Forkhead/winged-helix
(Fox) family of transcription factors, which has a
conserved 100 amino acid DNA binding domain and
plays important roles in cilia formation of the respiratory,
reproductive, and central nervous systems (Clevidence et
al. 1993; Hackett et al. 1995; Brody et al. 2000).
Abnormal expression or targeted mutation of Foxj1 will
result in an absence of cilia in the tissues and a defect in
Gang Cui and Zhihua Yu contributed equally to this work.
G. Cui (*): Z. Yu: Z. Li: W. Wang: T. Lu: C. Qian
Department of Neurosurgery,
The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou 215006, People’s Republic of China
e-mail: cuigang33@yahoo.com.cn
J. Li: Y. Ding
Department of Burn Surgery,
The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou 215006, People’s Republic of China
J Mol Neurosci (2011) 45:145–153
DOI 10.1007/s12031-011-9504-8

left–right axis determination of organs (Brody et al. 2000;
Chen et al. 1998). Foxj1 suppresses T cell activity and
thus spontaneous autoimmunity, through the repression of
NF-κB activity (Srivatsan and Peng 2005). Foxj1 also
inhibits the humoral immune response in B cells; FOXJ1
deficiency in B cells results in spontaneous and accentu-
ated germinal center formation, implicated in the devel-
opment of pathogenic autoantibodies and accentuated
responses to immunizations (Lin et al. 2005).
Recent studies have shown that FoxJ1 is required for
postnatal differentiation of ependymal cells and a subset
of astrocytes in the subventricular zone (SVZ) and the
subpopulation of astrocytes has the ability of self-renew
and neurogenic potential differentiated into astrocytes,
oligodendrocytes and neurons (Jacquet and Salinas-
Mondragon 2009). We hypothesize that Foxj1 may be
involved in the pathophysiological and biochemical
progression after TBI, which is associated with the
outcome of brain function and neurogenesis induced by
injury.
In our study, we investigated the expression and the
distribution of Foxj1 in the rat brain after injury for the first
time. Our experiment is conducted to gain a brighter insight
into the physiologic functions of Foxj1 in the normal brain
and the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying
central nerve lesion and repair.
Materials and Methods
Animals and Surgery
Male Sprague–Dawley rats (weighing 220–275 g) were
used in this experiment. After deeply anesthetized with
chloral hydrate (10% solution), the heads of the rats were
fixed in the stereotactic frame and a microknife was
inserted into the right cortex under the aseptic
condition 3 mm lateral parallel from the midline with an
antero-posterior surgical incision (5 mm long, 3 mm deep,
and 1 mm wide); thereafter, the scalps were sutured. Sham-
controlled rats were subjected the identical procedures to
experimental rats except for being inserted with the micro-
knife into the brain. After all the procedures, animals were
returned to their cages and allowed freely to get food and
water. Animals were housed under a 12 h light/dark cycle
and the room temperature (RT) was kept at 37±0.5.
Experimental animals (n=21) were killed at 12 h, 1, 3, 5,
7, 14, and 28 days after injury. Normal rats (n=3) and
sham-controlled rats (n=3) were sacrificed at 3 days. All
surgical and animal care procedures were carried out in
accordance with the Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals (National Research Council, 1996, USA) and were
approved by the Chinese National Committee to Use of
Experimental Animals for Medical Purposes, Jiangsu
Branch.
Western Blot
After given an overdose of chloral hydrate, rats were killed
at different time points post-operatively, and the cortex
tissue surrounding the wound (extending 3 mm to the
incision) as well as an equal part of the normal and sham-
controlled cortex were dissected out and stored at −80°C
until use. In order to prepare lysates, frozen cortex tissue
samples were weighed and minced with eye scissors in ice.
Then the samples were homogenized in lysis buffer (1%
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 1% Triton X-100, 50 mmol/
L Tris, 1% NP-40, pH 7.5, 5 mmol/L EDTA, 1% sodium
deoxycholate, 1 μg/ml leupeptin, 10 μg/ml aprotinin, and
1 mmol/L PMSF) and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm and 4°C
for 20 min to collect the supernatant. After determined
protein concentration with the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad),
protein samples were subjected to SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and transferred to a polyvinylidine diflour-
ide filter membrane. The membrane was blocked with 5%
milk without fat for 2 h and incubated with primary
antibody against Foxj1 (anti-mouse, 1:1,000; Santa Cruz)
or GAPDH (anti-rabbit, 1:1,000, Santa Cruz) at 4°C
overnight. At last, the membrane was incubated with
second antibody goat-anti-mouse or goat-anti-rabbit conju-
gated horseradish peroxidase (1:2,000, Southern-Biotech)
for 2 h and visualized using an enhanced chemilumines-
cence system (Pierce Company, USA).
Sections and Double Immunofluorescent Staining
After defined survival times, rats were terminally anesthe-
tized and perfused through the ascending aorta with 500 ml
of 0.9% saline, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde. After
that, the brains were removed and postfixed in the same
fixative for 3 h and then replaced with 20% sucrose for 2–
3 days, following 30% sucrose for 2–3 days. After
treatment with sucrose solutions, the tissues were embed-
ded in O.T.C. compound. Then, 10-μm frozen cross-
sections were prepared and examined. All sections were
first blocked with 10% normal serum-blocking solution
species the same as the secondary antibody, containing 3%
(w/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA), and 0.1% Triton X-100
and 0.05% Tween-20 2 h at RT in order to avoid unspecific
staining. Then, the sections were incubated with both rabbit
polyclonal primary antibodies for anti-MAP-2 (a marker of
neurons, 1:1,000; Santa Cruz), anti-GFAP (a marker of
astrocytes, 1:200; Sigma), and anti-Ki67 (a marker of cell
division, 1:300; Santa Cruz), and mouse monoclonal
primary antibodies for anti-Foxj1 (1:100; Santa Cruz),
anti-NeuN (a marker of neurons, 1:500; Chemicon), anti-
146
J Mol Neurosci (2011) 45:145–153

GFAP (a marker of astrocytes, 1:200; Sigma). Briefly,
sections were incubated with both primary antibodies
overnight at 4°C, followed by a mixture of FITC- and
TRITC-conjugated secondary antibodies for 2 h at 4°C. The
stained sections were examined with a Leica fluorescence
microscope (Germany).
Immunohistochemistry
We blocked the sections with confining liquid consisting of
10% goat serum, 1% BSA, 0.3% Triton X-100, and 0.15%
Tween-20 for 2 h at room temperature, then incubated with
anti-Foxj1 antibody (anti-mouse, 1:100, Santa Cruz) over-
night at 4°C. After incubation with the primary and the
second reagents as the second antibody for 20 and 30 min,
respectively, at 37°C, the reaction sections were incubated
with the liquid mixture (0.02% daminobenzidine tetrahy-
drochloride, 3% H2O2, and 0.1% PBS). Finally, the sections
were dehydrated and covered with coverslips. We examined
the sections and counted the cells with strong or moderate
brown staining, weak or no staining as positive or negative
Foxj1 cells, respectively, from each group at higher
magnified images. We took the average assays of each
group as the valuable results.
Quantitative Analysis
Cells double labeled for Foxj1 and the other phenotypic
markers used in the experiment were quantified. Sections
were double labeled for Foxj1 and MAP-2 and GFAP. To
identify the proportion of each phenotype-specific marker-
positive cells expressing Foxj1, a minimum of 200 phenotype-
specific marker-positive cells were counted adjacent to the
wound in each section. Then double labeled cells for Foxj1
and phenotype-specific markers were recorded. Two or three
adjacent sections per animal were sampled.
Statistical Analysis
All data were analyzed with Stata 7.0 statistical software. All
values were expressed as mean±SEM. One-way ANOVA
followed by the Tukey’s post hoc multiple comparison tests
was used for statistical analysis. P values less than 0.05 were
considered statistically significant. Each experiment con-
sisted of at least three replicates per condition.
Results
The Expression of Foxj1 in Brain by Western Blot
In order to investigate the temporal patterns of Foxj1
expression after TBI, Western blot was performed in this
study. In the cerebral cortex surrounding the injury, Foxj1
protein level was low in normal and sham cortex, and
increased at 12 h after TBI and peaked at day 3, then
gradually reduced thereafter; however, the expression of
Foxj1 at day 28 after injury was still higher than the sham
control. These data indicated that Foxj1 protein level had a
temporally change after TBI (Fig. 1a and b).
The Changed Distribution of Foxj1 in the Brain Cortex
after TBI
We used the coronal sections of the uninjured sham-
operation and day 3 after injury to assess the changed
distribution of the expression of Foxj1 by immunohisto-
chemistry. We could see that the immunostaining of Foxj1
deposited strongly in the plasmalemma adjacent to the
lesion site (Fig. 2e–g); however, a few positive immunos-
taining was found in the equal contralateral hemisphere
(Fig. 2c, d, and g) and the uninjured sham-operated
hemisphere (Fig. 2a and b). Further magnifications revealed
clearly the distribution and the morphous of the positive
immunostaining. The results suggested that the expression
of Foxj1 was apparently higher in the ipsilateral injured
brain on day 3 after TBI compared with the contralateral
hemisphere and the sham-operated hemisphere.
The Colocalization of Foxj1 with Different Cellular
Markers by Double Immunofluorescent Staining
To further determine the cell types expressing Foxj1 after
TBI, we used double labeling immunofluorescent staining
with cell-specific markers: MAP-2 (a marker of neurons)
and GFAP (a marker of astrocytes). We found that Foxj1
was expressed in neurons (Fig. 3a–c) and astrocytes
(Fig. 3g–i) and with a relatively low level in sham brain
(Fig. 3d–f and j–l). To identify the proportion of each
phenotype-specific marker-positive cells expressing Foxj1,
a minimum of 200 phenotype-specific marker-positive cells
were counted between sham and 3 days after TBI (Fig. 3m).
After injury, Foxj1 expression was increased significantly
in neurons and astrocytes at 3 days compared with sham
brain.
Cellular Proliferation in the Brains after TBI
To identify the proliferative cell types after TBI, we
performed double immunofluorescent staining with NeuN
(a marker of neurons), GFAP (a marker of astrocytes), and
Ki67 (a marker of cell division) in injured brain 3 days after
TBI. We also performed Foxj1 and Ki67 to investigate their
relationship. The results revealed that there were colocali-
zations between Neun and Ki67 (Fig. 4a–c), GFAP and
Ki67 (Fig. 4d–f), Foxj1, and Ki67 (Fig. 4g–i), that was to
J Mol Neurosci (2011) 45:145–153
147

say neurons and astrocytes had proliferated after injury and
Foxj1 had the relationship with cell proliferation.
Discussion
TBI has been one of the leading causes of death and
disability in both industrialized and developing countries
(Djebaili et al. 2004; Lo et al. 2003) and results in a
significant society burden throughout the world (Langlois
et al. 2006; Marshall 2000; Teasdale and Graham 1998).
The pathophysiology of cerebral contusions is varied and
complicated, including complex temporal and regional
changes of cerebral blood flow and metabolism (Katayama
et al. 1998; Bullock et al. 1992), disruption of the blood–
brain barrier resulting in brain edema (Unterberg et al.
2004), and progressive neuronal cell death in pericontu-
sional tissue (Cervos-Navarro and Lafuente 1991). TBI
induces deleterious neuroinflammation, as proved by
edema, free radicals, cytokine production, induction of
nitric-oxide synthase and cyclooxygenase type 2, and
leukocyte infiltration (Xiao et al. 2008). Because a series
of inner mechanisms leading to the physiological and the
pathological alteration in the brain after injury have not
been understood clearly, there are currently no good
treatments that improve clinical outcome measures (Roberts
et al. 1998; McKee et al. 2005). In our study, we employed
a controlled stereotactic knife lesion model in adult rats to
investigate the cell mechanism after TBI.
We displayed the increased expression of Foxj1 in adult
rats’ brain after traumatic brain injury for the first time.
Western blot analysis showed that the expression of Foxj1
was significantly increased and peaked at 3 days after
injury. We also found that the staining of Foxj1 was
enhanced obviously in the ipisilateral brain cortex nearby
the lesion site compared to the conspilateral brain and the
sham-operated brain by immuohistochemical staining. By
double immunofluorescent staining, we observed that there
were co-localization of Foxj1 and MAP-2, as well as Foxj1
and GFAP. In addition, the co-localization of Foxj1 with
MAP-2 and GFAP was increased in the brain 3 days after
injury compared to the sham brain. In our experiment, the
important alteration of the expression of Foxj1 located in
cytoplasm in the brain after injury forcefully supported the
idea that Foxj1 was implicated in the central nervous
system pathophysiology after TBI. Our findings may
provide a crucial clue to learn the cellular and molecular
mechanisms underlying TBI.
Traumatic brain injury would lead to permanent motor,
cognitive and behavioral deficits, which are the result of
neural tissue loss and cell death (Paghupathi et al. 2000). In
response to the injury, the cells in the brain will produce
corresponding reactions to resist the injury and help to
recover the insulted functions. Neurons may be replenished
by neural stem cells in the dentate gyrus and subventricular
zones (Yagita et al. 2001; Peterson 2002). Astrocytes
proliferate possibly to support surviving neurons and
prevent further tissue damage through formation of the
glial scar (Smith et al. 2001). Microglia increase to get rid
of cellular debris and promote recovery of brain function
(Glulian et al. 1991). Recent studies have shown that the
mammalian brain contains neural stem and progenitor cells
Foxj1
GAPDH
Relative level
N
sham
12h
1d
3d
5d
7d
14d
28d
Times after injury
A
B
Foxj1
*
*
*
Fig. 1 Western blot showing
the temporal protein levels of
Foxj1 following traumatic brain
injury (TBI). Western blot was
performed to assess the protein
level of Foxj1 in the cortex
surrounding the wound at
different survival times after
TBI. The bar chart below
demonstrated the ratio of Foxj1
relative to GAPDH for each
time point. a Foxj1 protein level
was relatively lower in normal
and sham cortex, and peaked at
day 3, then gradually reduced. b
Semiquantitative analysis
(relative optical density) showed
the intensity of staining of Foxj1
to GAPDH for each time point.
The data are means±SEM (n=3,
*P<0.05, significantly different
from the sham-operated group)
148
J Mol Neurosci (2011) 45:145–153

in different regions such as the sub-granular zone of the
dentate gyrus and the SVZ of the lateral ventricles
(Reynolds and Weiss 1992; Johansson et al. 1999;
Alvarez-Buylla et al. 2002; Doetsch et al. 1999; Palmer et
al. 1997). After injury, neurogenesis is stimulated in the
adult brain (Kunlin et al. 2010) and migration toward
pathology is the first critical step in stem cell engagement
during regeneration (Imitola et al. 2004). Neural stem cells
migrate through the parenchyma along nonstereotypical
routes in a precise directed manner across great distances to
injury sites in the central nervous system, where they could
engage niches harboring local transiently expressed repar-
ative signals (Imitola et al. 2004). Injury-induced neuro-
genesis has been observed across a broad range of injury
models in experimental animals and human patients. For
example, cerebral ischemia enhances proliferation of
sham 
3d 
3d 
contralateral
ipsilateral
* lesion site 
A
B
C
D
E
F
Number of positive cells (/mm2)
G
Foxj1
*
contralateral
ipsilateral
3d after injury
Fig. 2 The changed distribution
of Foxj1 in injured brain cortex
by immunohistochemical
staining. a, b We could observe
the staining of Foxj1 in the
sham-operated brain, and the
level was relatively lower. c, d
The same staining was found in
the equal contralateral
hemisphere of the injured brain;
however, the level was low as
the sham brain. e, f We could
see that the immunostaining of
Foxj1 deposited strongly
adjacent to the lesion site, in
addition the level was
significantly higher compared
with the sham and the
contralateral hemisphere of the
brain after TBI. g Quantitative
analysis of Foxj1 positive cells/
mm2 between contralateral and
ipsilateral brains 3 days after
injury. Foxj1 was significantly
increased in the ipsilateral brain
at 3 days after TBI. Asterisk
indicated significant difference
at P<0.05 compared with
contralateral brain. Error bars
SEM. Scale bars: left columns
(a, c, e), 50 μm; right columns
(b, d, f), 10 μm
J Mol Neurosci (2011) 45:145–153
149

MAP-2
MAP-2
GFAP
GFAP
Foxj1
Foxj1
Foxj1
Foxj1
Merge
Merge
Merge
Merge
3d
3d
sham
sham
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
Sham
3d
Time after injury
Foxj1 positive cells (%)
M
MAP-2
GFAP
*
#
Fig. 3 Double immunofluorescence staining for Foxj1 and different
phenotype-specific markers in adult rat brain 3 days after TBI. The
sections from sham and injured brains 3 days after TBI were
immunostained with Foxj1 (green, b, e, h, k) and different cell
makers, such as MAP-2 (a marker of neurons, red, a, d) and GFAP (a
marker of astrocytes, red, g, j), and the co-localization of Foxj1 with
different phenotype-specific markers were visualized in the merged
images (c, f, i, l). a–c, g–i Immunostaining for Foxj1 with MAP-2 and
GFAP at 3 days after TBI; d–f, j–l Immunostaining for Foxj1 with
MAP-2 and GFAP in sham brain. m Quantitative analysis of different
phenotype-specific markers positive cells expressing Foxj1 (%) in
sham group and 3 days after injury. The change of Foxj1 was striking
in neurons and astrocytes; *, # indicate significant difference at P<
0.05 compared with the sham group. Error bars SEM. Scale bars
20 μm (a–l)
150
J Mol Neurosci (2011) 45:145–153

neuronal precursor cells in the SVZ, followed by their
migration into ischemic brain regions, where they differen-
tiate and mature (Jin et al. 2001), in addition ectopic
neurogenesis has been observed in animal models in the
ipsilateral striatum of middle cerebral artery occlusion
(Arvidsson et al. 2002; Zhang et al. 2002) and in
degenerated hippocampal CA1 with global cerebral ische-
mia (Nakatomi et al. 2002; Bendel et al. 2005). The finding
that brain injury stimulates the production of neurogenesis
in the mammalian brain shows a role for this process in
brain repair.
Foxj1 is a member of the Fox family of transcription
factors, which plays an important role in cilia formation
(Clevidence et al. 1993; Hackett et al. 1995; Brody et al.
2000), left–right axis determination of organs (Brody et al.
2000; Chen et al., 1998), suppressing T cell activity
(Srivatsan and Peng 2005), inhibiting the humoral immune
response in B cells (Lin et al. 2005) and so on. Recent
studies found that Foxj1 is required for postnatal differen-
tiation of ependymal cells and a subset of astrocytes in the
SVZ, where these cells form a postnatal neural stem cell
niche (Jacquet and Salinas-Mondragon 2009). The findings
of the studies revealed that the subset of astrocytes
harvested from the SVZ generate neurospheres, which had
the capability of self-renew and had the potential to give
rise to neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes, thus
functionally resembling adult neural stem cells. In support
of this, recent studies have revealed that Foxj1 promoter-
active cells in the spinal canal and SVZ participate in
neurogenesis and gliogenesis in spinal cord injury and in
response to stroke (Meletis et al. 2008; Carlen et al. 2009).
Our study revealed that the expression of Foxj1 was
significantly increased in the rat brain after injury, which
supported the concept that Foxj1 may be involved in the
physiological and the pathological process in the injured
brain. Recent studies have displayed that Foxj1 is depended
in inducing the differentiation of a subset of astrocytes in
the subventricular zone, which can functionally act as adult
neural stem cells and give rise to neurons, astrocytes, and
oligodendrocytes. Our results suggest that Foxj1 may be
Ki67
Ki67
Ki67
NeuN
GFAP
Foxj1
Merge
Merge
Merge
A
B
C
D
F
G
H
I
Merge
Ki67
GFAP
Fig. 4 Double immunofluorescence staining for cellular proliferation
in the brains after TBI. Double immunofluorescence staining for
NeuN (a marker of neurons, green, a), GFAP (green, d), Foxj1 (green,
g), and Ki67 (a marker of cell division, red, b, e, h) in injured brain
cortex after TBI. In the rat brain 3 days after injury, there were co-
localization between NeuN and Ki67 (a–c), GFAP and Ki67 (d–f),
Foxj1 and Ki67 (g–i). Scale bars 20 μm (a–i)
J Mol Neurosci (2011) 45:145–153
151

required for the differentiation of the cells acting as adult
neural stem cell which participate in neurogenesis and give
rise to neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes. These
cells may migrate to the lesion region by stimulation of
injury to compensate for the loss of neuronal function
caused by TBI. Our experiment may provide a novel
strategy for the treatment of CNS trauma in the field of
neurogenesis. Further studies are needed to confirm the
inherent mechanisms of the role of Foxj1 after brain injury.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which per-
mits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
Alvarez-Buylla A, Seri B, Doetsch F (2002) Identification of neural stem
cells in the adult vertebrate brain. Brain Res Bull 57:751–758
Arvidsson A, Collin T, Kirik D, Kokaia Z, Lindvall O (2002)
Neuronal replacement from endogenous precursors in the adult
brain after stroke. Nat Med 8:963–970
Bendel O, Bueters T, von Euler M, Ove Ogren S, Sandin J, von Euler
G (2005) Reappearance of hippocampal CA1 neurons after
ischemia is associated with recovery of learning and memory. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 25:1586–1595
Brody SL, Yan XH, Wuerffel MK, Song SK, Shapiro SD (2000)
Ciliogenesis and left-right axis defects in forkhead factor HFH-4-
null mice. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 23:45–51
Bullock R, Sakas D, Patterson J, Wyper D, Hadley D, Maxwell W,
Teasdale GM (1992) Early post-traumatic cerebral blood flow
mapping: correlation with structural damage after focal injury.
Acta Neurochir Suppl (Wien) 55:14–17
Carlen M, Meletis K, Goritz C, Darsalia V, Evergren E, Tanigaki K,
Amendola M, Barnabe-Heider F, Yeung MS, Naldini L (2009)
Forebrain ependymal cells are Notch-dependent and generate
neuroblasts and astrocytes after stroke. Nat Neurosci 12:259–267
Cervos-Navarro J, Lafuente JV (1991) Traumatic brain injuries:
structural changes. J Neurol Sci 103(Suppl):S3–S14
Chen J, Knowles HJ, Hebert JL, Hackett BP (1998) Mutation of the
mouse hepatocyte nuclear factor/forkhead homologue 4 gene
results in an absence of cilia and random left–right asymmetry. J
Clin Invest 102:1077–1082
Clevidence DE, Overdier DG, Tao W, Qian X, Pani L, Lai E, Costa
RH (1993) Identification of nine tissue-specific transcription
factors of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/forkhead DNA-binding
domain family. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:3948–3952
Di Giovanni S, Movsesyan V (2005) Cell cycle inhibition provides
neuroprotection and reduces glial proliferation and scar formation
after traumatic brain injury. Neuroscience 102:8333–8338
Djebaili M, Hoffman SW, Stein DG (2004) Allopregnanolone and
progesterone decrease cell death and cognitive deficits after a
contusion of the rat pre-frontal cortex. Neurosci 123:349–359
Doetsch F, Caille I, Lim DA, García-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A
(1999) Subventricular zone astrocytes are neural stem cells in the
adult mammalian brain. Cell 97:703–716
Glulian D, Frederickson R, McGaugh J, Fehon D (1991) Microglia–
neuron interactions after injury to the central nervous system.
Hogrefe and Huber, Lewiston, NY, pp 73–82
Hackett BP, Brody SL, Liang M (1995) Primary structure of
hepatocyte nuclear factor/forkhead homologue 4 and character-
ization of gene expression in the developing respiratory and
reproductive epithelium. Proc Natl Acad Sci 92:4249–4253
Imitola J, Raddassi K, Park Kook In, Mueller F-J (2004) Directed
migration of neural stem cells to sites of CNS injury by the
stromal cell-derived factor 1α/CXC chemokine receptor 4
pathway. PNAS 101:18117–18122
Jacquet BV, Salinas-Mondragon R (2009) FoxJ1-dependent gene
expression is required for differentiation of radial glia into
ependymal cells and a subset of astrocytes in the postnatal brain.
Development 136:4021–4031
Jin K, Minami M, Lan JQ, Mao XO, Batteur S, Simon RP, Greenberg
DA (2001) Neurogenesis in dentate subgranular zone and rostral
subventricular zone after focal cerebral ischemia in the rat. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 98:4710–4715
Johansson CB, Momma S, Clarke DL, Risling M, Lendahl U, Frise’n
J (1999) Identification of a neural stem cell in the adult
mammalian central nervous system. Cell 96:25–34
Katayama Y, Mori T, Maeda T, Kawamata T (1998) Pathogenesis of
the mass effect of cerebral contusions: rapid increase in
osmolality within the contusion necrosis. Acta Neurochir Suppl
71:289–292
Kunlin Jin, Xiaomei Wang, Lin Xie, Xiao Ou Mao, Greenberg DA
(2010) Transgenic ablation of doublecortin-expressing cells
suppresses adult neurogenesis and worsens stroke outcome in
mice. PNAS 107:7993–7998
Langlois JA, Rutland-Brown W, Wald MM (2006) The epidemiology
and impact of traumatic brain injury: a brief overview. J Head
Trauma Rehabil 21:375–378
Lin L, Brody SL, Peng SL (2005) Restraint of B cell activation by
Foxj1-mediated antagonism of NF-κB and IL-6. J Immunol
175:951–958
Lo EH, Dalkara T, Moskowitz MA (2003) Mechanisms, challenges
and opportunities in stroke. Nat Rev Neurosci 4:399–415
Marshall LF (2000) Epidemiology and cost of central nervous system
injury. Clin Neurosurg 46:105–112
McGraw J, Hiebert GW, Steeves JD (2001) Modulating astrogliosis
after neurotrauma. J Neurosci Res 63:109–115
McKee JA, Brewer RP, Macy GE, Borel CO, Reynolds JD, Warner
DS (2005) Magnesium neuroprotection is limited in humans with
acute brain injury. Neurocrit Care 2:342–351
Meletis K, Barnabe-Heider F, Carlen M, Evergren E, Tomilin N,
Shupliakov O, Frisen J (2008) Spinal cord injury reveals
multilineage differentiation of ependymal cells. PLoS Biol 6:
e182
Nakatomi H, Kuriu T, Okabe S, Yamamoto S, Hatano O, Kawahara
N, Tamura A, Kirino T, Nakafuku M (2002) Regeneration of
hippocampal pyramidal neurons after ischemic brain injury by
recruitment of endogenous neural progenitors. Cell 110:429–
441
Nortje J, Menon DK (2004) Traumatic brain injury: physiology,
mechanisms, and outcome. Curr Opin Neurol 17:711–718
Paghupathi R, Graham D, Mcintosh TK (2000) Apoptosis after
traumatic brain injury. J Neurontrauma 17:927–938
Palmer TD, Takahashi J, Gage FH (1997) The adult rat hippocampus
contains primordial neural stem cells. Mol Cell Neurosci 8:389–
404
Peterson DA (2002) Stem cells in brain plasticity and repair. Curr
Opin Pharmacol 2:34–42
Plesnila N, von Baumgarten L, Retiounskaia M (2007) Delayed
neuronal death after brain trauma involves p53-dependent
inhibition of NF-κB transcriptional activity. Cell Death Differ
14:1529–1541
Raghupathi R (2004) Cell death mechanisms following traumatic
brain injury. Brain Pathol 14:215–222
152
J Mol Neurosci (2011) 45:145–153

Reynolds BA, Weiss S (1992) Generation of neurons and astrocytes
from isolated cells of the adult mammalian central nervous
system. Science 255:1707–1710
Roberts I, Schierhout G, Alderson P (1998) Absence of evidence for
the effectiveness of five interventions routinely used in the
intensive care management of severe head injury: a systematic
review. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 65:729–733
Smith C, Berry M, Clarke WE, Logan A (2001) Differential
expression of fibroblast growth factor-2 and fibroblast growth
factor receptor 1 in a scaning and nonscaning model of CNS
injury in the rat. J Neurosci 13:443–456
Srivatsan S, Peng SL (2005) Cutting edge: Foxj1 protects against
autoimmunity and inhibits thymocyte egress. J Immunol
175:7805–7809
Teasdale GM, Graham DI (1998) Craniocerebral trauma: protection
and retrieval of the neuronal population after injury. Neurosur-
gery 43:723–738
Unterberg AW, Stover J, Kress B, Kiening KL (2004) Edema and
brain trauma. Neuroscience 129:1021–1029
Walker PA, Shah SK, Harting MT (2009) Progenitor cell therapies for
traumatic brain injury: barriers and opportunities in translation.
Disease Models & Mechanisms 2:23–38
Xiao Ru, Chen VC, Besson TB (2008) Combination therapy with
fenofibrate, a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α ago-
nist, and simvastatin, a 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme a
reductase inhibitor, on experimental traumatic brain injury. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther 326:966–974
Yagita Y, Kitagawa K, Ohtsuki T (2001) Neurongenesis by rogenitor
cells in the ischemic adult rat hippocampus. Stroke 2001
(32):1890–1896
Zhang R, Wang Y, Zhang L, Zhang Z, Tsang W, Lu M, Zhang L,
Chopp M (2002) Sildenafil (Viagra) induces neurogenesis and
promotes functional recovery after stroke in rats. Stroke
33:2675–2680
Zweckberger K, Eros C, Zimmermann R, Kim SW, Engel D, Plesnila
N (2006) Effect of early and delayed decompressive craniectomy
on secondary brain damage after controlled cortical impact in
mice. J Neurotrauma 23:1083–1093
J Mol Neurosci (2011) 45:145–153
153

===== CuraCosta2021_eLife+axolotl_SCregen =====
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

1 of 30
Spatiotemporal control of cell cycle 
acceleration during axolotl spinal 
cord regeneration
Emanuel Cura Costa1†, Leo Otsuki2†, Aida Rodrigo Albors3, Elly M Tanaka2, 
Osvaldo Chara1,4*
1Systems Biology Group (SysBio), Institute of Physics of Liquids and Biological 
Systems (IFLySIB), National Scientific and Technical Research Council (CONICET) 
and University of La Plata (UNLP), La Plata, Argentina; 2The Research Institute of 
Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria; 3Division of Cell 
and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, 
United Kingdom; 4Center for Information Services and High Performance Computing, 
Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
Abstract: Axolotls are uniquely able to resolve spinal cord injuries, but little is known about the 
mechanisms underlying spinal cord regeneration. We previously found that tail amputation leads 
to reactivation of a developmental-­like program in spinal cord ependymal cells (Rodrigo Albors et 
al., 2015), characterized by a high-­proliferation zone emerging 4 days post-­amputation (Rost et al., 
2016). What underlies this spatiotemporal pattern of cell proliferation, however, remained unknown. 
Here, we use modeling, tightly linked to experimental data, to demonstrate that this regenerative 
response is consistent with a signal that recruits ependymal cells during ~85 hours after amputation 
within ~830 μm of the injury. We adapted Fluorescent Ubiquitination-­based Cell Cycle Indicator 
(FUCCI) technology to axolotls (AxFUCCI) to visualize cell cycles in vivo. AxFUCCI axolotls confirmed 
the predicted appearance time and size of the injury-­induced recruitment zone and revealed cell 
cycle synchrony between ependymal cells. Our modeling and imaging move us closer to under-
standing bona fide spinal cord regeneration.
Introduction
The axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum) has the remarkable ability to regenerate the injured spinal cord 
(reviewed in Freitas et al., 2019; Tazaki et al., 2017; Chernoff et al., 2003), and thus represents a 
unique system to study the mechanisms of successful spinal cord regeneration. Key players in this 
process are the ependymal cells lining the central canal of the spinal cord, which retain neural stem 
cell potential throughout life (Becker et al., 2018).
In earlier studies, we found that spinal cord injury in the axolotl triggers the reactivation of a 
developmental-­like program in ependymal cells, including a switch from slow, neurogenic to fast, 
proliferative cell divisions (Rodrigo Albors et  al., 2015). We showed that in the uninjured spinal 
cord and in the non-­regenerating region of the injured spinal cord, ependymal cells divide slowly, 
completing a cell cycle in 14.2 ± 1.3 days. In contrast, regenerating ependymal cells speed up their 
cell cycle and divide every 4.9 ± 0.4 days (Rodrigo Albors et al., 2015; Rost et al., 2016). By using 
a mathematical modeling approach, we demonstrated that the acceleration of the cell cycle is the 
major driver of regenerative spinal cord outgrowth and that other processes such as cell influx, cell 
rearrangements, and neural stem cell activation from quiescence play smaller roles (Rost et al., 2016). 
We quantitatively analyzed cell proliferation in space and time and identified a high-­proliferation 
Research Advance
*For correspondence: 
​osvaldo.​chara@​tu-​dresden.​de
†These authors contributed 
equally to this work
Competing interest: The authors 
declare that no competing 
interests exist.
Funding: See page 26
Received: 10 February 2020
Accepted: 13 May 2021
Published: 14 May 2021
Reviewing Editor: Alejandro 
Sánchez Alvarado, Stowers 
Institute for Medical Research, 
United States
‍ ‍ Copyright Cura Costa et al. 
This article is distributed under 
the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License, 
which permits unrestricted use 
and redistribution provided that 
the original author and source 
are credited.

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

2 of 30
zone that emerges 4 days after amputation within the 800 μm adjacent to the injury site and shifts 
posteriorly over time as the regenerating spinal cord grows (Rost et  al., 2016). In particular, we 
quantified a switchpoint separating the high-­proliferation from the low-­proliferation zones from day 
4 on (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). What underlies this precise spatiotemporal pattern of cell 
proliferation in the regenerating axolotl spinal cord, however, remains unknown. Pattern formation 
phenomena occurring during development can be quantitatively reproduced by invoking morpho-
genetic signals spreading from localized sources (Morelli et al., 2012). It is thus conceivable that tail 
amputation triggers a signal that propagates or diffuses along the injured spinal cord to speed up the 
cell cycle of resident cells.
In this new study, we take a modeling approach supported by previous and new experimental 
data to unveil the spatiotemporal distribution that such a signal should have in order to explain the 
observed rate of spinal cord outgrowth in the axolotl. We confirm several of our theoretical predic-
tions by generating a new transgenic AxFUCCI axolotl that faithfully reports cell cycle phases in vivo 
using axolotl-­specific cell cycle protein fragments. We envision that AxFUCCI axolotls will serve as 
useful tools for future studies of proliferation during development and regeneration. Together, our 
results provide new clues for when and where to search for the signal/s that may be responsible for 
driving successful spinal cord regeneration.
Results
Model of uninjured spinal cord
Taking into account the symmetry of the ependymal tube and that ependymal cells organize as a 
pseudo-­stratified epithelium (Joven and Simon, 2018), we modeled the anterior-­posterior (AP) axis of 
the spinal cord as a row of ependymal cells (see Section 1.1 for more details). We modeled ependymal 
cells as rigid spheres of uniform diameter and assumed that they can be either cycling or quiescent 
and defined the fraction of cycling cells as the growth fraction, GF. We modeled the proliferation 
dynamics of cycling cells as follows: we assumed that in the initial condition each cycling cell is in a 
random coordinate along its cell cycle, where the initial cell cycle coordinate and the cell cycle length 
follow an exponential and a lognormal distribution, respectively. In the uninjured axolotl spinal cord, 
upon cell division, (i) the daughter cells inherit the cell cycle length from the mother’s lognormal distri-
bution and (ii) the daughter cells translocate posteriorly, displacing the cells posterior to them. This 
last feature of the model is the implementation of what we earlier defined as ‘cell pushing mechanism’ 
(Rost et al., 2016). This model predicts that after a time of approximately one cell cycle length mitotic 
events will occur along the AP axis and contribute to the growth of the spinal cord (Figure 1A).
Model of regenerating spinal cord
Next, we removed the most posterior cells of the tissue to model tail amputation and the regenera-
tive response in the remaining cells (N0) in silico (see Figure 1B and Section 1.1 for more details). We 
assumed that amputation triggers the release of a signal that spreads anteriorly from the injury site 
with constant speed along the AP axis, recruiting cells by inducing a change in their cell cycle. We 
established that cell recruitment stops at time τ, recruiting λ μm of cells anterior to the amputation 
plane. We notated the AP position of the most anterior cell recruited by the signal as ξ(t) and called 
this the recruitment limit, such that ξ(t = τ) = - λ. In the model, all cycling cells anterior to the cell 
located at ξ(t) are not recruited and continue cycling slowly during the simulations (Figure 1—figure 
supplement 2). In contrast, cycling cells posterior to ξ(t) are recruited at a time t within the interval 0 ≤ 
t ≤ τ and irreversibly modify their cycling according to their cell cycle phase at the time of recruitment.
Because we previously demonstrated that the length of G2 and M phases does not change upon 
amputation (Rodrigo Albors et al., 2015), we assumed that cells in G2 or M within the recruitment 
zone spend the same time to divide as the non-­recruited cells. However, their daughters will reduce 
their cell cycle (see below) (Figure 1C, Section 1.1.3). In contrast, because we showed that regener-
ating cells go through shorter G1 and S phases than non-­regenerative cells (G1 shortens from 152 ± 
54 hours to 22 ± 19 hours; S shortens from 179 ± 21 hours to 88 ± 9 hours, Rodrigo Albors et al., 
2015), we reasoned that the signal instructs recruited cells to shorten G1 and S, effectively shortening 
their cell cycle.

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

3 of 30
Figure 1. Model of uninjured and regenerating spinal cord growth based on shortening G1 and S phases. (A) 
Uninjured spinal cord. 1D model of ependymal cells aligned along the anterior-­posterior (AP) axis. In uninjured 
tissue, ependymal cells cycle with a long cell cycle length (see Figure 1—figure supplement 1). When they divide, 
they ‘push’ cells posteriorly and the spinal cord tissue grows. As an example, two mother cells (in blue) in the top 
row give rise to four daughter cells in the second row (also in blue) following one division. This results in a growth 
of two cell diameters within a timeframe of approximately one long cell cycle length. (B) Regenerating spinal 
cord. After amputation (AP coordinate and time equal to zero), a signal is released anteriorly from the amputation 
plane during a time τ and spreads while recruiting resident ependymal cells up to the theoretical recruitment 
limit ξ located at –λ μm from the amputation plane. After a certain time, the recruitment limit ξ overlaps the 
experimental switchpoint (see definition of the experimental switchpoint in Figure 1—figure supplement 1). 
(C) Proposed mechanism of cell cycle acceleration, consisting of partial skipping of G1 phase and proportional 
mapping between long and short S phases. In the middle panel, two examples are depicted (dashed green arrows) 
of cells that were in the long G1 phase (immediately before recruitment) that become synchronized (immediately 
after recruitment). Additionally, there are three examples (dotted orange arrows) of cells that were in the long S 
phase (immediately before recruitment) that are proportionally mapped (immediately after recruitment). All these 
examples are shown in detail in Figure 1—figure supplement 2. The diameter of the circles is approximately 
proportional to the length of the cell’s cell cycle.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 1:
Figure supplement 1. Space-­time distribution of cell proliferation during axolotl spinal cord regeneration.
Figure supplement 2. Further explanation of the cell cycle coordinate transformation invoked by the model.

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

4 of 30
To explain how ependymal cells may shorten G1 and S phases in response to the injury signal, we 
conceived a mechanism of G1 shortening in which a certain part of this cell cycle phase is skipped. We 
implemented this mechanism as follows (Figure 1C, Figure 1—figure supplement 2, Section 1.1.1): if 
at the time of recruitment the cell is in G1, there are two possible coordinate transformations. If the cell 
cycle coordinate is located before the difference between the long (non-­regenerative) G1 length and 
the shortened (regenerative) G1 length, the cell clock is reset; that is, its transformed cell cycle coor-
dinate will be the beginning of the shortened G1 phase in the next simulation step (immediately after 
G2+ M phases). In contrast, if the original cell cycle coordinate of the cell is located after the difference 
between the long G1 length and the shortened G1 length, there is no change in the time to enter into 
S phase. The difference between the long and short G1 lengths constitutes a temporal threshold. If the 
G1 cell lies before this value, it skips, and if it lies after, it continues cycling as before. This mechanism 
of G1 skipping predicts a partial synchronization of the cell cycle as cells transit through G1 (Figure 1—
figure supplement 2) – an important implication that we test experimentally later.
Because all DNA must be duplicated prior to cell division, we considered a different mechanism to 
model S phase shortening: if the cell cycle coordinate belongs to S at the moment of recruitment, the 
new cell cycle coordinate of this cell will be proportionally mapped to the corresponding coordinate 
of a reduced S phase in the next simulation step (Figure 1C, Figure 1—figure supplement 2, Section 
1.1.2). For instance, if a cell is 40% into its long S phase when the recruitment signal arrives, it will be 
40% into its shorter S phase in the next simulation step.
Daughter cells of recruited cells inherit short G1 and S phases from their mothers and consequently 
have shorter cell cycle lengths (Figure 1C). In particular, daughter cells whose mother was in G2 + 
M phases at the moment of recruitment will transit through short G1 phases, effectively adopting a 
Table 1. Model parameters.
Model parameter
Value/explanation
Fixed/free
G1 phase non-­regenerating mean
152 hours
Fixed parameters, extracted from 
Rodrigo Albors et al., 2015
G1 phase non-­regenerating sigma
54 hours
S phase non-­regenerating mean
179 hours
S phase non-­regenerating sigma
21 hours
G2 + M phases non-­regenerating mean
9 hours
G2 + M phases non-­regenerating sigma
6 hours
G1 phase regenerating mean
22 hours
G1 phase regenerating sigma
19 hours
S phase regenerating mean
88 hours
S phase regenerating sigma
9 hours
G2 + M phases regenerating mean
9 hours
G2 + M phases regenerating sigma
2 hours
GF non-­regenerating
0.12
Cell length along the AP axis
13.2 μm
tG0-­G1
48 hours
N0
Initial number of cells along the 
AP axis, anterior to the amputation 
plane
Free parameters (determined in 
this study)
λ
Maximal length from the 
amputation plane recruited by the 
signal (μm)
τ
Maximal time for cell recruitment 
(days after amputation or hours 
after amputation)
GF: growth fraction; AP: anterior-­posterior.

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

5 of 30
short cell cycle length. Finally, we assumed that recruitment of a quiescent cell would induce its prog-
ress from G0 to G1 after an arbitrary delay (Section 1.1.4). To parametrize the cell phase durations of 
recruited and non-­recruited cycling cells, the growth fraction, and cell geometry, we used our previous 
experimental data from regenerating and non-­regenerating regions of axolotl spinal cords (Rodrigo 
Albors et al., 2015) (Section 1.2 and Table 1).
The model predicts that if we wait a time similar to the short cell cycle length, we will observe more 
proliferation posterior to ξ than anterior to it. In particular, if this model is correct, the prediction for ξ 
(Figure 1B) should agree with the experimental curve of the switchpoint separating the region of high 
proliferation from low proliferation along the AP axis of the axolotl spinal cord during regeneration 
(see definition of the switchpoint curve in Figure 1—figure supplement 1).
Regenerative spinal cord outgrowth can be explained by a signal that 
acts during the 85 ± 12 hours following amputation and recruits cells 
within 828 ± 30 μm of the amputation plane
To evaluate if the model could explain the regenerative outgrowth of the ependymal tube and to esti-
mate the free parameters, we fitted ξ(t) to the experimental switchpoint (Rost et al., 2016). Specifi-
cally, we followed an inference Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) method, streamlined by the 
use of pyABC-­framework (Klinger et al., 2018). The model successfully reproduced the experimental 
switchpoint with best-­fitting parameters N0 = 196 ± 2 cells, λ = 828 ± 30 μm, and τ = 85 ± 12 hours 
(Figure 2A; parameter posterior distributions obtained after convergence are shown in Figure 2—
figure supplement 1, and see Section 1.3 for details). Interestingly, a clonal analysis of the model 
shows that while the anterior-­most cells are slightly displaced, cells located close to the amputation 
plane end up at the posterior end of the regenerated spinal cord (Figure 2—figure supplement 2A), 
in agreement with cell trajectories observed during axolotl spinal cord regeneration (Rost et al., 2016). 
Additionally, the velocity of a clone monotonically increases with its AP coordinate (Figure 2—figure 
supplement 2B), also in line with experimental data (Rost et al., 2016). These results suggest that 
cells preserve their relative position along the AP axis. Hence, when plotting the relative position of 
each clone to the outgrowth of the corresponding tissue minus the recruitment limit ξ(t), we observed 
that this normalized quantity is conserved in time, a fingerprint of the scaling behavior characteristic 
of regeneration (Figure 2—figure supplement 2C). Importantly, with the parameterization leading to 
the best fitting of the experimental switchpoint, we quantitatively predicted the time evolution of the 
regenerative outgrowth that was observed in vivo (Rost et al., 2016; Figure 2B, Video 1).
Our model assumed that cells are rigid spheres of uniform diameter fixed from the mean length of 
ependymal cells measured along the AP axis (Rost et al., 2016). To test whether this naïve assumption 
could impact on our prediction of the regenerative spinal cord outgrowth, we repeated the simula-
tions but replacing the mean cell length by the biggest and smallest possible cell lengths within a 99% 
confidence interval based on earlier data (Rost et al., 2016). Spinal cord outgrowth predicted under 
these two extreme scenarios could hardly be distinguished from the previous prediction (Figure 2—
figure supplement 3A,B). Similar results were obtained when we assumed that ependymal cells do 
not have a constant length along the AP axis but one extracted from a normal distribution parame-
trized from the experimental data on ependymal cell lengths along the AP axis (Figure 2—figure 
supplement 3C).
When we simulated a fast recruitment process by reducing the maximal recruitment time τ to 1 
day while maintaining the maximal recruitment length λ constant, we found that the model-­predicted 
outgrowth overestimates the experimental outgrowth (Figure 2—figure supplement 4A). On the 
contrary, when we decreased recruitment speed by increasing τ to 8 days while keeping λ constant, we 
observed a shorter outgrowth than that observed experimentally (Figure 2—figure supplement 4A). 
Reducing the maximal recruitment distance λ to zero mimics a hypothetical case in which the signal is 
incapable of recruiting the cells anterior to the amputation plane (Figure 2—figure supplement 4B). 
Increasing λ by approximately 100% without changing τ (i.e., increasing recruitment speed) results in 
more recruited ependymal cells and faster spinal cord outgrowth than observed in vivo (Figure 2—
figure supplement 4B). These results point to a spatially and temporarily precise cell recruitment 
mechanism underlying the tissue growth response during axolotl spinal cord regeneration.

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

6 of 30
Regenerating spinal cord outgrowth when cell cycle acceleration is 
impeded
We next asked how much the spinal cord would grow if the cell cycle acceleration instructed by the 
injury signal is blocked. We made use of our model and predicted the tissue outgrowth when the lengths 
of G1 and S were unaltered after amputation. In this condition, all cells would divide with the durations 
of cell cycle phases reported under non-­regenerating conditions (Rodrigo Albors et al., 2015). Our 
results show that blocking recruitment, and therefore the acceleration of the cell cycle, slows down 
tissue growth, leading to an outgrowth of 694 ± 77 μm instead of the observed 1127 ± 103 μm at day 
6 (Figure 2C). This result is consistent with reducing down to zero the maximal recruitment length λ 
Figure 2. A hypothetical signal recruits ependymal cells up to 828 ± 30 μm anterior to the amputation plane during the 85 ± 12 hours following 
amputation, recapitulating in vivo spinal cord regenerative outgrowth. (A) The modeled recruitment limit successfully fits the experimental switchpoint 
curve. Best-­fitting simulations of the model-­predicted recruitment limit ξ(t) overlap the experimental switchpoint curve (see definition of the 
experimental switchpoint in Figure 1—figure supplement 1). Best-­fitting parameters are N0 = 196 ± 2 cells, λ = 828 ± 30 μm, and τ = 85 ± 12 hours. 
(B) The model quantitatively matches experimental axolotl spinal cord outgrowth kinetics (Rost et al., 2016). (C) The model reproduces experimental 
outgrowth reduction when the acceleration of cell proliferation is impeded. Prediction of the model assuming that neither S nor G1 phase lengths were 
shortened superimposed with experimental outgrowth kinetics in which acceleration of the cell cycle was prevented by knocking out Sox2 (Fei et al., 
2014). Lines in (A–C) show the means while blue shaded areas correspond to 68, 95%, and 99.7% confidence intervals, from darker to lighter, calculated 
from the 1000 best-­fitting simulations. (D) S phase shortening dominates cell cycle acceleration during axolotl spinal cord regeneration. Spinal cord 
outgrowth kinetics predicted by the model assuming shortening of S and G1 phases (blue line), only shortening of S phase (orange dashed line), only 
shortening of G1 phase (magenta dotted line), and neither S nor G1 shortening (green line). The magenta line and green line are overlapped with one 
another. Means are represented as lines, and each shaded area corresponds to 1 sigma out of 1000 simulations.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 2:
Figure supplement 1. Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) fitting of the recruitment limit model to the experimental switchpoint data.
Figure supplement 2. The model encompasses the cell pushing mechanism: the more posterior a cell is, the faster it moves.
Figure supplement 3. Incorporating variability of cell length along the anterior-­posterior (AP) axis does not impact on predicted axolotl spinal cord 
outgrowth.
Figure supplement 4. The maximal recruitment time (τ) and the maximal recruitment length (λ) determine the outgrowth of the axolotl spinal cord.

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

7 of 30
(Figure 2—figure supplement 4B). Interestingly, 
this model-­predicted outgrowth is in agreement 
with the reported experimental outgrowth in 
Sox2 knock-­out axolotls, in which the acceleration 
of the cell cycle does not take place after amputa-
tion (Figure 2C, Fei et al., 2014).
S phase shortening is sufficient 
to explain the initial regenerative 
spinal cord outgrowth
The relative contributions of G1 versus S phase 
shortening to spinal cord outgrowth are an 
important unknown that is technically difficult to 
interrogate in vivo. We made use of our model to 
address this question in silico. For this, we main-
tained the same parametrization recapitulating 
spinal cord outgrowth (Figure  2A and B) but 
modified the model such that recruited cycling 
cells shorten S phase but not G1 phase (i.e., 
leaving unaltered G1 phase) or vice versa. Inter-
estingly, our results indicate that shortening of 
only S phase can explain the explosive spinal cord 
outgrowth observed in vivo, independently of G1 
shortening, up to day 4 (Figure 2D, blue line and 
orange line). In contrast, shortening of only G1 
phase has a mild impact on the initial outgrowth 
as it results in an outgrowth almost identical to the 
case in which neither G1 nor S phase was reduced 
(Figure 2D, magenta line versus green line). From 
day 4, though, shortening of only S phase cannot 
recapitulate the observed outgrowth (Figure 2D, 
blue line and orange line), and indeed, it is the 
shortening of both S and G1 phases that returns 
the same outgrowth than that observed in vivo. 
These modeling predictions are a consequence of 
(i) the proximity of S phase to the next cell division 
compared with G1 phase; (ii) the fact that S phase represents ~7.5 days of the total ~14 days of the 
long cell cycle, which is reduced to ~3.7 days in the ~5 days short cell cycle; and (iii) the time window 
of the investigated outgrowth being 8 days. To conclude, these results indicate that, up to day 4, 
shortening of S phase can explain the regenerative spinal cord outgrowth in the axolotl, while the 
effect of G1 shortening manifests from day 5.
Visualizing cell cycle progression in axolotls in vivo using FUCCI
Our model makes defined assumptions on how the phases of the cell cycle shorten to result in an accel-
eration of cell cycle over 85 hours within 828 μm of the injury site. We sought to validate the model by 
determining the kinetics of this response rigorously using a tool that distinguishes cell cycle phases in 
vivo while preserving spatiotemporal context. For this, we adapted Fluorescent Ubiquitination-­based 
Cell Cycle Indicator (FUCCI) technology to axolotls (Figure 3A; Zielke and Edgar, 2015). FUCCI is 
a genetically encoded reporter that distinguishes cell cycle phases by capitalizing on the mutually 
exclusive, oscillatory activity of two ubiquitin ligases (Sakaue-­Sawano et al., 2008). SCFSkp2 is active in 
S and G2 of the cell cycle when it targets the DNA licensing factor Cdt1 for proteolytic degradation. In 
contrast, APC/CCdh1 is active from mid-­M to G1; during these phases, it targets Geminin (Gmnn; a Cdt1 
inhibitor) for degradation. Fusing the degradation-­targeting motifs (degrons) in the Cdt1 and Gmnn 
proteins to two distinct fluorophores puts fluorophore abundance under the control of SCFSkp2 and 
APC/CCdh1 activity and enables fluorescence to be used as a readout for cell cycle phase. Importantly, 
Video 1. 1D model simulations of spinal cord 
regeneration. (Top panel) 20 model simulations from 
20 different random seeds (the seeds are shown in 
the vertical axis). The color code corresponds to 
the generation of each cell (blue, orange and black 
correspond to the first, second and third generation, 
respectively). Vertical interrupted black line denotes the 
amputation plane (AP coordinate of 0). The recruitment 
limit ξ(t) (vertical red dashed line) propagates linearly 
in time up until the time t of 85 hours post amputation, 
covering up the maximal recruitment λ of 828 mm 
anterior to the amputation plane. (Bottom left panel) 
Predicted recruitment limit ξ(t) as a function of time 
from the simulations showed in the top panel. Mean 
value is depicted in the red line while the red shaded 
areas corresponds to 68, 95 and 99.7 % confidence 
intervals (Bottom right panel) Predicted spinal cord 
outgrowth predicted by the model from the simulations 
showed in the top paneladapte. The line represents 
to the mean (also indicated as the blue vertical line in 
the top panel) and the blue shaded areas correspond 
to the 68, 95 and 99.7 % confidence intervals. The 20 
simulations have the same parametrization than the 
1,000 simulations showed in Figure 2A and B.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/55665/figures#video1

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

8 of 30
analyzing FUCCI does not require cell dissociation (thus preserving spatial context within the tissue), 
immunostaining, or measurement of DNA content.
FUCCI has been adapted successfully to several model organisms, including mouse, zebrafish, 
Drosophila, and human cells (reviewed by Zielke and Edgar, 2015). We designed axolotl FUCCI de 
novo by extracting the degron-­harboring sequences from the axolotl Cdt1 and axolotl Gmnn proteins. 
This was important as we found that the N-­terminus of Cdt1 protein, harboring the PIP degron, is diver-
gent across animal models (Figure 3—figure supplement 1A). We defined the relevant fragments of 
axolotl Cdt1 protein (harboring the PIP degron and Cy motif) and axolotl Gmnn protein (harboring the 
D box degron) using homology alignment and comparison with zebrafish FUCCI (Figure 3—figure 
supplement 1A–D; Sugiyama et al., 2009; Bouldin et al., 2014). The axolotl Cdt1[aa1-128] fragment 
was fused to mVenus fluorescent protein and the axolotl Gmnn[aa1-93] fragment to mCherry fluorescent 
protein. We used the CAGGs ubiquitous promoter and viral T2A sequence to co-­express the Cdt1[aa1-
128]-­mVenus and Gmnn[aa1-93]-­mCherry fusions in one transcript. The resulting axolotl-­specific cell cycle 
reporter is referred to as AxFUCCI (Figure 3A).
Figure 3. AxFUCCI – a transgenic cell cycle reporter for axolotl. (A) Top panel: AxFUCCI design. A ubiquitous promoter (CAGGs) drives expression of 
two AxFUCCI probes (AxCdt1[1-128]-Venus and mCherry-­AxGmnn[1-93]) in one transcript. The two AxFUCCI probes are separated co-­translationally 
by virtue of the viral ‘self-­cleaving’ T2A peptide sequence. Bottom panel: AxFUCCI fluorescence combinations in each phase of the cell cycle. (B) Live 
imaging of a single AxFUCCI-­electroporated axolotl cell in vitro. Each panel is a single frame acquired at the indicated hour (h) after the start of the 
imaging session. One cell cycle (from S/G2 to the subsequent S/G2) is depicted. At 67 hours, the two mitotic daughter cells moved apart; the asterisked 
daughter cell is depicted in the remaining panels. (C) Establishment of AxFUCCI transgenic axolotls. The location of the spinal cord is indicated in 
the context of the tail. (D) A fixed AxFUCCI tail, cleared and imaged in wholemount using lightsheet microscopy. The 3D data enable post-­hoc digital 
sectioning of the same spinal cord into lateral, dorsal, or transverse views. Images depict maximum intensity projections through 50 μm (lateral and 
transverse views) or 150 μm (dorsal view) of tissue. Trans.: Transition-­AxFUCCI (G1/S or G2/M transition).
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 3:
Figure supplement 1. Determination of Cdt1 and Gmnn fragments for AxFUCCI reporter.
Figure supplement 2. Fluorescence intensity measurements of AxFUCCI through the cell cycle.
Figure supplement 3. DNA quantification by flow cytometry to validate AxFUCCI functionality.
Figure supplement 4. Validation of AxFUCCI functionality through in vivo tissue analysis.
Figure supplement 5. The tissue clearing protocol does not alter spinal cord length.

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

9 of 30
AxFUCCI discriminates cell cycle 
phases faithfully in vivo
We performed live-­cell imaging, DNA content 
analysis, and immunofluorescence-­based charac-
terizations to validate the ability of AxFUCCI to 
report the phases of the cell cycle. First, we elec-
troporated an immortalized axolotl cell culture 
line (AL1 cells) with AxFUCCI plasmid and performed live imaging. As expected, AxFUCCI fluores-
cence oscillated during the cell cycle in the order mVenus > Double positive > mCherry > Double 
positive > mVenus (Figure  3B, Figure  3—figure supplement 2A,B, Video  2 and Video  3). We 
confirmed that mVenus-­positive cells were G0/G1 cells and that mCherry-­positive cells were S/G2 cells 
using a flow cytometer to analyze DNA content (Figure 3—figure supplement 3A). Cells are tran-
siently AxFUCCI double positive between G0/G1 and S/G2 (Figure 3B and Figure 3—figure supple-
ment 2A,B); we infer that these cells are at the G1/S boundary, as observed in mouse FUCCI (Abe 
et al., 2013). Interestingly, and in contrast to FUCCI in other model organisms, we observe a second 
AxFUCCI double-­positive window between S/G2 and G0/G1, corresponding to the G2/M boundary and 
M cells (Figure 3B, Figure 3—figure supplement 2A,B). Thus, AxFUCCI discriminates the following 
cell cycle phases in axolotl: G0/G1 (mVenus only); S/G2 (mCherry only); G1/S transition and G2/M tran-
sition (double positive) (Figure 3B). Importantly, AxFUCCI’s capacity to label defined landmarks in 
the cell cycle (i.e., G1/S and G2/M transition) enabled us to later test for cell cycle synchronization, a 
characteristic feature of our model.
We generated stable transgenic AxFUCCI axolotls using I-­SceI-­mediated transgenesis, bred them 
to sexual maturity, and used F1 (germline-­transmitted) progeny for further validations (Figure 3C). 
AxFUCCI animals developed at a similar rate to their non-­transgenic siblings, did not differ in their 
basal cell proliferation (Figure 3—figure supplement 4A), and regenerated amputated tail tissue with 
similar kinetics to the d/d animals used in our previous study (Figure 3—figure supplement 4B). Cells 
dissociated from AxFUCCI axolotl tails and analyzed using a flow cytometer exhibited the expected 
fluorescence/DNA content relationships (Figure 3—figure supplement 4C). As a second assay, we 
prepared spinal cord tissue sections from AxFUCCI axolotls and compared DNA content (as assessed 
by DAPI fluorescence) in mVenus versus mCherry-­positive cells. As expected, mCherry-­positive cells 
harbored significantly more DNA than mVenus-­positive cells (Figure 3—figure supplement 4D,E). 
Video 2. Live imaging of an AxFUCCI-­electroporated 
AL1 cell (G1 to G1). A single AxFUCCI-­electroporated 
AL1 cell passing through one cell cycle from G1 to G1, 
imaged hourly over ~130h. The cell transitions through 
the cell cycle phases in the following order: Green (G0/
G1-­AxFUCCI) > White (Transition-­AxFUCCI) > Magenta 
(S/G2-­AxFUCCI) > White (Transition-­AxFUCCI) > Mitosis 
> Two Green daughter cells (G0/G1-­AxFUCCI). This cell 
corresponds to Cell 41 tracked in Figure 3—figure 
supplement 2. Fluorescence intensity drops after 
mitosis due to fluorophore and plasmid dilution (non-­
integrating transgene).
https://elifesciences.org/articles/55665/figures#video2
Video 3. Live imaging of an AxFUCCI-­electroporated 
AL1 cell (S/G2 to S/G2). A single AxFUCCI-­
electroporated AL1 cell passing through one cell cycle 
from S/G2 to S/G2, imaged overly over ~120h. The 
cell transitions through the cell cycle phases in the 
following order: Magenta (S/G2-­AxFUCCI) > White 
(Transition-­AxFUCCI) > Mitosis > Two Green daughter 
cells (G0/G1-­AxFUCCI) > White (Transition-­AxFUCCI) 
> Magenta (S/G2-­AxFUCCI). This cell corresponds 
to Cell 30 tracked in Figure 3—figure supplement 
2. Fluorescence intensity drops after mitosis due to 
fluorophore and plasmid dilution (non-­integrating 
transgene).
https://elifesciences.org/articles/55665/figures#video3

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

10 of 30
Thirdly, we injected AxFUCCI axolotls intraperitoneally with EdU, a thymidine analogue that is incor-
porated into DNA during S phase. Following an 8 hours EdU pulse, mCherry-­positive cells but not 
mVenus-­positive cells should be EdU-­positive and this was indeed the case (Figure 3—figure supple-
ment 4F). Finally, we co-­stained AxFUCCI spinal cord tissue sections with cell type-­specific markers. 
NeuN-­expressing neurons, located on the periphery of the spinal cord, are post-­mitotic, differentiated 
cells (G0) and should be mVenus-­positive (and never mCherry-­positive). Indeed, we found that 100% 
of neurons that expressed AxFUCCI were mVenus-­positive (Figure 3—figure supplement 4G). By 
contrast, Sox2-­expressing ependymal cells, which are proliferative cells, expressed mVenus, mCherry, 
or both fluorophores (Figure 3—figure supplement 4H).
Based on these validations, and for simplicity, we refer to mVenus fluorescence as ‘G0/G1-­AxFUCCI’ 
(green in Figures  3–6), mCherry fluorescence as ‘S/G2-­AxFUCCI’ (magenta in Figures  3–6), and 
double positivity as ‘Transition-­AxFUCCI’ (white in Figures 3–6).
Measuring the recruitment zone in vivo using AxFUCCI
We used AxFUCCI animals to measure the size of the ependymal cell recruitment zone in vivo. We 
amputated AxFUCCI tails at 5 mm from the tail tips and harvested replicate regenerating tails daily up 
to 5 days post-­amputation. We implemented a pipeline to optically clear and image fixed AxFUCCI 
tail tissue in wholemount, which enabled post-­hoc digital re-­sectioning of the imaging data into any 
orientation for accurate measurement (Figure 3D; Pende et al., 2020; Video 4). Importantly, this 
pipeline did not alter the length of the tail tissue (Figure 3—figure supplement 5). We found that, 
at amputation, most ependymal cells expressed G0/G1-­AxFUCCI and only a minority expressed S/
G2-­AxFUCCI (Figure 4A). In the 5 days following tail tip amputation, the proportion of S/G2-­AxFUCCI-­
expressing cells increased locally and sharply at the amputation site, then propagated anteriorly along 
the spinal cord, consistent with the appearance of a recruitment zone (Figures 1B and 4A).
As a first step, we manually quantified the percentage of ependymal cells expressing either G0/
G1-­AxFUCCI alone or S/G2-­AxFUCCI alone within the 1000–1600 μm of spinal cord anterior to the 
injury site at each day post-­amputation. A 1600 μm length should encompass not only the recruitment 
zone but also more anteriorly located ependymal cells that are not recruited by the injury signal and 
that continue to cycle slowly (Figure 1B). We performed our quantifications in 100 μm adjacent bins 
to preserve spatial information using the severed notochord tip to denote the amputation plane. 
To test statistically whether the cells expressing G0/G1-­AxFUCCI and S/G2-­AxFUCCI are heteroge-
neously distributed along the AP axis in the regenerating spinal cords (i.e., if a recruitment zone 
can be detected), we followed an approach similar to that that we used previously to determine 
the switchpoint (Rost et al., 2016). We fitted the measured spatial AP profiles of the percentage 
of G0/G1-­AxFUCCI and S/G2-­AxFUCCI-­expressing cells in each animal with a mathematical model 
assuming two adjacent homogeneous spatial zones separated by an AP border, which we assumed 
was the same for both G0/G1 and S/G2-­AxFUCCI data. For each animal at each timepoint, we tested 
if the mean percentage of cells expressing G0/G1-­AxFUCCI or S/G2-­AxFUCCI in the anterior versus 
the posterior zones was significantly different by running a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. Up until 3 
days post-­amputation, no statistical significance was detected between anterior and posterior in 
the G0/G1-­AxFUCCI and S/G2-­AxFUCCI data (Figure  4B, Figure  4—figure supplement 1A,B,C,D 
and Figure 4—figure supplement 2A,B,C,D). By contrast, at 4 and 5 days post-­amputation, G0/G1-­
AxFUCCI and S/G2-­AxFUCCI data revealed a significant difference between the anterior and posterior 
zones, consistent with the appearance of a recruitment zone (Figure 4B, Figure 4—figure supple-
ment 1E,F and Figure 4—figure supplement 2E,F).
Crucially, we measured the AP border of the AxFUCCI data to be at –717 ± 272 μm relative to the 
amputation plane on day 4 and –446 ± 112 μm on day 5, overlapping within 2 sigma the –782 ± 50 μm 
and –710 ± 62 μm recruitment limits predicted by our model (Figure 4B). Moreover, the appearance 
of the recruitment zone between days 3 and 4 post-­amputation accommodates the 85 hours recruit-
ment time in our model. Thus, AxFUCCI animals confirmed the predicted appearance time and size 
of the recruitment zone.
Regenerating cells have high cell cycle synchrony in vivo
Our model of G1 shortening (Figure 1C, Figure 1—figure supplement 2) predicts that ependymal 
cells in the recruitment zone should exhibit high synchrony with each other in the cell cycle during 

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

11 of 30
Figure 4. The predicted recruitment zone size is observed in AxFUCCI tails after amputation. (A) Visualization of 
the recruitment zone in AxFUCCI tails. At amputation, most ependymal cells are G0/G1-­AxFUCCI positive (green). 
After amputation, a decrease in G0/G1-­AxFUCCI and an increase in S/G2-­AxFUCCI (magenta) expression is seen 
anterior to the amputation plane, and this zone increases in size anteriorly through day 5 post-­amputation. The 
spinal cord is outlined. Images depict maximum intensity projections through 30 μm of tissue and are composites 
of two adjacent fields of view. (B) Quantification of the anterior-­posterior border (AP border) that delimits the 
recruitment zone in G0/G1 and S/G2-­AxFUCCI data. Percentage of G0/G1 (in green) and S/G2 (in magenta)-­
AxFUCCI-­expressing cells quantified in 100 μm bins along the AP spinal cord axis. A mathematical model 
assuming two adjacent spatially homogeneous zones separated by an AP border was fitted to the G0/G1 and S/
G2-­AxFUCCI-­data for each animal. Significant differences between anterior and posterior zones were detected only 
at days 4 and 5 (Kolmogorov–Smirnov test p=0.0286). The AP border mean and 2 sigmas are depicted as a black 
dashed line and a gray shaded areas, respectively. AP position is defined with respect to the amputation plane (0 
Figure 4 continued on next page

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

12 of 30
early regeneration, a property that has not been investigated. AxFUCCI axolotls enabled us to assess 
for potential ependymal cell cycle synchrony in regenerating spinal cord.
We performed a more rigorous quantification of cell cycle distribution from our wholemount data 
in which we focused on the 600 μm of spinal cord immediately anterior to the amputation plane, 
within the recruitment zone, and additionally including Transition-­AxFUCCI (G1/S and G2/M transition 
cells) and M phase cells. At the moment of amputation, 85% ± 5% of ependymal cells expressed G0/
G1-­AxFUCCI and 11% ± 6% expressed S/G2-­AxFUCCI (Figure 5A). We note that this baseline differs 
from the one that we reported previously in smaller, d/d control animals, but we found this lower basal 
proliferation rate to be consistent among animals in this study independent of genotype (Figure 3—
figure supplement 4A; Rodrigo Albors et  al., 2015). Restrictions in feeding and/or changes in 
animal handling during the COVID-19 pandemic might explain this difference (see Discussion). As we 
expected our model might be robust to the baseline cell cycle profile, we gathered measurements in 
these animals for further analysis.
After amputation, we detected a significant drop in G0/G1-­AxFUCCI-­expressing ependymal 
cells already at day 1. Reciprocally, the number of S/G2-­AxFUCCI-­expressing cells increased signifi-
cantly starting at 3 days and reached 50% at days 4 and 5 post-­amputation, compared to a baseline 
percentage below 10% (Figure  5A and B). M phase cells started to appear noticeably from day 
4, although it was not possible to perform statistical analysis due to the absence of M phase cells 
in the 0 day post-­amputation samples (Figure 5B). Intriguingly, we observed a transient ‘burst’ of 
Transition-­AxFUCCI cells at days 1 and 2 post-­amputation. The percentage of Transition-­AxFUCCI 
cells increased to 21% ± 12% and 23% ± 12%, respectively, during this burst, before declining back 
to the baseline level of 5% ± 4% at 3 days (Figure 5B). We confirmed the accuracy of these quanti-
fications by preparing tissue sections from replicate AxFUCCI spinal cords and imaging them using 
confocal microscopy (Figure 5C, Figure 5—figure supplement 1A).
Transition-­AxFUCCI could correspond to G1/S transition or G2/M transition (Figure 3A). We hypoth-
esized that Transition-­AxFUCCI cells at 1 and 2 days post-­amputation resided at the G1/S transition as 
they appeared between the decline in G0/G1-­AxFUCCI cells at day 1 and the increase in S/G2-­AxFUCCI 
cells at day 3. To confirm this, we subjected AxFUCCI animals to an EdU pulse for 24 hours imme-
diately prior to tail harvesting at 0, 1, or 2 days post-­amputation. In this assay, Transition-­AxFUCCI 
cells that incorporate EdU should be in G2/M, while those that do not incorporate EdU should be in 
G1/S (Figure 5—figure supplement 1B). Consistent with our expectations, Transition-­AxFUCCI cells 
at 1 and 2 days post-­amputation were almost entirely EdU-­negative and therefore resided in G1/S 
(Figure 5D, Figure 5—figure supplement 1C,D).
In sum, AxFUCCI revealed the following cell cycle dynamics during regeneration (summarized in 
Figure 5E). Most ependymal cells in the uninjured spinal cord reside in G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle. 
Following tail amputation, ependymal cells start to leave G0/G1 within the first day of amputation, 
transit through G1/S at days 1 and 2, enter S/G2 from day 3 onwards, and undergo mitosis from day 
4. The fact that these behaviors are readily observed at the population level indicates a high level 
of synchrony among ependymal cells in the recruitment zone. The G1/S transition acts as a discrete 
landmark in the cell cycle at which this synchrony can be inferred reliably. Transition-­AxFUCCI cells are 
very rare (~5%) at amputation. We take the 4.5-­fold increase in Transition-­AxFUCCI-­expressing cells 
at days 1 and 2 post-­amputation as a strong indication of cell cycle synchrony during early spinal cord 
regeneration, a key prediction of our model.
μm). n = 4–6 tails per time point, ~300 cells each. Different symbols depict different animals; each line represents 
one animal. Best-­fitting values of the model regarding the anterior and posterior percentage of AxFUCCI data are 
in Figure 4—figure supplement 1. Individual fittings are in Figure 4—figure supplement 2. For more details, 
see Section 2.12.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 4:
Figure supplement 1. Estimation of anterior and posterior (AP) percentages of G0/G1-­AxFUCCI and S/G2-­
AxFUCCI-­expressing cells by fitting a two-­zones model.
Figure supplement 2. Individual fitting of the two-­zones model to experimental AP profiles of the percentages of 
G0/G1-­AxFUCCI and S/G2-­AxFUCCI-­expressing cells.
Figure 4 continued

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

13 of 30
A convergence in regenerative response from distinct baselines
The AxFUCCI quantifications validated key predictions of our model in terms of the size of the 
ependymal cell recruitment zone and in demonstrating high cell cycle synchrony during the regen-
erative response. We were intrigued that these agreements occurred despite a significant difference 
Figure 5. Ependymal cells exhibit cell cycle synchrony during spinal cord regeneration. (A) Cell cycle distributions of ependymal cells during the first 
5 days of regeneration. Maximum intensity projections through 25 μm of spinal cord oriented anterior to left and posterior to right. The spinal cord is 
outlined. The lumen is in the center. Images were taken from within the 600 μm of most posterior regenerating spinal cord. (B) AxFUCCI data separated 
by cell cycle phase. Percentage of ependymal cells in each cell cycle phase in the 600 μm of most posterior regenerating spinal cord between 0 and 
5 days post-­amputation. Cells in mitosis (M) were counted independently of AxFUCCI and were identified based on their condensed chromatin as 
revealed by staining with DAPI (not shown). The percentage of AxFUCCI-­negative cells (‘-‘) was negligible and did not change at any time point (p=0.40, 
Wilcoxon rank sum). Each dot represents data from one tail. n = 4–6 tails per time point, ~100 cells each. Error bars indicate standard deviations. Day 
0 data (immediately after amputation) were taken as baselines, and statistical analyses were performed against these baselines. Kruskal–Wallis tests 
followed by Wilcoxon rank sum tests revealed a significant decrease in G0/G1-­AxFUCCI from 1 day post-­amputation (p=0.02) and a significant increase in 
S/G2-­AxFUCCI starting at 3 days post-­amputation (p=0.02). One-­way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s HSD test revealed a significant increase in Transition-­
AxFUCCI cells at 1 and 2 days post-­amputation (p=0.04 and 0.02, respectively), but not at later days post-­amputation (p>0.99). Mitotic cells were absent 
in the 0 day samples, precluding statistical analysis. ns: not statistically significant. (C) The emergence of Transition-­AxFUCCI cells at 1 and 2 days post-­
amputation was confirmed in tissue sections. Images are single-­plane confocal images of spinal cord cross-­sections fixed at the indicated times after 
amputation. Percentages indicate the percentage of Transition-­AxFUCCI cells at each time point (mean ± standard deviation). n = 3 tails per time point, 
~400 cells counted in each, corresponding to ~750 μm of spinal cord. (D) Transition-­AxFUCCI-­expressing cells at 1 and 2 days post-­amputation reside at 
the G1/S transition. Transition-­AxFUCCI cells can be either at the G1/S transition or the G2/M transition. Following an 8 hours (0 days) or 24 hours (1 and 
2 days) EdU pulse, only G2/M cells should become labeled with EdU. Tails were fixed, then processed for tissue sectioning and EdU detection. >97% 
of Transition-­AxFUCCI cells were EdU-­negative at 1 and 2 days post-­amputation, indicating that they reside at the G1/S transition. n = 3 tails per time 
point. A total of 36, 442, and 315 Transition-­AxFUCCI cells were assayed at 0, 1, and 2 days post-­amputation, respectively. (E) Cell cycle dynamics during 
axolotl spinal cord regeneration. 
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 5:
Figure supplement 1. Transition-­AxFUCCI cells at 1 and 2 days post-­amputation reside at the G1/S boundary.

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

14 of 30
Figure 6. Convergence of cell cycle response between the model simulations and the AxFUCCI data. Heatmaps depicting spatiotemporal 
distribution of G0/G1-­AxFUCCI cells (A), S/G2-­AxFUCCI cells (B), model-­predicted cells in G1 phase (C), and model-­predicted cells in S phase (D). 
x-­axes depict anterior-­posterior (AP) position with respect to the amputation plane (AP position = 0 μm). y-­axes depict time (days) post-­amputation 
and both experimental and simulated replicates within each time point. The color codes correspond to the percentage of cells in the corresponding 
phase. Transition-­AxFUCCI data are in Figure 6—figure supplement 2. (E) Model-­predicted occurrence of G1-­S transitions is more often within the 
recruited cells (gray circles) compared to the non-­recruited (orange crosses) cells. At days 4 and 5, the recruitment limits overlap with the AP borders. 
Independent simulations from 10 independent seeds are shown and the model is parameterized as in Figure 2.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 6:
Figure supplement 1. Modeled spatiotemporal distributions of ependymal cell divisions during axolotl spinal cord regeneration.
Figure supplement 2. Spatiotemporal distributions of Transition-­AxFUCCI cells during axolotl spinal cord regeneration.

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

15 of 30
in starting cell cycle conditions (day 0) between 
the AxFUCCI animals and our model, which was 
based on data described in Rodrigo Albors et al., 2015. The AxFUCCI animals were of size 5.5 
cm from snout to tail and, on the day of amputation, 11% ± 6% of ependymal cells expressed S/
G2-­AxFUCCI. In contrast, our model was parametrized using measurements acquired from 3 cm, non-­
transgenic axolotls, in which the baseline percentage of S-­phase cells was four-­fold higher, as inferred 
from cumulative BrdU labeling (Rodrigo Albors et al., 2015). Despite these differences, we found the 
speed of spinal cord tissue regeneration to be similar in the two datasets (Figure 3—figure supple-
ment 4B). This could reflect a convergence in regenerative response at the cell cycle level.
We investigated further the kinetics of this convergence by using our model to generate day-­
by-­day simulations of the spatial distribution of cells in G1 or S phase and comparing these simulations 
to the cell cycle phase quantifications made from the AxFUCCI animals (Figure 6A–D, Video 5). We 
validated the simulations by testing where and when ependymal cells would leave G1 phase to enter 
S phase and found that, as expected, simulated G1-­to-­S transitions were more frequent posterior 
to the experimentally derived recruitment limit (Figure 6E), which at days 4 and 5 overlap with the 
determined AP borders. Consequently, simulated cell divisions (M phase) exhibited a similar pattern 
(Figure 6—figure supplement 1).
We compared the model simulations to the AxFUCCI data. As noted, the cell cycle conditions 
at day 0 differ between the AxFUCCI experiments and our model but match quantitatively at day 4 
post-­amputation (Figure 6A–D, Video 5). We found the appearance of the recruitment zone to be 
later in the AxFUCCI animals (days 4–5) than in the simulations (day 2). However, once the recruitment 
zone is evident in the AxFUCCI data, its size at days 4 and 5 is comparable to the one predicted 
by the simulations at those times. Thus, the recruitment zone in the AxFUCCI spinal cord manifests 
more synchronously and rapidly than in the simulations, in which it increases gradually in size in a 
posterior-­to-­anterior direction between days 2 and 4. This is likely a consequence of the larger pool 
of G0/G1 cells in the AxFUCCI animals at days 0–2 compared to the model, which incurs a collective 
(but relatively synchronous) lag in S phase entry (recruitment zone manifestation). Our data reveal two 
contrasting trajectories towards achieving a common regenerative output.
Video 4. 3D imaging of an optically cleared AxFUCCI 
tail tip. Volume rendering of a fixed and optically 
cleared AxFUCCI tail tip, co-­stained for DNA using 
DAPI (blue) and imaged with a lightsheet microscope. 
The spinal cord is visible as an intensely green and 
magenta rod at the center of the sample. Peripheral 
signal is AxFUCCI expression in surface epidermal cells. 
Other internal structures, including notochord, have 
weaker AxFUCCI expression and are not visible in this 
rendering. Volume rendering was performed using 
Imaris software. See also Figure 3D.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/55665/figures#video4
Video 5. 1D Model simulations of spinal cord 
regeneration showing cells in G1 and S phases. 20 
model simulations from 20 different random seeds (the 
seeds are shown in the vertical axis). Cells in G1 and 
S are depicted in green and magenta, respectively. 
Predicted recruitment limit ξ(t) and outgrowth are 
indicated with the vertical red and blue discontinuous 
lines, respectively. Amputation plane is depicted as a 
vertical black dashed line. The simulations have the 
same parametrization than the simulations showed in 
Figure 2A and B.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/55665/figures#video5

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

16 of 30
Discussion
The tissue response to spinal cord injury differs greatly across vertebrates. In mammals, including 
humans, injuries to the spinal cord often result in permanent tissue damage. In salamanders like the 
axolotl, however, the ependymal cell response is tightly orchestrated to faithfully rebuild the missing 
spinal cord (Joven and Simon, 2018; Tazaki et al., 2017). Following tail amputation, ependymal cells 
in the axolotl spinal cord switch from slow, neurogenic to faster, proliferative cell divisions (Rodrigo 
Albors et al., 2015). These faster cell cycles lead to the expansion of the ependymal/neural stem 
cell pool and drive an explosive regenerative outgrowth. However, the mechanisms regulating cell 
cycle dynamics during regeneration are not fully understood. Here, by using a modeling approach 
tightly linked to experimental data, we find that the spatiotemporal pattern of cell proliferation in the 
regenerating axolotl spinal cord is consistent with a signal that propagates anteriorly 828 µm from the 
injury site during the first 85 hours post-­amputation. Although, for simplicity, we refer in this article 
to a single amputation-­induced signal, our model could naturally extend to the combined output of 
multiple molecular and/or biophysical signals. We show that shortening of S phase is sufficient to 
explain the explosive growth observed during the first days of regeneration, but that both S and G1 
shortening are necessary to explain/sustain further outgrowth before the first newborn neurons are 
seen (Rodrigo Albors et al., 2015).
Compared to the number of mathematical models designed to unveil pattern formation phenomena 
during development (Morelli et al., 2012), modeling of regeneration is still in its infancy (Chara et al., 
2014). An interesting example of modeling applied to regenerative processes was given by a system 
of deterministic ordinary differential equations that was superbly used to disentangle how secreted 
signaling factors could be used to control the output of multistage cell lineages in a self-­renewing 
neural tissue, the mammalian olfactory epithelium (Lander et al., 2009). Another mathematical model 
based on ordinary differential equations was conceived to establish the causal relationship between 
the individually quantified cellular processes to unravel the stem cell dynamics in the developing 
spinal cord in chick and mouse (Kicheva et al., 2014). In a similar approach, we previously modeled 
the regenerating axolotl spinal cord by means of a system of deterministic ordinary differential equa-
tions describing the kinetics of the cycling and quiescent ependymal cell numbers, which we mapped 
to a model of spinal cord outgrowth (Rost et al., 2016). This allowed us to conclude that while cell 
influx and cell cycle re-­entry play a minor role, the acceleration of the cell cycle is the major driver 
of regenerative spinal cord outgrowth in axolotls (Rost et al., 2016). A more recent study based on 
ordinary and partial differential equations involving cell proliferation was used to predict the spinal 
cord growth of the knifefish (Ilieş et al., 2018).
In this study, we investigated the spatiotemporal distribution of cell proliferation during axolotl 
spinal cord regeneration. To do so, and in contrast with the aforementioned articles, we developed 
a more general and yet accurate cell-­based model introducing the spatial dimension relevant to the 
problem: the AP axis. To further build a more realistic model, we included non-­deterministic attri-
butes: an exponential distribution of the initial coordinates along the cell cycle and a lognormal distri-
bution of the cell cycle length. In the model, a signal shortens the cell cycle of ependymal cells along 
the AP axis by shortening their G1 and S phases, as we reported earlier (Rodrigo Albors et al., 2015). 
Regulation of G1 and S phases are well-­known mechanisms controlling cell fate and cell output in a 
number of developmental contexts. In the brain, G1 lengthening results in longer cell cycles in neural 
progenitors undergoing neurogenesis (Lukaszewicz et al., 2005; Calegari et al., 2005; Takahashi 
et al., 1995), while experimental shortening of G1 in neural progenitors of the cerebral cortex results 
in more proliferative divisions, increasing the progenitor pool and delaying neurogenesis (Salomoni 
and Calegari, 2010; Lange et al., 2009; Pilaz et al., 2009; Calegari and Huttner, 2003). Here, we 
have shown that the shortening of G1 during spinal cord regeneration is necessary to sustain the 
expansion of the ependymal cell pool. Together, these findings point to the regulation of G1 length 
as a key mechanism regulating the output of neural stem/progenitor cell divisions in development 
and in regeneration. The length of S phase is also regulated during development by modulating 
the number of DNA replication origins (Nordman and Orr-­Weaver, 2012). In mammals, shortening 
of S phase seems to play a role in regulating the mode of cell division: mouse neural progenitors 
committed to neurogenesis and neurogenic cortical progenitors in the ferret undergo shorter S phase 
than their self-­renewing/proliferative counterparts (Turrero García et al., 2016; Arai et al., 2011). In 
the axolotl, regenerating ependymal cells shorten S phase during the expansion/outgrowth phase. 

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

17 of 30
Together, these findings suggest that the regulation of S phase controls cell output in the context of 
development and regeneration rather than influence the mode of cell division. The combined short-
ening of S and G1 in the regenerating spinal cord sustains the expansion of the resident ependymal/
neural stem cell pool at the expense of neurogenesis. In this line, experimentally shortening G1 and 
S phases in cortical progenitors of the developing mouse brain delayed the onset of neurogenesis 
(Hasenpusch-­Theil et al., 2018). Our findings add to the evidence that cell cycle regulation is a key 
mechanism controlling the number and type of cells needed to generate and regenerate a tissue.
Another prediction of our model is that a signal must spread about 800 μm from the injury site 
while recruiting ependymal cells during the 85 hours after amputation to explain the spatiotemporal 
pattern of cell proliferation in the regenerating spinal cord. In order to test this prediction experimen-
tally, we adapted FUCCI technology to axolotls, which enabled us to visualize cell cycle dynamics in 
vivo. We found remarkable agreement between our prediction and the size and timing of appearance 
of the recruitment zone in AxFUCCI spinal cords. Our prediction was made based on data from 3 cm 
snout-­to-­tail axolotls, while the AxFUCCI measurements were taken from 5.5 cm axolotls. That the 
size of the recruitment zone appears similar between these two animal sizes could be important in 
understanding the identity of the injury-­induced signal and how it spreads to recruit ependymal cells. 
Future experiments will determine if the size of the recruitment zone also remains constant in even 
larger axolotls.
A characteristic feature of our model is that G1 shortening after amputation causes ependymal 
cells to partially synchronize with one another as they pass through G1. Cell cycle synchronization is 
difficult to measure in cells in vivo. Here, AxFUCCI’s property of labeling short, discrete landmarks 
in the cell cycle (e.g., G1/S transition) enabled us to visualize high G1/S synchrony at 1 and 2 days 
post-­amputation in vivo. It will be interesting to assess whether a similar phenomenon occurs during 
regeneration of other tissues in the axolotl (e.g., limb) and in other regenerative organisms.
Although we observed an excellent match between our model simulations and the AxFUCCI data 
in terms of recruitment zone size at days 4 and 5 post-­amputation, we also encountered quantitative 
differences at earlier time points. In particular, we found that significantly fewer ependymal cells were 
in S/G2 at baseline conditions in the present study compared to our previous study (Rost et al., 2016). 
The AxFUCCI experiments reported here were carried out under COVID-19-­related operational 
restrictions – in particular, animal feeding frequency was reduced. A dietary reduction could plausibly 
reduce baseline ependymal cell proliferation rate and animal growth. We also cannot exclude an 
impact from general housing conditions as the previous experiments were performed in a different 
animal facility with, for example, a different water supply. We note, however, that the baseline of S/
G2 ependymal cells that we observe in this study is in good agreement with recent results obtained 
from FUCCI axolotls that were independently generated using zebrafish DNA constructs (Duerr et al., 
2021). From the data analysis side, it is important to note that in our AxFUCCI experiments G0/G1 
AxFUCCI cells become Transition-­AxFUCCI cells and then S/G2 AxFUCCI cells. This means that tran-
sition cells could be either cells in the late G1 or in the early S phases. Modeled cells, in contrast, go 
straight from G1 to S phase. Consequently, we cannot quantitatively equate the ‘Transition phase’ 
cells between experiments and model. This is why the AxFUCCI data and the model simulations can 
only be qualitatively compared, especially at days 1 and 2, when transition cells peak. Additionally, 
given that the model is parametrized using cell cycle phase lengths, which are not possible to infer 
from the AxFUCCI data (which measure cell cycle phase proportions), it was not trivial to re-­parame-
trize and re-­run our model using the new data generated in this study. Despite these considerations, 
we found that the proportions of ependymal cells in the G0/G1 versus S/G2 AxFUCCI data at 4 and 5 
days post-­amputation – that is, during the first regenerative cell cycle – accurately and quantitatively 
matched the simulations of our model. Moreover, the outgrowth rate of the regenerating spinal cord 
was consistent between the AxFUCCI animals in this study and the animals measured in our previous 
study (Figure 3—figure supplement 4B). This is to say that axolotls mount a remarkably consistent 
regenerative response within their first cell cycle after amputation, possibly converging their cell cycle 
responses despite differences in baseline proliferation. It will be fascinating to investigate the molec-
ular mechanisms that enable this consistent regenerative response in axolotls across age/size and 
nutrition availability.
An important question now is whether the spatiotemporal cell cycle response observed in this study 
agrees with known signaling events operating during spinal cord regeneration. A strong candidate 

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

18 of 30
molecule for recruiting ependymal cells is the axolotl MARCKS-­like protein (AxMLP), a secreted factor 
involved in the proliferative response during axolotl appendage regeneration (Sugiura et al., 2016). 
AxMLP is normally expressed in spinal cord cells but is upregulated following tail amputation, peaking 
12–24 hours after amputation and returning to basal levels a day later (Sugiura et al., 2016). The 
timing prediction of our model is in agreement with the peak of AxMLP followed by a downstream 
period of signal decoding to instruct intrinsic cellular changes that lead to faster cell cycles. More-
over, the secreted nature of AxMLP protein could explain the long-­range proliferative response in the 
regenerating spinal cord. In the future, a tighter time-­course characterization of AxMLP localization 
throughout axolotl spinal cord regeneration will help to put our predictions to test.
Changes in the biophysical properties of the amputated tail could also trigger the orderly increase 
in cell proliferation. In Xenopus tadpoles, tail amputation leads to the activation of the H+ V-­AT-
Pase, which is necessary and sufficient to promote tail regeneration (Adams et  al., 2007). In the 
axolotl, tail amputation triggers changes in calcium, sodium, and membrane potential at the injury 
site (Ozkucur et al., 2010) while spinal cord transection induces a rapid and dynamic change in the 
resting membrane potential, which drives a c-­Fos-­dependent gene expression program promoting 
a pro-­regenerative response (Sabin et al., 2015). The proliferation-­inducing signal could also be of 
mechanical nature (Chiou and Collins, 2018). In this direction, it is interesting that spinal cord transec-
tion in the zebrafish induces an immediate alteration in the mechanical properties in the lesion site, 
which gradually returns to normal (Schlüßler et al., 2018). Our predictions of the temporal and spatial 
distribution that such proliferation-­inducing signal could have will guide efforts to narrow down the 
mechanisms responsible for successful spinal cord regeneration.
Taken together, our study provides a finer mechanistic understanding of the cell cycle kinetics that 
drive spinal cord regeneration in axolotl and paves the way to search for the signal or signals that 
launch the successful ependymal cell response to spinal cord injury.
Materials and methods
 Continued on next page
Key resources table 
Reagent 
type 
(species) or 
resource
Designation
Source or 
reference
Identifiers
Additional information
Strain, strain 
background 
(Ambystoma 
mexicanum, 
d/d strain)
Axolotl, d/d 
strain
Tanaka 
lab axolotl 
colony
-
Axolotl stock maintained in Tanaka lab, Vienna, Austria.
Genetic 
reagent 
(Ambystoma 
mexicanum, 
AxFUCCI 
transgenic)
Transgenic 
AxFUCCI 
axolotl
This paper
-
Transgenic stock generated in d/d genetic background in Tanaka lab, 
Vienna, Austria.
Gene 
(Ambystoma 
mexicanum)
Cdt1
Axolotl 
genome 
release 
v6.0-­DD 
Schloissnig, 
2021
CDT1|AMEX60DD201052583.1
Axolotl genome release v6.0-­DD available at: https://www.​axolotl-​omics.​
org/​assemblies.
Gene 
(Ambystoma 
mexicanum)
Gmnn
Axolotl 
genome 
release 
v6.0-­DD 
Schloissnig, 
2021
GMNN|AMEX60DD301038574.1
Axolotl genome release v6.0-­DD available at: https://www.​axolotl-​omics.​
org/​assemblies.

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

19 of 30
Reagent 
type 
(species) or 
resource
Designation
Source or 
reference
Identifiers
Additional information
Cell line 
(AL1, 
Ambystoma 
mexicanum)
AL1 cells
Roy et al., 
2000
-
AL1 cells were kindly provided by Dr David Gardiner (UC Irvine). AL1 
cells are an immortalized mesenchymal axolotl line originally derived 
from a limb blastema.
Recombinant 
DNA reagent
Addgene 
plasmid 
mVenus N1
Addgene
RRID:Addgene_27793
To amplify coding sequence for mVenus fluorescent protein by PCR.
Recombinant 
DNA reagent pAxFUCCI
This paper
pAxFUCCI
Plasmid encoding AxFUCCI. Used to generate AxFUCCI transgenic 
axolotls by I-­SceI-­mediated transgenesis.
Sequence-­
based 
reagent
axCdt1-­fwd
This paper
PCR primer
​TCAT​GCGGCCGC​ATGGCCCAGCTCCGGATGA.
Forward primer to amplify axCdt1[aa1-128] from axolotl embryonic 
cDNA. Bold indicates a NotI restriction site.
Sequence-­
based 
reagent
axCdt1-­rev
This paper
PCR primer
​TCAT​GCTAGC​GAAT​TCTC​CGCT​TCCT​GCTG​CGCT​TCCT​GCGCTTCC​
CAGGGATGATGGG GTTAATGGCT
Reverse primer to amplify axCdt1[aa1-128] from axolotl embryonic 
cDNA. Bold indicates a NheI restriction site. Underlined sequence 
encodes GS-­rich linker.
Sequence-­
based 
reagent
Venus-­fwd
This paper
PCR primer
​TCAT​GCTAGC​ATGGTGAGCAAGGGCGAGG
Forward primer to amplify mVenus sequence from addgene plasmid 
#27793. Bold indicates a NheI restriction site.
Sequence-­
based 
reagent
Venus-­rev
This paper
PCR primer
​TCAT​ACCGGT​CTTG​TACA​GCTC​GTCC​ATGCC
Reverse primer to amplify mVenus sequence from addgene plasmid 
#27793. Bold indicates a AgeI restriction site.
Sequence-­
based 
reagent
axGmnn-­fwd
This paper
PCR primer
​TCAT​TCCGGA​GGAG​GAGG​AGGA​AGCG​GAGG​AGGA​GGAAGC​
ATGAATGCTAAGAAAG CAGCGACAAT
Forward primer to amplify axGmnn[aa1-93] from axolotl embryonic 
cDNA. Bold indicates a BspEI restriction site. Underlined sequence 
encodes GS-­rich linker.
Sequence-­
based 
reagent
axGmnn-­rev
This paper
PCR primer
​TCAT​ATCGAT​GCTGTAAGCTTCTTGGGACA CCC
Reverse primer to amplify axGmnn[aa1-93] from axolotl embryonic 
cDNA. Bold indicates a ClaI restriction site.
Antibody
Mouse 
monoclonal 
antibody to 
NeuN
Millipore
MAB377
RRID:AB_2298772
1:500
Antibody
Rabbit 
polyclonal 
antibody to 
Sox2
Fei et al., 
2016
-
1:1000
Commercial 
assay or kit
Click-­iT 
647 EdU 
detection kit 
for Imaging
Thermo 
Fisher 
Scientific
C10340
To label cells that have transited through S-­phase.
Chemical 
compound, 
drug
Easyindex
LifeCanvas 
Technologies -
Refractive index matching solution for light sheet imaging (RI 1.46).
Software, 
algorithm
Trackmate 
plugin for Fiji
Tinevez 
et al., 2017
-
To track AL1 cells for the purposes of quantifying AxFUCCI fluorescence.
 Continued

 Research advance﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
Computational and Systems Biology | Developmental Biology
Cura Costa, Otsuki, et al. eLife 2021;10:e55665. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​55665

20 of 30
Computational methods
Model of developing and regenerating axolotl spinal cord
We modeled the spinal cord as a densely packed row of ependymal cells. Since all the cells are 
assumed identical rigid spheres, the model effectively involves only one spatial dimension: the AP 
axis of the spinal cord. We assumed that cells are either cycling or quiescent, where the fraction of 
cycling cells is the growth fraction GF. We considered that each cycling cell i located in the position 
xi at the time t proliferates with a certain random cell cycle length lognormally distributed Ti (xi, t) and 
has a certain age within its cell cycle, Ci (xi, t), defined as a coordinate along the cell cycle or clock 
(‍0 ≤Ci
(
xi, t
)
< Ti
(
xi, t
)
‍). In the initial condition, each cycling cell has a random age ‍Ci
(
xi, t = 0
)
= C0
i ‍ 
along its particular cell cycle length Ti (xi, t), where the Ci
0 distribution is given by ‍
(
ln 2
Ti
(
xi,t
)
)
2
1−
2C0
i
Ti
(
xi,t
)
‍ 
. As time t goes by, each cycling cell increases its clock Ci (xi, t) deterministically until it reaches its 
corresponding Ti (xi, t) value. At this precise moment, the cell divides and one daughter inherits its 
mother’s AP coordinate while the other is intercalated between the first daughter and the posterior 
neighboring cell. This last feature of the model is the implementation of what we earlier defined as 
‘cell pushing mechanism’ (Rost et al., 2016). After cell division, the daughter cells reinitiate their 
clocks and ‍Ci
(
xi, t
)
= 0‍. This model predicts that after a time of approximately one cell cycle length 
mitotic events will occur along the AP axis, contributing to the growth of the spinal cord during devel-
opment (Figure 1A).
To study the evolution of the tissue under a regenerative setup, we focused on the tissue response 
to an amputation modeled by simply removing the most posterior cells. We modeled the regenerative 
response in the remaining N0 cells by assuming that amputation triggers the release of a signal, which 
spreads with constant velocity anteriorly over the AP axis while recruiting the ependymal cells. We 
assumed that cell recruitment stops at time τ, rendering λ μm of cells anterior to the amputation plane 
recruited and a recruitment velocity -λ/τ during the interval ‍0 ≤t ≤τ‍. We notated the AP position of 
the most anterior cell recruited by the signal as ξ(t), the recruitment limit, such that ξ(t = τ) = -λ.
Because regenerative ependymal cells shorten G1 and S phases (without altering G2 and M phases) 
leading to an acceleration of the cell cycle (Rodrigo Albors et al., 2015), we assumed that the signal-­
induced recruitment instructs regenerating ependymal cells precisely to reduce G1 and S phases, 
effectively shortening their cell cycle (Figure 1C). We represent here as G1long and Slong (G1short and 
Sshort) the length of the corresponding phases for ependymal cells of uninjured animals (regenerating 
animals). We notate with Tlong and Tshort to the cell cycle length of the ependymal cells in uninjured and 
regenerating axolotls, respectively.
Note that a cycling cell i whose position xi is anterior to the recruitment limit (‍xi < ξ
(
t
)
‍) is not 
recruited at time t and has a cell cycle length Ti (xi,t) equal to Tlong, that is, continue cycling slowly 
during the simulations (Figure 1—figure supplement 1B). In contrast, a cycling cell i whose position xi 
is posterior to the recruitment limit (‍xi ≥ξ
(
t
)
‍) within the time interval ‍0 < t ≤τ‍ is irreversibly recruited 
and consequently has a cell cycle length Ti (xi,t) equal to Tshort. The progeny of the recruited cells (non-­
recruited cells) have a cell cycle length extracted from the same lognormal distribution of Tshort (Tlong) 
(Figure 1C).
We assumed that recruitment of a cell i located in the position xi at time t induces an irreversible 
transformation in its cell cycle coordinate ‍Ci
(
xi, t
)
→C′
i
(
xi, t
)
‍ , where Ci (xi, t) and Ci′ (xi, t) are the orig-
inal and transformed cell cycle coordinates, respectively. This means that the cell cycle coordinates 
of these cells undergo an irreversible coordinate transformation, modifying their cycling according to 
the cell cycle phase in which they are in at the moment of recruitment, as we describe in the following 
subsections (Figure 1—figure supplement 1B).
When the cells are in the G1 phase at the time of recruitment
We assumed that if at the moment of amputation t a cell i would be in a cell cycle coordinate Ci 
(xi, t) within ‍0 ≤Ci
(
xi, t
)
≤G1long −G1short‍ , the new cell cycle coordinate is as follows (Figure 1C, 
Figure 1—figure supplement 2):
	﻿‍
C
′
i
(
xi, t
)
= 0‍
(1)

===== Deguchi2023_Development_Xenopus-macrophage-regeneration =====
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
RESEARCH REPORT
regeneration factors expressed on myeloid expression in
macrophage-like cells is required for tail regeneration
in Xenopus laevis tadpoles
Momoko Deguchi, Taro Fukazawa* and Takeo Kubo
ABSTRACT
Xenopus laevis tadpoles can regenerate whole tails after amputation.
We have previously reported that interleukin 11 (il11) is required for tail
regeneration. In this study, we have screened for genes that support tail
regeneration under Il11 signaling in a certain cell type and have
identified the previously uncharacterized genes Xetrov90002578m.L
and Xetrov90002579m.S [referred to hereafter as regeneration
factors expressed on myeloid.L (rfem.L) and rfem.S]. Knockdown
(KD) of rfem.L and rfem.S causes defects of tail regeneration,
indicating that rfem.L and/or rfem.S are required for tail regeneration.
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) revealed that rfem.L and
rfem.S are expressed in a subset of leukocytes with a macrophage-
like gene expression profile. KD of colony-stimulating factor 1 (csf1),
which is essential for macrophage differentiation and survival,
reduced rfem.L and rfem.S expression levels and the number
of rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing cells in the regeneration bud.
Furthermore, forced expression of rfem.L under control of the mpeg1
promoter, which drives rfem.L in macrophage-like cells, rescues
rfem.L and rfem.S KD-induced tail regeneration defects. Our findings
suggest that rfem.L or rfem.S expression in macrophage-like cells is
required for tail regeneration.
KEY WORDS: Xenopus laevis, Tail regeneration, Leukocyte,
Reparative myeloid, Macrophage
INTRODUCTION
Xenopus laevis tadpoles can regenerate whole tails with muscles,
notochord and spinal cord in one week (Beck et al., 2009; Slack
et al., 2008). It has been suggested that, after tail amputation,
lineage-restricted progenitor cells, which are produced from stem
cells of each type of tissue differentiate into their own tissues to form
a regenerated tail (Cesare and Slack, 2004). In our previous study,
we found that il11, the expression of which is induced after tail
amputation, is required and sufficient for producing several types of
progenitor cells; thus, it is essential for tail regeneration (Tsujioka
et al., 2017). We found that even progenitor cells in which il11
receptors are knocked out contribute to the formation of the
regenerated tail, suggesting that the progenitor cell induction
function of Il11 is elicited in a non-cell autonomous manner
(Suzuki et al., 2022). These findings led us to hypothesize that
Il11 induces progenitor cells via a specific cell type that supports
tail regeneration in response to Il11. In this study, we aim to
identify the putative cell type by screening genes that function in
the putative cells.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Expression of rfem.L and rfem.S is induced by tail
amputation
To identify the putative supporting cells, we searched for genes
thought to function in the cells using published RNA-sequencing
(RNA-seq) data of amputated tails from il11 knockdown (KD)
tadpoles (Tsujioka et al., 2017) in order to screen for genes that
function in response to Il11. We obtained 1266 genes that were
downregulated in il11 KD groups. Next, to screen for genes that
function during tail regeneration but not during development, we
analyzed the RNA-seq data of proliferating cells from developing
tailbuds and proliferating cells and non-proliferating cells from
regeneration buds (Tsujioka et al., 2015), and narrowed down the
candidates to seven genes that are rarely expressed in the
proliferating cell fraction of the tailbud. Next, to screen for genes
expressed in the putative supporting cells other than the proliferating
progenitor cells, we further narrowed down the candidates to those
with higher expression in the non-proliferating cell fraction than
in the proliferating cell fraction and identified four genes
(Table S1). Among them, we focused on Xetrov90002578m.L and
Xetrov90002579m.S because their functions have not been reported
and they are rarely expressed in early development (Session et al.,
2016) (Fig. S1A). X. laevis is an allotetraploid species and many
genes have homologous genes on L and S chromosomes
(Session et al., 2016). We identified Xetrov90002578m.L and
Xetrov90002579m.S to be homologous, as they have very similar
sequences and are located on homologous L and S chromosomes,
respectively, with conserved synteny (Fig. S1B). Hereafter, we refer to
them as regeneration factors expressed on myeloid.L (rfem.L) and
rfem.S, respectively. There is a putative rfem.L and rfem.S orthologue
in Xenopus tropicalis (accession number KAE8633781), a closely
related species of X. laevis, but no orthologues have been identified in
fish and rodents. The functions of Rfem.L and Rfem.S were not
predictable from their amino acid sequences because there were
no remarkable domains, although they showed weak similarity to
γ-crystallin, and have no putative signal peptide sequences, suggesting
their intracellular function.
Temporal expression analysis of tail stumps (Fig. 1A) revealed
that the expression level of rfem.L and rfem.S at the tail stump
became significantly higher at 1 to 3 days post amputation (dpa)
than that at 0 dpa (Fig. 1B). The temporal expression pattern
Handling Editor: Ken Poss
Received 14 December 2021; Accepted 4 July 2023
Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan.
*Author for correspondence (tfukazawa@bs.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
M.D., 0000-0001-6120-6449; T.F., 0000-0003-1380-4924; T.K., 0000-0002-
5914-5269
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed.
1
© 2023. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2023) 150, dev200467. doi:10.1242/dev.200467
DEVELOPMENT

correlated well with the formation of the regeneration bud, which
forms within 2 dpa (Beck et al., 2003). Expression of rfem.L and
rfem.S is decreased at 5 to 7 dpa (Fig. 1B), when tail regeneration
is almost complete. These results indicate that the expression of
rfem.L and rfem.S is induced by tail amputation and correlates well
with the progression of tail regeneration. We performed in situ
hybridization on sections of intact and 3 dpa tadpoles, which
revealed that rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing cells were scattered
around the regeneration bud and adjacent regions at 3 dpa (Fig. 1C),
but were rarely observed in intact tadpole tails (Fig. 1D). We also
observed scattered rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing cells around
the head and abdomen in both intact and amputated tadpoles
(Fig. S1C). The number of rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing cells at
the regeneration bud and adjacent regions at 1 dpa increased
significantly compared with the corresponding region in the intact
tail (Fig. 1E), it is possible that the upregulation of rfem.L and
rfem.S expression after tail amputation is due to the migration
of rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing cells to the amputation site or
regeneration bud.
rfem.L and/or rfem.S are required for normal tail regeneration
Next, we examined the function of rfem.L and rfem.S in tail
regeneration by KD using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. We injected
cas9 mRNA and guide RNAs (gRNAs) that target the coding
sequence of rfem.L and rfem.S into one-cell stage embryos to
introduce mutations in the rfem.L and rfem.S sequences. Tadpoles
obtained by this method are mosaics of gene-edited and unedited
cells because gene editing occurs in each cell independently after
cleavage. We refer to the mosaic tadpoles as KD. To improve the
efficiency of KD by gene editing, two gRNAs with different target
sites were used for rfem.L and rfem.S, respectively (Fig. S2A).
Tadpoles injected with cas9 mRNA and gRNAs targeting
tyrosinase, a gene responsible for albinism and unnecessary for
tadpole survival, were used as controls (tyr KD). Injected embryos
were maintained for 4 days (stage 41), and normally developed
tadpoles were used for the experiments (Fig. 2A and Fig. S2B). The
development rates did not differ between the rfem.L and rfem.S KD
and tyr KD groups (Table S2). To confirm that gene editing had
occurred, some of the rfem.L and rfem.S KD tadpoles were
randomly selected for Inference of CRISPR Edits-Analysis (ICE
analysis) (Hsiau et al., 2018 preprint), a method to estimate the
proportion of cells with frameshifts or insertions/deletions ≥21 bp
as a KO score. At each gRNA target site of rfem.L and rfem.S KD
tadpoles, gene editions that would result in loss of function were
detected (Fig. S2C). The KO scores did not differ significantly
between rfem.L and rfem.S KD tadpoles with developmental
abnormalities and those with normal development (Fig. S2C),
suggesting that the developmental abnormalities exhibited by some
rfem.L and rfem.S KD tadpoles were not due to rfem.L and rfem.S
KD. Considering that rfem.L and rfem.S are rarely expressed in
early development (Fig. S1A), we estimate that the effect of rfem.L
and rfem.S KD on development is limited. We amputated the
tails of injected tadpoles at 4 days post-fertilization (4 dpf), and
the regenerative ability depending on the morphology of the
regenerated tails was evaluated at 7 dpa. Several tadpoles in the
rfem.L and rfem.S KD groups showed defects of tissues or
regenerated tails that were bent in strange directions (Fig. 2B and
Fig. S2D), and the rfem.L and rfem.S KD groups exhibited a
reduced regeneration rate compared with the tyr KD groups (Fig. 2C
and Fig. S2E, and Table S2). Measurement of the area and length of
regenerated tail revealed that the rfem.L and rfem.S KD tadpoles
regenerated significantly smaller and shorter tails (Fig. 2D,E and
Fig. 1. rfem.L and rfem.S expression is upregulated after tail amputation and is detected in scattered cells in the amputated tails. (A) Experimental
design of expression analysis. Tail stumps (0 dpa) and regenerating tails (1 to 7 dpa) were sampled at the time-points indicated with arrows. (B) Relative
expression levels of rfem.L and rfem.S in the tail stumps/regenerating tails. Vertical axes represent relative expression of rfem.L and rfem.S normalized to
that of ef1a. Data are mean±s.d., n=4. *P<0.05, Tukey-Kramer’s test. (C,D) Representative images of in situ hybridization of rfem.L and rfem.S with (left) the
antisense probe and (right) the sense probe on sagittal sections of tails from (C) 3 dpa or (D) intact tadpoles. Posterior is upwards and dorsal is leftwards.
Red arrowheads indicate representative signals. Black dashed lines indicate the amputation position. Areas enclosed with orange dashed lines in C indicate
the regeneration buds. Insets in the figures are magnified images of the outlined areas. Blue dashed lines in the schematic diagrams outline the location of
the sections. nc, notochord; sm, skeletal muscle. Scale bars: 200 μm. (E) Number of rfem-expressing cells in sections of intact (28 sections from nine
tadpoles) or 1 dpa (24 sections from nine tadpoles) tails. Data are mean±s.d., *P<0.05, Welch’s t-test.
2
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2023) 150, dev200467. doi:10.1242/dev.200467
DEVELOPMENT

Fig. S2F-H). These results indicated that rfem.L and/or rfem.S
are required for normal tail regeneration. The morphology of
regenerated tails of rfem.L and rfem.S KD tadpoles remained
abnormal as they grew (Fig. S2J) and the tadpoles showed poor
regeneration outcomes after re-amputation (Fig. S2K).
rfem.L and rfem.S are expressed in a subset of leukocytes
To estimate the function of rfem.L and rfem.S, we performed RNA-
seq of tail stumps of amputated rfem.L and rfem.S KD tadpoles. The
RNA-seq detected six genes that were significantly downregulated
in rfem.L and rfem.S KD tail stumps (Table S3), including three
hemoglobin genes, suggesting that rfem.L and rfem.S KD affects
wound repair, including blood vessel formation. We also attempted
to identify the cell types that express rfem.L and rfem.S using
scRNA-seq on enzymatically dispersed intact tails and 2 dpa
regeneration buds (Fig. S3A). Cell clusters that reflect most of the
tissues constituting the tail, such as the epidermis, muscles,
notochord, nerves and blood cells, were detected (Fig. 3A and
Fig. S3B,C), suggesting that the data covered a broad range of
tissues in the tail. rfem.L and rfem.S were expressed in a few cells,
and their expression was well correlated (Fig. 3B). The rfem.L- and
rfem.S-expressing cell fraction was found in both intact tails
and regeneration buds (Fig. S3D), and the fraction belonged to a
cluster of leukocytes, indicating that rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing
cells are a type of leukocyte. We examined genes that are
characteristically
expressed
in
the
fraction
and
found
that
expression of c1qc.L, csf1r.S, trem2.S, art5.L and crp.4.L was
enriched (Fig. 3C). In particular, the expression of c1qc.L and art5.L
correlated well with that of rfem.L and rfem.S, and these two genes
were identified in the first screening of this study (Table S1).
Complement component 1 subcomponent C chain (C1q) is
produced in tissue phagocytes such as macrophages and dendritic
cells (Thi et al., 2017). colony stimulating factor-1 receptor (csf1r)
and triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (trem2) are
known to be expressed on myeloid cells such as macrophages and
dendritic cells (Stanley and Chitu, 2014; MacDonald et al., 2005;
Hickman and El, 2014). These results revealed that rfem.L- and
rfem.S-expressing cells had a macrophage-like gene expression
profile.
Because rfem.L and rfem.S are identified as genes that are
downregulated in il11 KD tadpoles (Fig. S3E), we assessed whether
the rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing cells respond to Il11 by analyzing
their il11 receptor subunit alpha (il11ra.L) expression, and found
that il11ra.L expression was not detected (Fig. S3F). Therefore, it is
possible that rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing cells do not receive Il11
directly and thus are regulated indirectly by Il11 signaling. We could
not, however, exclude the possibility that the rfem.L- and rfem.S-
expressing cells express il11ra.L under the detection threshold
because of the relatively low sensitivity of detection of gene
expression by scRNA-seq.
Expression of rfem.L or rfem.S in macrophage-like cells is
required for tail regeneration
To assess the relationship between tail regenerative capacity, and
rfem.L and rfem.S expression in leukocytes, we examined the
correlation between the area of the regenerated tail and the KO score
in the peripheral blood cell (PBC) fraction of rfem.L and rfem.S KD
tadpoles, but failed to detect a tendency for the regenerated area to
be smaller in tadpoles with higher KO scores in the fraction
(Fig. S2I), possibly because of the small proportion of rfem.L- and
rfem.S-expressing leukocytes in PBCs. To investigate the role of the
rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing leukocytes in tail regeneration
directly, we attempted to examine the effects of depletion of
rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing leukocytes on tail regeneration. The
Fig. 2. rfem.L and/or rfem.S are required for normal tail regeneration. (A) Experimental design of rfem.L and rfem.S KD. (B) Representative images of
regenerated tails at 7 dpa in tadpoles from tyr KD, and rfem.L and rfem.S KD groups. Gray dashed lines indicate the outline of the tail. Arrowheads indicate
amputation sites. Scale bars: 2 mm. Other examples of regenerated tails are shown in Fig. S2D. (C) Regeneration rates of tyr KD (n=18), and rfem.L and
rfem.S KD (n=18) groups. Tadpoles from each experimental group were classified into two groups depending on the morphology of the regenerated tails:
perfect or imperfect (see Materials and Methods). *P<0.05 versus tyr KD, Fisher’s exact test. Data are representative of three experiments; the other results
are shown in Fig. S2E. (D,E) Measured (D) area and (E) length of regenerated tails at (D) 3, 5 and 7 dpa, and (E) 7 dpa in tyr KD (n=18), and rfem.L and
rfem.S KD (n=18) groups. Data are mean±s.d. in D. In E, the horizontal lines indicate the 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles. Other results are shown in
Fig. S2F,G.*P<0.05, Welch’s t-test.
3
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2023) 150, dev200467. doi:10.1242/dev.200467
DEVELOPMENT

major fraction of rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing cells co-expressed
csf1r.S (Fig. 3C and Fig. S4A), a receptor for colony stimulating
factor 1 (csf1). Csf1 is a cytokine that is essential for differentiation
and survival of monocytes and macrophage lineage cells in
mammals (Nakamichi et al., 2013), and Csf1 is also reported to
function in X. laevis (Grayfer and Robert, 2013). We therefore
assumed that csf1 KD depletes Csf1-dependent cells, including the
rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing leukocytes. X. laevis has only one
csf1 gene on the genome (csf1.S) and we designed two gRNAs
(gRNA#4 and gRNA#5; Fig. S4B) for csf1.S and generated csf1 KD
tadpoles using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Tadpoles injected with
only cas9 mRNA were used as controls (cas9 groups). ICE analysis
confirmed that gene editing was successful at the target site of each
gRNA (Fig. S4C). csf1 KD did not decrease normal development
rates (Table. S4). We quantified the rfem.L and rfem.S expression
levels (Fig. 4A), and the number of rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing
cells (Fig. 4B) in the tail stumps of csf1 KD tadpoles, and found that
both were significantly decreased, suggesting that csf1 KD depleted
the rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing leukocytes. We also quantified
genes with expression patterns similar to that of rfem.L and rfem.S in
the scRNA-seq; expression levels of c1qa.L, c1qb.L, c1qc.L, art5.L
and crp.4.L (Fig. S4D, E); and the number of c1qa.L-expressing
cells (Fig. S4F). We and observed a significant reduction or a trend
towards reduction of the expression levels and number in the tail
stumps in csf1 KD tadpoles. The lack of a statistically significant
reduction in the cell number may be due to the difficulty in detecting
clqa.L-expressing cells because of their low expression level.
Several csf1 KD tadpoles showed tail regeneration defects with
the tails becoming thinnerand bending in strange directions (Fig. S4G),
and the regeneration rates of csf1 KD groups were lower or tended to be
lower than those of the control groups (Fig. S4H and Table S4).
To confirm that rfem.L and/or rfem.S expression in leukocytes is
required for regeneration, we performed cell type-specific rescue
experiments using the zebrafish mpeg1 promoter, which is reported
to work in X. laevis macrophage-like cells (Paredes et al., 2015).
We designed constructs that express rfem.L and acgfp1 (Aequorea
coerulescens gene encoding green fluorescent protein) bicistronically,
or only acgfp1 under control of the mpeg1 promoter (mpeg1:rfem
and mpeg1:gfp respectively, Fig. S4I) to perform macrophage-like
cell-specific rescue in rfem.L and rfem.S KD tadpoles (Fig. 4C).
Scattered gfp-expressing cells were observed in regenerating tails of
tadpoles injected with the construct (Fig. 4D and Fig. S4J),
suggesting that the construct worked as expected. Compared with
control tadpoles, the area and length of the regenerated tails in the
mpeg1:rfem-rescued 7 dpa rfem.L and rfem.S KD tadpoles were
significantly recovered (Fig. 4E,F and Fig. S4K,L), indicating
that rfem.L or rfem.S expression in macrophage-like cells has an
indispensable role in successful tail regeneration.
In this study, we identified rfem.L and rfem.S as genes required
for tail regeneration, and indicated that rfem.L and rfem.S have
an essential role in the regeneration-promoting function of
macrophage-like cells. Leukocytes are recruited to the wound site
Fig. 3. rfem.L and rfem.S are expressed in a subset of leukocytes with a macrophage-like gene expression profile. (A) UMAP plot of cells detected in
the scRNA-seq. Cells from the tail tips and tail stumps from intact tadpoles, and the regeneration bud at 2 dpa in tadpoles are plotted together and divided
into 50 clusters shown in different colors. (B) rfem.L and rfem.S expression on a UMAP plot. (Upper left) rfem.L and (upper right) rfem.S expression are
plotted using red and green dots, respectively. (Lower) Expression of rfem.L and rfem.S is shown by merged colors. Insets in each plot are magnified images
of the leukocyte clusters, which are outlined in the plots. Black arrowheads indicate the fraction of the rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing cells. (C) Genes with
enriched expression in the rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing cells.
4
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2023) 150, dev200467. doi:10.1242/dev.200467
DEVELOPMENT

to contribute to wound healing by killing pathogens and producing
various cytokines (Koh and DiPietro, 2011; Wynn and Vannella,
2016). On the other hand, an excessive inflammatory response can
lead to regenerative failure. In X. laevis, it is suggested that there are
inflammatory and reparative myeloid cells that impair and promote
tail regeneration, respectively (Aztekin et al., 2020). The rfem.L-
and rfem.S-expressing macrophage-like cells identified by this
study define a (sub)population of these reparative myeloid
populations. We propose that rfem.L and rfem.S provide a clue to
unveiling the cellular and molecular mechanisms that promote
regenerative ability in leukocytes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
X. laevis adults were purchased from domestic breeders (Hamamatsu
Seibutsu Kyouzai, Shizuoka, Japan; Watanabe Zoushoku, Hyogo, Japan).
Tadpoles were obtained by mating X. laevis adults or by artificial
fertilization. Adult frogs and tadpoles were kept at 20°C. Surgical
procedures such as dissections and amputations were performed under
0.02% ethyl 3-aminobenzoate methanesulfonate salt (MS-222, Millipore
Sigma) or ice anesthesia. Tail amputation was performed at 4 days post-
fertilization (4 dpf; stage 41). Tadpoles were randomly assigned to
experimental groups. Animals used in this study were grown under
identical conditions without blinding. Animal experiments were performed
Fig. 4. rfem.L or rfem.S expression in macrophage-like cells is required for tail regeneration. (A) Relative expression levels of rfem.L and rfem.S in the
tail stumps at 24 h post-amputation in tadpoles from cas9 and csf1 KD groups. Vertical axes represent relative expression levels normalized to those of ef1a.
Data are mean±s.d., n=3. *P<0.05, Welch’s t-test. (B) (Left) Representative images of in situ hybridization of rfem.L and rfem.S on sagittal sections of tails
from 1 dpa tyr KD and csf1 KD tadpoles. Red arrowheads indicate signals. Blue dashed lines in the schematic diagrams outline the location of the sections.
nc, notochord; sm, skeletal muscle. Scale bars: 200 μm. (Right) Number of rfem.L- and rfem.S-expressing cells in sections of 1 dpa tails of tyr KD (31
sections from seven tadpoles) or csf1 KD (34 sections from eight tadpoles) tadpoles. Data are mean±s.d., *P<0.05, Welch’s t-test. (C) Design of rfem.L and
rfem.S rescue experiment. Normal development ratios are shown in Table S5. (D) Representative images of GFP-expressing cells in regenerated tails at 7
dpa in rfem.L and rfem.S KD tadpoles co-injected with the mpeg1:gfp (control) or mpeg1:rfem (rfem-rescued) constructs. Gray dashed lines indicate the
outline of the tail. White arrowheads indicate representative GFP-expressing cells. The yellow arrowhead indicates ectopic expression of GFP in muscle.
Scale bars: 1 mm. (E) Representative image of regenerated tails at 7 dpa in a control, and an rfem.L-rescued rfem KD tadpole. Gray dashed lines show the
outline of the tail. Arrowheads indicate amputation sites. Scale bars: 2 mm. (F) Measured area and length of regenerated tails at 7 dpa in control (n=17) and
rfem.L-rescued (n=21) groups. *P<0.05, Welch’s t-test. Data are representative of three experiments; the other results are shown in Fig. S4K,L.
5
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2023) 150, dev200467. doi:10.1242/dev.200467
DEVELOPMENT

in accordance with the Guidelines for Proper Conduct of Animal
Experiments of Science Council of Japan. The protocols of experiments
using living modified organisms in this study were approved by the
Committee on Living Modified Organism Experiments of the Graduate
School of Science at the University of Tokyo (DNA Exp 17-3).
Sample size
No statistical methods were used to predetermine the sample size.
Quantitative reverse transcription -PCR (qRT-PCR)
To quantify the rfem.L- and rfem.S expression in the tail stumps after tail
amputation, we amputated tadpole tails at 4 dpf and sampled four batches of
20 tail stumps at 0, 1, 3, 5 and 7 dpa. Total RNA was extracted using an
RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) and Micro Smash MS-100 (Tomy Seiko).
cDNAs were synthesized from the same amounts of total RNAs per sample
using a PrimeScript RT reagent Kit with gDNA Eraser (Perfect Real Time)
(Takara). A group without reverse transcription (RT-) was also prepared as a
control. Real-time-PCR was performed with SYBR premix ExTaq II
(Takara) or TB Green Ex Taq II (Tli RNaseH Plus) (Takara) and
LightCycler 480 (Roche). Sequences of primers used are shown in
Table S6. Because the sequences of rfem.L and rfem.S are quite similar
and it was difficult to design primers specific to rfem.L or rfem.S,
respectively, and the amplicon sizes are within 80-150 bp for qRT-PCR,
we designed primers for the consensus sequences of rfem.L and rfem.S
to amplify both of them. The threshold cycle was calculated using the
2nd derivative maximum method. The relative expression levels were
normalized to those of elongation factor 1 alpha. We electrophoresed
the PCR products and confirmed that no amplification was detected in the
RT−group. Tukey-Kramer’s test was performed using R (v3.6.3).
To quantify the gene expression in csf1 KD tadpoles, we amputated the
tails of csf1 KD and cas9 tadpoles, and sampled three batches of 12 tail
stumps at 1 day post amputation, and qRT-PCR was performed as described
above.
In situ hybridization
For cloning the rfem.L and rfem.S partial sequences, cDNA was synthesized
from the total RNA of thymi of X. laevis J strain stage 52 tadpoles with
TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and SuperScript III Reverse
Transcriptase (Thermo Fisher Scientific); then, the partial sequences of
rfem.L and rfem.S were amplified by PCR with the cDNA, and the PCR
products were cloned into a pGEM-T Easy vector (Promega). Sequences of
the primers used are shown in Table S6. To synthesis RNA probes, the
cloned vectors were amplified by PCR, and then PCR products were
purified using FastGene Gel/PCR Extraction Kit (Nippon Genetics).
Digoxigenin (DIG)-labeled RNA probes were synthesized using DIG
RNA labeling Mix (Roche) and T7 or SP6 RNA polymerase (Roche) with
the purified PCR products as templates. The probes were purified by ethanol
precipitation. We synthesized probes for rfem.L and rfem.S, and the
synthesis was confirmed by denaturing gel electrophoresis.
In situ hybridization was performed as described previously (Tsujioka
et al., 2017; Hatta-Kobayashi et al., 2016) with several modifications. Intact
4 dpf tadpoles, and tadpoles amputated at 4 dpf at 3 dpa were fixed in
MEMFA fixative [0.1 M MOPS (pH 7.4), 2 mM EGTA (pH 8.0), 1 mM
MgSO4 and 10% formalin) at room temperature for 48 h. They were
dehydrated in an ethanol and Clear Plus (Falma) series and embedded in
Paraplast plus (Leica); 8 µm sections were prepared and adhered to MAS-
coated slide glass (Matsunami Glass). Sections were deparaffinized and
rehydrated with a Clear Plus and ethanol series, permeabilized with 20 µg/ml
proteinase K (Roche) and 1% Triton X-100, followed by acetylation with
0.25% acetic anhydride. The mixture of DIG-labeled rfem.L and rfem.S
probes was hybridized in buffer containing 50% formamide, 5× SSC (75 mM
trisodium citrate and 750 mM NaCl), 240 µg/ml torula yeast RNA (Millipore
Sigma), 500 µg/ml salmon sperm DNA (FUJIFILM Wako Chemical) and
50× Denhardt’s solution (FUJIFILM Wako) at 58°C for 16 h. Slides were
washed with 0.2× SSC at 58°C. Sections were incubated with 1/5000 diluted
alkaline
phosphatase-conjugated
anti-DIG
antibody
(catalogue
code
11175041910, lot 44053100, Roche). Signals were detected with NTM
buffer [100 mM Tris (pH 9.5), 100 mM NaCl and 50 mM MgCl2]
supplemented with 1/100 volume of NBT/BCIP stock solution (Roche).
The endogenous melanin pigments were bleached by placing the slides in
0.5× SSC containing 0.3% H2O2 under fluorescent light overnight. The
sections were mounted with 50% glycerol. The slides were observed using a
differential interference microscope.
Knockdown experiments
KD
experiments
using
the
CRISPR/Cas9
system
were
performed
essentially as described previously (Tsujioka et al., 2017; Kato et al.,
2021). Guide RNAs were synthesized as follows. The rfem.L, rfem.S, tyr.L
and tyr.S sequences were obtained from Xenbase (RRID:SCR_003280;
Xetrov90002578m.L for rfem.L and Xetrov90002579m.S for rfem.S,
respectively). The csf1.S sequence (|JX418294.1) (Grayfer and Robert,
2013) was obtained from the NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). The
guide RNAs were designed with CRISPRdirect (http://crispr.dbcls.jp/)
(Naito et al., 2015). Two guide RNAs per gene were designed to improve the
KD efficiency. The target sequences are shown in Table S6. The guide RNA
#1 targets the same sequences of rfem.L and rfem.S (Fig. S2A). The target
sequences were inserted into the DR274 plasmid (Hwang et al., 2013) (for
gRNAs #1, #2 and #3) or the DR274-T7dG1 plasmid [for gRNAs #4 and
#5; modified DR274 plasmid was used for synthesis of gRNAs that have one
guanine at the 5′ end; DR274 was digested with BsaI (New England
Biolabs) and the GAGACCGAGAGAGGGTCTCA sequence was inserted
downstream of the T7 promoter to generate the DR274-T7dG1], and guide
RNA was synthesized using an AmpliScribe T7-Flash Transcription Kit
(Lucigen) then purified with an RNeasy Mini Kit. The synthesis was
confirmed by denaturing gel electrophoresis.
For cas9 mRNA synthesis, pXT7-hcas9 (China Zebrafish Resource
Center) (Chang et al., 2013) was digested with Xba I (Takara) and then
mRNA was synthesized using mMESSAGE mMACHINE T7 ULTRA Kit
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) and purified with an RNeasy Mini Kit. The
synthesis was confirmed by denaturing gel electrophoresis.
Artificial fertilization was performed as follows. Unfertilized eggs were
obtained by squeezing an adult female frog that was injected with 500 units
of gonadotropin (ASKA Pharmaceutical) the previous night. A sperm
suspension was prepared by shredding a part of a testis in 0.33× De Boer
solution (18.3 mM NaCl, 217 μM KCl, 73 μM CaCl2 and 695 μM
NaHCO3). Eggs were fertilized by mixing with sperm suspension.
Fertilized eggs were dejellied with 3% cysteine (pH 7.6) and chilled to
12°C in 0.1×MMR [10 mM NaCl, 200 µM KCl, 100 µM MgSO4, 200 µM
CaCl2, 500 µM HEPES (pH 7.4)].
We injected 18.4 nl of the guide RNA and cas9 mRNA solution into the
animal hemisphere of healthy one-cell stage embryos in 0.1×MMR
supplemented with 2% Ficoll PM 400 (Cytiva) at 12°C using a Nanoject
II (Drummond Scientific Company). Concentrations of cas9 mRNA and
guide RNA were as follows: guide RNA, 80 ng/µl each; cas9 mRNA,
700 ng/µl for rfem.L and rfem.S KD, and 1000 ng/µl for csf1 KD. Embryos
of control group were injected with guide RNA#6 and #7 (tyr KD) and cas9
mRNA at the same concentration as the experimental group. Injected
embryos were kept separately in 96-well plates (one embryo/well) in 0.1×
MMR at 12°C for 24 h and then reared at 20°C.
Rates of normally developed tadpoles were counted at 3 dpf (stage
36-39), then healthy tadpoles with a normal morphology and motility were
transferred to 0.1× Steinberg solution [5.8 mM NaCl, 67 µM KCl, 34 µM
Ca(NO3)2, 83 µM MgSO4 and 300 µM HEPES (pH7.4)] in a 90 mm dish.
We used any mRNA and gRNA-injected, surviving and healthy tadpoles at
4 dpa for each experiment. Tadpole tails were amputated at 4 dpf,
maintained for 7 days and then classified into two groups depending on the
morphology of the regenerated tails, as follows: perfect, regenerated tail
with normal morphology of muscle, notochord and fin; imperfect, no tail
regeneration or regenerated tail with defects in any tissues and/or vent axis.
Dead tadpoles or tadpoles with severe malformation of the whole body were
excluded from counting. Statistical significance of the ratio of perfect/
imperfect was assessed by two-sided Fisher’s exact test using R (v3.6.3).
Measurement of the regenerated tails were performed as described
previously (Suzuki et al., 2022); we took photos of the regenerated tails
of tadpoles and the parameters (area and length of regenerated tail) were
measured using Fiji (Schindelin et al., 2012).
6
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2023) 150, dev200467. doi:10.1242/dev.200467
DEVELOPMENT

Estimation of KO scores of gRNA target sites
To estimate the KO scores, genomic DNA was extracted from the whole
body, amputated tail or blood cells (sample types depend on each
experiment) by boiling them in 50 mM NaOH at 98°C for 10 min,
followed by neutralization with 1/10 volume of 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.5).
PBCs were collected as described previously (Naora et al., 2013) with
minor modifications. After tail amputation, each tadpole was immersed
in 0.6% sodium chloride with 2.5 mM EDTA in a 0.2 ml PCR tube and
left to bleed for 45 min. The tadpoles were then removed and the resulting
blood fraction was centrifuged at 500 g for 5 min to pellet blood cells.
The supernatant was removed and pelleted blood cells were resuspended in
10 µl of 50 mM NaOH, and genomic DNA was extracted as described
above.
PCR and Sanger sequencing were performed with the primers listed in
Table S6. Sequence data were subjected to ICE analysis (Hsiau et al., 2018
preprint) (https://ice.synthego.com/) to estimate the KO scores (proportion
of cells with either a frameshift, or at least a 21 bp insertion/deletion.).
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq)
Tails of intact tadpoles at 4 dpf and tadpoles at 2 dpa whose tails were
amputated at 4 dpf (as ‘regeneration bud’) were subjected to scRNA-seq.
Intact tails were divided into anterior (as ‘tail stump’) and posterior (as ‘tail
tip’) parts (Fig. S3A). Tails were shredded using a razor. Cells were then
enzymatically dispersed by treating them in 1× PBS (137 mM NaCl,
2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4 and 1.8 mM KH2PO4) supplemented with
0.4 mg/ml of Liberase TH Research Grade (Roche) and 177.7 units/μl
DNase I (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 40 min on a rotator at 30°C.
Dispersed cells were washed and suspended in 1× sorting buffer [1× PBS
supplemented with 1 mM EDTA, 25 mM HEPES and 1% BSA (Nacalai
Tesque)], then filtered through a 55 μm opening nylon mesh (AS ONE,
Osaka, Japan). Dead cells were stained by adding 1/100 volume of 7-AAD
(TONBO Biosciences). Live cells in the cell suspension (7-AAD negative)
were sorted using a FACS Aria III (Becton, Dickinson and Company).
Doublet or multiplet events were gated out using height and width
parameters of forward and side scatter. Sorted cells were used to generate
scRNA-seq libraries using Chromium Single Cell 3′ Reagent Kits v3 (10X
Genomics), followed by sequencing on a Novaseq 6000 (Illumina).
Output data were processed using Cell Ranger v3.0.2 to generate a gene
count matrix. We used a genome sequence file generated by combining the
X. laevis genome version 9.1 sequence (Xla.v91.repeatMasked.fa) and
mitochondrial genome sequence of genome version 9.2 (XL9_2.fa) for
mapping, and a gene model file generated by combining the gene model
for genome version 9.1 (XL_9.1_v1.8.3.2.primaryTranscripts.gff3) and
mitochondrial gene annotation of the gene model for genome version 9.2
(XENLA_9.2_Xenbase.gff3) for read counting. The genome sequence files
and the gene model files were obtained from Xenbase. The generated count
matrix was analyzed using Seurat package v3.2.2 (Stuart et al., 2019). The
cells whose percentage of mitochondrial gene counts per total gene counts
exceeded 20, or whose total gene counts were outside a 500-10,000 range
were excluded from the analysis. The numbers of cells used for analysis
were as follows: tail stump, 6622; tail tip, 7600; regeneration bud, 7400.
The gene counts were normalized by the total expression of each cell and
scaled; linear dimensional reduction was then performed by principal
component analysis. For clustering the cells, we used FindNeighbors
and FindClusters functions on Seurat using PC1-PC100, which divided
cells to 50 clusters, and processed data was visualized using Uniform
Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) (Mcinnes et al., 2018
preprint).
Analysis of the published RNA-seq data
The RNA-seq data of the X. laevis embryo developmental expression
(Session et al., 2016) and tail stumps at 48 h after amputation of il11 KD and
control tadpoles (Tsujioka et al., 2017) were analyzed using HISAT2 v2.1.0
(Kim et al., 2019) for mapping, and HTSeq v0.11.2 (Anders et al., 2015) for
read counting, with the genome sequence file (Xla.v91.repeatMasked.fa)
and the gene model file (XL_9.1_v1.8.3.2.primaryTranscripts.gff3).
Differential expression analysis was performed using DESeq2 package
v1.32.0 (Love et al., 2014).
RNA-seq of tail stumps of rfem KD tadpoles
rfem.L and rfem.S KD tadpoles were obtained as described above. For the
control group, tadpoles injected with only cas9 mRNA were used. We
amputated the tails of tadpoles at 4 dpf, then 13-20 tail stumps of tadpoles were
sampled 48 h after amputation. We collected samples from three different
batches. The samples were homogenized using TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher
Scientific), and extraction of total RNA and the following RNA-seq were
performed at Tsukuba i-Laboratory LLP (Ibaraki, Japan). Extracted total RNA
was subjected to mRNA isolation using NEBNext Poly(A) mRNA Magnetic
Isolation Module (New England Biolabs). cDNA libraries were produced
using a NEBNext Ultra Directional RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (New
England Biolabs). Sequencing was performed using a NextSeq500 (Illumina)
to generate ∼4×107 paired-ends reads (36 bp ×2) from each cDNA library. The
RNA-seq data were analyzed as described above.
Cell type-specific rescue experiments
The rescue construct was generated as follows. Two I-SceI meganuclease
recognition sites were inserted between SphI and PstI sites, and KpnI and
SacI sites, respectively, of the pUC19 plasmid to generate the pIS2 plasmid.
A DNA fragment containing the zebrafish mpeg1 promoter sequence
(Paredes et al., 2015), rfem.L-coding sequence, P2A, acgfp1-coding
sequence, and SV40 polyadenylation signals were synthesized by Twist
Bioscience. Synonymous substitutions were introduced into the rfem.L
sequence at gRNA#1 and #2 target sites [#1, GGGATtTAttctTCtATcCC; #2,
GGAGCcTGGGTttTaTAcCA (substitutions are indicated with a lowercase
letter)]. A DNA fragment without the rfem.L-coding sequence and P2A was
also synthesized for the control experiment. pIS2 plasmid was digested with
XbaI and the DNA fragment was inserted using an In-Fusion HD cloning kit
(Takara) to generate mpeg1:rfem and mpeg1:gfp constructs, respectively.
Cell type-specific rfem.L forced-expression in rfem.L and rfem.S KD
tadpoles was performed as follows. The constructs had two I-SceI sites to
perform I-SceI mediated transgenesis, which would facilitate the expression
by stably inserting into the genome, in addition to the free constructs
remaining in the cells of the tadpole at the time of tail amputation. I-SceI
mediated transgenesis was performed as described previously (Ogino et al.,
2006) with several modifications. We prepared a solution containing
1.25 µM of Cas9 protein (PNA Bio), 13.3 ng/µl of rfem.L/S gRNA #1, #2
and #3, respectively, 0.5 units/µl of I-SceI (New England Biolabs), 75 ng/µl
of mpeg1:rfem or mpeg1:gfp constructs, and 1×CutSmart Buffer (New
England Biolabs). The solution was incubated at 37°C for 30 min, then
18.4 nl was injected into one-cell stage embryos as described above.
Injected embryos were maintained at 20°C. Tails of tadpoles were
amputated at 4 dpf, followed by assessment of the regenerative capacity
by measuring of the area and length of the regenerated tails at 7 dpa. A two-
sided Fisher’s exact text was performed using R (v3.6.3)
General statistical analyses
All statistical analyses were conducted in R (v3.6.3). The statistical method
and sample size are provided in the corresponding figure legends.
Acknowledgements
Cell sorting and flow cytometry analysis for this study were performed on instruments
in the FACS Core Laboratory at The Institute of Medical Science, The University of
Tokyo, with technical support of FACS Core Laboratory staff. scRNA-seq work was
supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (KAKENHI 16H06279
to the Platform for Advanced Genome Science).
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: M.D., T.F.; Methodology: M.D., T.F.; Investigation: M.D., T.F.;
Writing - original draft: M.D., T.F., T.K.; Visualization: M.D.; Supervision: T.K.; Project
administration: T.F., T.K.; Funding acquisition: T.F., T.K.
Funding
This study was partly supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C) from
the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS KAKENHI 19K06437 to T.F.)
and by Challenging Research (Exploratory) from the Japan Society for the
7
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2023) 150, dev200467. doi:10.1242/dev.200467
DEVELOPMENT

Promotion of Science (JSPS KAKENHI 20K21517 to T.K., 22K19325 to T.F.). Open
Access funding provided by the University of Tokyo. Deposited in PMC for
immediate release.
Data availability
The scRNA-seq and the RNA-seq data have been deposited in the DDBJ under
accession numbers DRA009253 and DRA015181, respectively.
Peer review history
The peer review history is available online at https://journals.biologists.com/dev/
lookup/doi/10.1242/dev.200467.reviewer-comments.pdf.
References
Anders, S., Pyl, P. T. and Huber, W. (2015). HTSeq—a Python framework to work
with high-throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics 31, 166-169. doi:10.1093/
bioinformatics/btu638
Aztekin, C., Hiscock, T. W., Butler, R., De Jesús Andino, F., Robert, J.,
Gurdon, J. B. and Jullien, J. (2020). The myeloid lineage is required for the
emergence of a regeneration-permissive environment following Xenopus tail
amputation. Development 147, dev185496. doi:10.1242/dev.185496
Beck, C. W., Christen, B. and Slack, J. M. W. (2003). Molecular pathways needed
for regeneration of spinal cord and muscle in a vertebrate. Dev. Cell 5, 429-439.
doi:10.1016/S1534-5807(03)00233-8
Beck, C. W., Izpisúa Belmonte, J. C. and Christen, B. (2009). Beyond early
development: Xenopus as an emerging model for the study of regenerative
mechanisms. Dev. Dyn. 238, 1226-1248. doi:10.1002/dvdy.21890
Cesare, G. and Slack, J. M. W. (2004). Cell lineage tracing during Xenopus tail
regeneration. Development 131, 2669-2679. doi:10.1242/dev.01155
Chang, N., Sun, C., Gao, L., Zhu, D., Xu, X., Zhu, X., Xiong, J. and Xi, J. J. (2013).
Genome editing with RNA-guided Cas9 nuclease in Zebrafish embryos. Cell Res.
23, 465-472. doi:10.1038/cr.2013.45
Grayfer, L. and Robert, J. (2013). Colony-Stimulating Factor-1-Responsive
Macrophage Precursors Reside in the Amphibian (Xenopus laevis) Bone
Marrow rather than the Hematopoietic Subcapsular Liver. Journal of Innate
Immunity 5, 531-542. doi:10.1159/000346928
Hatta-Kobayashi,
Y.,
Toyama-Shirai,
M.,
Yamanaka,
T.,
Takamori,
M.,
Wakabayashi, Y., Naora, Y., Kunieda, T., Fukazawa, T. and Kubo, T. (2016).
Acute phase response in amputated tail stumps and neural tissue-preferential
expression in tail bud embryos of the Xenopus neuronal pentraxin I gene.
Development, Growth & Differentiation 58, 688-701. doi:10.1111/dgd.12326
Hickman, S. E. and El, K. J. (2014). TREM2 and the neuroimmunology of
Alzheimer’s disease. Biochem. Pharmacol. 88, 495-498. doi:10.1016/j.bcp.2013.
11.021
Hsiau, T., Maures, T., Waite, K., Yang, J., Kelso, R., Holden, K. and Stoner, R.
(2018). Inference of CRISPR edits from sanger trace data. bioRxiv. doi:10.1101/
251082
Hwang, W. Y., Fu, Y., Reyon, D., Maeder, M. L., Tsai, S. Q., Sander, J. D.,
Peterson, R. T., Yeh, J.-R. J. and Joung, J. K. (2013). Efficient genome editing
in zebrafish using a CRISPR-Cas system. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 227-229.
doi:10.1038/nbt.2501
Kato, S., Fukazawa, T. and Kubo, T. (2021). Low-temperature incubation improves
both knock-in and knock-down efficiencies by the CRISPR/Cas9 system in
Xenopus laevis as revealed by quantitative analysis. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 543, 50-55. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.11.038
Kim, D., Paggi, J. M., Park, C., Bennett, C. and Salzberg, S. L. (2019). Graph-
based genome alignment and genotyping with HISAT2 and HISAT-genotype. Nat.
Biotechnol. 37, 907-915. doi:10.1038/s41587-019-0201-4
Koh, T. J. and Dipietro, L. A. (2011). Inflammation and wound healing: the
role of the macrophage. Expert Rev. Mol. Med. 13, e23. doi:10.1017/
S1462399411001943
Love, M. I., Huber, W. and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold change
and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 1-21.
doi:10.1186/gb-2014-15-1-r1
Macdonald, K. P. A., Rowe, V., Bofinger, H. M., Thomas, R., Sasmono, T.,
Hume, D. A. and Hill, G. R. (2005). The colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor is
expressed on dendritic cells during differentiation and regulates their expansion.
J. Immunol. 175, 1399-1405. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.175.3.1399
Mcinnes, L., Healy, J. and Melville, J. (2018). UMAP: uniform manifold
approximation and projection for dimension reduction. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/
abs/1802.03426.
Naito, Y., Hino, K., Bono, H., Ui-Tei, K. and Naito, Y. (2015). CRISPRdirect:
software for designing CRISPR/Cas guide RNA with reduced off-target sites.
Bioinformatics 31, 1120-1123. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu743
Nakamichi, Y., Udagawa, N. and Takahashi, N. (2013). IL-34 and CSF-1:
Similarities and differences. J. Bone Miner. Metab. 31, 486-495. doi:10.1007/
s00774-013-0476-3
Naora, Y., Hishida, Y., Fukazawa, T., Kunieda, T. and Kubo, T. (2013). Expression
analysis of XPhyH-like during development and tail regeneration in Xenopus
tadpoles: Possible role of XPhyH-like expressing immune cells in impaired
tail regenerative ability. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 431, 152-157.
doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.01.005
Ogino, H., Mcconnell, W. B. and Grainger, R. M. (2006). High-throughput
transgenesis in Xenopus using I-SceI meganuclease. Nat. Protoc. 1, 1703-1710.
doi:10.1038/nprot.2006.208
Paredes, R., Ishibashi, S., Borrill, R., Robert, J. and Amaya, E. (2015). Xenopus:
An in vivo model for imaging the inflammatory response following injury and
bacterial infection. Dev. Biol. 408, 213-228. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.03.008
Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M.,
Pietzsch, T., Preibisch, S., Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B. et al.
(2012). Fiji: An open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods
28, 676-682. doi:10.1038/nmeth.2019
Session, A. M., Uno, Y., Kwon, T., Chapman, J. A., Toyoda, A., Takahashi, S.,
Fukui, A., Hikosaka, A., Suzuki, A., Kondo, M. et al. (2016). Genome evolution
in the allotetraploid frog Xenopus laevis. Nature 538, 336-343. doi:10.1038/
nature19840
Slack, J. M. W., Lin, G. and Chen, Y. (2008). Molecular and cellular basis of
regeneration and tissue repair. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 65, 54-63. doi:10.1007/s00018-
007-7431-1
Stanley, E. R. and Chitu, V. (2014). CSF-1 receptor signaling in myeloid cells. Cold
Spring Harbor Perspect. Biol. 6, a021857. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a021857
Stuart, T., Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Hafemeister, C., Papalexi, E., Mauck, W. M.,
Hao, Y., Stoeckius, M., Smibert, P. and Satija, R. (2019). Comprehensive
integration of single-cell data. Cell 177, 1888-1902.e21. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.
05.031
Suzuki, S., Sasaki, K., Fukazawa, T. and Kubo, T. (2022). Xenopus laevis il11ra.L
is an experimentally proven interleukin-11 receptor component that is required for
tadpole tail regeneration. Sci. Rep. 12, 1903. doi:10.1038/s41598-022-05954-w
Thi, M., Tran, N., Hamada, M., Jeon, H., Shiraishi, R., Asano, K., Hattori, M.,
Nakamura, M., Imamura, Y., Tsunakawa, Y. et al. (2017). MafB is a critical
regulator of complement component C1q. Nat. Commun. 8, 1700. doi:10.1038/
s41467-017-01711-0
Tsujioka, H., Kunieda, T., Katou, Y., Shirahige, K. and Kubo, T. (2015). Unique
gene expression profile of the proliferating Xenopus tadpole tail blastema cells
deciphered by RNA-sequencing analysis. PloS one 10, e0111655. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0111655
Tsujioka, H., Kunieda, T., Katou, Y., Shirahige, K., Fukazawa, T. and Kubo, T.
(2017). interleukin-11 induces and maintains progenitors of different cell lineages
during Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Nat. Commun. 8, 495. doi:10.1038/
s41467-017-00594-5
Wynn, T. A. and Vannella, K. M. (2016). Macrophages in tissue repair,
regeneration, and fibrosis. Immunity 44, 450-462. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2016.
02.015
8
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2023) 150, dev200467. doi:10.1242/dev.200467
DEVELOPMENT

===== Delgehyr2015_MethCellBiol+EpendymalCilia =====
Ependymal cell
differentiation, from
monociliated to
multiciliated cells
2
Nathalie Delgehyr*,x,{, Alice Meunier*,x,{, Marion Faucourt*,x,{,
Montserrat Bosch Grau#,**,xx,{{, Laetitia Strehl*,x,{,jj,
Carsten Janke#,**,xx,1, Nathalie Spassky*,x,{,1
*Institut de Biologie de l’Ecole Normal Supe´rieure (IBENS), Paris, France
xINSERM, U1024, Paris, France
{CNRS, UMR 8197, Paris, France
jjINSERM, UMRS 975, Brain and Spinal Cord Institute, Hoˆpital de la Salpeˆtrie`re, Paris, France
#Curie Institute, Orsay, France
**CNRS, UMR3306, Orsay, France
xxINSERM, U1005, Orsay, France
{{INSERM, UMRS 1120; Unite´ de Ge´ne´tique et Physiologie de l’Audition, Pasteur Institute, Paris,
France
1Corresponding authors: E-mail: nathalie.spassky@ens.fr; carsten.janke@curie.fr
CHAPTER OUTLINE
Introduction.............................................................................................................. 20
1. Methods .............................................................................................................. 20
1.1 Dissection of Lateral Ventricular Walls for Whole-Mount Staining .............. 20
1.1.1 Materials ............................................................................................ 21
1.1.2 Procedure .......................................................................................... 21
1.2 Ependymal Cell Culture ......................................................................... 23
1.2.1 Materials ............................................................................................ 23
1.2.2 Procedure .......................................................................................... 24
1.3 Immunocytochemistry of Cilia ................................................................ 25
1.3.1 Fixation .............................................................................................. 25
1.3.2 Immunoﬂuorescence.......................................................................... 26
1.3.3 Cilia markers ...................................................................................... 28
Conclusion ............................................................................................................... 32
Acknowledgments..................................................................................................... 32
References ............................................................................................................... 32
CHAPTER
Methods in Cell Biology, Volume 127, ISSN 0091-679X, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/bs.mcb.2015.01.004
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
19

Abstract
Primary and motile cilia differ in their structure, composition, and function. In the brain,
primary cilia are immotile signalling organelles present on neural stem cells and neurons.
Multiple motile cilia arefoundon the surface of ependymal cells in allbrainventricles, where
they contribute to the ﬂow of cerebrospinal ﬂuid. During development, monociliated
ependymal progenitor cells differentiate into multiciliated ependymal cells, thus providing a
simple system for studying the transition between these two stages. In this chapter, we
provide protocols for immunoﬂuorescence staining of developing ependymal cells in vivo,
on whole mounts of lateral ventriclewalls, and invitro, on cultured ependymal cells. We also
provide a list of markers we currently use to stain both types of cilia, including proteins at the
ciliary membrane and tubulin posttranslational modiﬁcations of the axoneme.
INTRODUCTION
During development, ependymal cells derive from embryonic neural stem cells
called radial glial cells (RGCs) (Spassky et al., 2005). During this differentiation
process, a large number of centrioles (>50) assemble, migrate apically, and anchor
at the plasma membrane, where they mature to become the basal bodies of motile
cilia. The coordinated beating of these multiple motile cilia assures the ﬂow of
the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (Zappaterra & Lehtinen, 2012). Defective ependymal cells
cause major neurological disorders (Sharma, Berbari, & Yoder, 2008) including hy-
drocephalus, one of the most common developmental abnormalities of the brain,
which is associated with a high rate of morbidity and mortality (Banizs et al.,
2005; Ibanez-Tallon et al., 2004). Conversely, ependymal cells may also be recruited
to form neurons after ischemia (Carlen et al., 2009).
The differentiation of RGCs into ependymal cells provides a simple experi-
mental system to study both primary and motile cilia, as well as the transition be-
tween these two. Primary and motile cilia are structurally different. Primary cilia
are composed of nine radially organized microtubule doublets (9 þ 0), whereas
motile cilia contain an additional central microtubule doublet (9 þ 2) plus dynein
arms that generate the shearing force needed for motility (Marshall & Kintner,
2008). Both types of cilia also differ by the kinds of receptors on their membrane
and the posttranslational modiﬁcations of their microtubules.
In this review, we describe protocols for staining differentiating ependymal cells
(1) on whole mounts of lateral ventricular walls and (2) on isolated primary culture
cells. In addition, we provide a nonexhaustive list of cilia markers of primary or
motile cilia or both.
1. METHODS
1.1 DISSECTION OF LATERAL VENTRICULAR WALLS FOR
WHOLE-MOUNT STAINING
Ependymal cells differentiate progressively from the caudo-ventral to the rostro-dor-
sal part of the lateral walls between postnatal day 0 (P0) and P15 (Figure 1; Spassky
20
CHAPTER 2 Ependymal cell differentiation

et al., 2005). The age at which the animals are sacriﬁced is therefore determined by
the stage to be observed.
1.1.1 Materials
•
Ca2þ/Mg2þ free phosphate buffered saline (PBS)
•
Mayo and Spring scissors, Ultra-ﬁne Micro Knife, and Dumont forceps #5 (Fine
Science Tools) precleaned with soap and 70% ethanol
•
Stereomicroscope
•
Dissection glass dish covered with silicon
1.1.2 Procedure
The different steps of dissection are illustrated in Figure 2.
•
After cervical dislocation, the head of the animal is opened with mayo scissors
and the skin peeled off with a forceps. To remove the skull, incise at the lambda
point (Figure 2(A), arrowhead), cut along the sagittal and interparietal suture
with spring scissors and pull off the parietal and interparietal bones with a
forceps (Figure 2(A), dashed lines). To avoid damaging the lateral walls located
close to the surface of the anterior part of the telencephalon, do not insert the
scissors deeply, and only make movements toward the exterior. Insert the for-
ceps underneath the brain to cut the optic nerves. Carefully remove the brain
from the cranial cavity and cover it with sterile PBS in the dissection dish. The
following steps are performed under a stereomicroscope.
•
With an Ultra-ﬁne Micro Knife, cut along the longitudinal ﬁssure of the brain to
separate the two hemispheres (Figure 2(B), double arrow 1). Cut diagonally deep
FIGURE 1 Differentiation of radial glial cells into ependymal cells along the lateral ventricular
wall during postnatal development.
(A) Schematic representation of the lateral wall at the postnatal days indicated (P3 to P15).
Ependymal cells differentiate progressively from the caudo-ventral to the rostro-dorsal part of
the wall. Red (dark gray in print versions) squares indicate the region imaged in B. (B)
Representative images of the cilia axoneme labeled with the glutamylation marker GT335 at
different stage of differentiation, as in A. Scale bar ¼ 5 mm.
1. Methods
21

underneath the cortex along the superior colliculus to separate the forebrain from
the midbrain and the cerebellum (Figure 2(B)e(C), double arrows 2 and 3). To
maintain the brain, the forceps can be inserted into the cerebellum.
•
Place the brain with the cortex facing down. To maintain the half-brain, the
forceps can be inserted above the corpus callosum and into the thalamus without
damaging the lateral wall (Figure 2(D), dots). Cut the most caudal part of the
half-brain. Insert the scalpel in the space between the cortex and the hippo-
campus (Figure 2(D) arrowhead). Cut the remaining caudal link between them
by pulling the scalpel away from the tissue. This cut releases the medial wall
and the hippocampus, which can then be pulled away from the lateral wall
toward the anterior part of the telencephalon. Cut on each side to separate the
lateral wall from the medial wall (Figure 2(E), arrowheads). This must be done
with care because the two walls are connected; the cuts should be superﬁcial to
avoid damaging the lateral wall. This creates a pit between the lateral and
medial walls where another cut can be made (Figure 2(F), dashed line). The
forceps can be inserted into the olfactory bulb and above the corpus callosum in
order to maintain the structure while cutting (Figure 2(E), dots).
•
Finally, to allow better access by ﬁxatives and antibodies, cut the cortex at the
interface between the corpus callosum and the lateral wall and remove the
thalamus (Figure 2(G), dashed line). Avoid touching, even gently, the underside
of the lateral wall. Usually, the choroid plexus peels off while the thalamus is
being cut. If not carefully removed, it can decrease the penetration of ﬁxative
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
(F)
(G)
(H)
FIGURE 2 Dissection of the lateral wall.
(A) Removal of the skull. (B) Separation of the two brain hemispheres. (C) Removal of the
most caudal part of the hemisphere to expose the hippocampus. (D) Separation of the
hippocampus from the cortex by pulling. (E) Removal of the hippocampus and medial wall.
(F) Separation of the medial wall and the lateral wall. (G) Removal of part of the cortex.
(H) Dissected lateral wall ready for immunostaining.
22
CHAPTER 2 Ependymal cell differentiation

and antibodies. The lateral wall is underlined with a white-dashed line in
Figure 2(H).
Another description of the dissection of the lateral ventricular wall, with a video,
has been published (Mirzadeh, Doetsch, Sawamoto, Wichterle, & Alvarez-Buylla,
2010).
1.2 EPENDYMAL CELL CULTURE
We usually use animals from P0 to P3 for these cultures. In our hands, younger
animals give faster-growing and better-differentiating ependymal cells. After setting
up the culture, the cells ﬁrst expand until they reach conﬂuence (around 4 to 5 days).
They are subsequently plated for the second step in which they differentiate and
grow multiple motile cilia (reaching 70e80% ependymal cells within 15 days,
Figure 3).
1.2.1 Materials
•
Poly-L-Lysine (Sigma) at 40 mg/mL, sterile H2O
•
Hank’s solution: 1X Hank’s balanced salt solution (Gibco), 10 mM Hepes
(Gibco), 0.075% sodium bicarbonate (Gibco), 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin
(10,000 Units; Gibco, P/S)
•
Enzymatic digestion solution: 30 mL of Papain (stock 2 crystalline suspension,
Worthington), 15 mL of DNAse I (stock 1% in water; Worthington), 24 mL of
L-Cysteine (stock 12 mg/mL in water; Sigma) in 1 mL of DMEM/Glutamax,
1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (10,000 Units; Gibco, P/S)
FIGURE 3 Differentiation of radial glial cells into ependymal cells in primary culture.
(A) Schematic representation of coverslips with a drop of cells in the middle at different
stages of differentiation (days after serum withdrawal, from D0 to D12). (B) Representative
images of the ciliary axoneme in the middle of the cell drop labeled with the glutamylation
marker GT335 at different stages of differentiation, as in A. Scale bar ¼ 5 mm.
1. Methods
23

•
Stop solution: 1 mL of trypsin inhibitor (Stock 10 mg/mL trypsin inhibitor
Worthington, 500 mg/mL BSA in PBS), 200 mL of DNAse I (stock 1%;
Worthington) in 10 mL of L15 (Gibco).
•
L15 (Gibco), DMEM/Glutamax, decomplemented Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS),
Penicillin/Streptomycin (P/S)
•
Absolute ethanol, acetone
•
Trypsin-EDTA, Ca2þ/Mg2þ free-PBS
•
12 mm diameter round glass coverslips, 25-cm2 ﬂasks, 24-well plate
1.2.2 Procedure
The protocol is given for one newborn mouse telencephalon and should be adjusted
to the number of animals.
•
Coat a 25-cm2 ﬂask with Poly-L-Lysine for 1 h up to overnight at 37 C. Rinse
3 with sterile water and let the ﬂask dry under a sterile hood for at least 1 h.
Flasks can be kept dried for one month in the refrigerator.
•
Prepare and ﬁlter 1 mL of enzymatic digestion solution.
•
Dissect the mouse telencephalon as described in Section 1 (step 1 to 3) in cold-
ﬁltered Hank’s solution in a sterile dissecting Petri dish. In addition, cut the
olfactory bulbs and peel off the meninges at the surface of the telencephalon
using a sharp forceps. With a small knife, cut the dissected telencephalon into
pieces small enough to pass through a 1-mL pipette tip. Transfer the Hank’s
solution and the pieces of telencephalon to a 15 mL Falcon tube using a 1-mL
tip and centrifuge 1 min at 110 g.
Note 1: Dissection should be rapid and the dissected telencephalon kept on ice to
minimize tissue damage.
Note 2: Up to six telencephala can be pooled together.
•
Remove the supernatant and add 1 mL of the enzymatic digestion solution per
brain. Incubate 45 min to 1 h at 37 C.
•
Prepare and ﬁlter 10 mL of stop solution. This volume can be used for up to four
telencephala.
•
Centrifuge 1 min at 110 g. Remove the supernatant and add the stop solution
•
Centrifuge 1 min at 110 g. Remove the supernatant and add 10 mL of L15 to
rinse. This volume can be used for up to six telencephala.
•
Centrifuge 1 min at 110 g. Remove the supernatant, add 1 mL of L15, and
carefully dissociate the cells mechanically with a 1-mL tip (do not pipette the
cells more than 10 times). This volume can be used for up to six telencephala.
•
Centrifuge 7 min at 110 g. Remove the supernatant and add 3 mL of DMEM/
Glutamax-10% FBS-1% P/S. Inoculate in the coated ﬂask.
•
Renew the media the following day.
•
When the cells reach conﬂuence, usually 4e5 days after inoculation, close
the ﬂask tightly and shake it at 250 rpm overnight at room temperature to
remove weakly attached cells (mainly differentiated oligodendrocytes and
neurons).
24
CHAPTER 2 Ependymal cell differentiation

•
Coat precleaned coverslips with Poly-L-Lysine at 40 mg/mL, in a 24-well plate
for at least 1 h at 37 C. Rinse 3 with sterile water and let the coverslips dry
under the hood for at least 1 h.
Note 1: We usually clean the coverslips with a 20-min acetone bath, two 20-min
baths in absolute ethanol, and dry/sterilization at 220 C for 7 h.
Note 2: One mouse brain sufﬁces for 12 coverslips.
•
Remove the media from the ﬂasks. Rinse with sterile Ca2þ/Mg2þ-free PBS. Add
1 mL of trypsin-EDTA solution and incubate for less than 5 min at 37 C. After
shaking brieﬂy, the cells should ﬂoat. Add 1 mL of decomplemented FBS.
Count the cells with a hemocytometer. Centrifuge the cells 7 min at 110 g.
•
Resuspend the cells in DMEM/Glutamax with 10% FBS and 1% P/S at a con-
centration of 2  105 cell per 20 mL. Carefully drop 20 mL of the cell suspension
onto a coated, dried coverslip without touching the coverslip. Since the
coverslip is dry, the drop should not spread. Incubate 1 h in a cell incubator to
allow the cells to adhere at high density before adding 1 mL per well of DMEM/
Glutamax, 10% FBS, 1% P/S.
•
The following day (Day 0), rinse and incubate the cells in DMEM/Glutamax, 1%
P/S without FBS. The culture is now mainly composed of ependymal progenitor
cells that will progressively differentiate into ependymal cells (Figure 3).
1.3 IMMUNOCYTOCHEMISTRY OF CILIA
1.3.1 Fixation
Dissected lateral walls or cells on coverslips are ﬁxed and rinsed in 6-well and
24-well plates, respectively. The ﬁxation protocol depends on the marker to be
analyzed. For example, proteins linked to the ciliary membrane are often sensitive
to detergent and methanol ﬁxation, whereas the antigens of proteins located at the
base of cilia are often masked by paraformaldehyde (PFA) ﬁxation (Figure 4).
The accessibility of antibody epitopes can vary depending on the ﬁxation. Therefore,
different ﬁxation protocols should be tested for new markers (See Figure 5 for anti-
bodies tested in our laboratory). We usually perform immunoﬂuorescence on the
lateral wall just after ﬁxation, and coverslips can be kept in PBS in the refrigerator
for several days.
1.3.1.1 Paraformaldehyde ﬁxation
Dissected lateral walls or cells on coverslips are immersed in 4% PFA in BRB80
(80 mM K-Pipes, 5 mM Na-EGTA, 5 mM MgCl2 pH 6.8) for 20 min and 6 min,
respectively. However, depending on the antibodies used, the ﬁxation time may
need to be adapted from 6 min at room temperature to overnight at 4 C. Longer ﬁx-
ations facilitate dissection of the lateral wall prior to mounting. Many antibodies that
do not work after PFA ﬁxation might work if the sample is treated with detergent
prior to ﬁxation and if the ﬁxation time is reduced. The detergent partly removes
the cytoplasmic protein pool and increases accessibility of some antibodies.
Different detergents can be used, such as Tween 20 (0.5e1%), NP40 (0.1e0.5%),
1. Methods
25

and Triton-X100 (0.1e1%) in BRB80. Except when labeling membrane proteins,
we routinely use the strongest detergent, Triton-X100, to remove most of the cyto-
plasmic protein pool. Examples of immunoﬂuorescence with different detergent pre-
treatments are presented in Figure 4(A) for a surface membrane protein enriched on
cilia (CD24, (Mirzadeh, Merkle, Soriano-Navarro, Garcia-Verdugo, & Alvarez-
Buylla, 2008)). The dissected lateral wall or the cells on coverslips are then trans-
ferred into PBS.
1.3.1.2 Methanol ﬁxation
Dissected lateral walls or cells on coverslips are rapidly immersed in fresh20 C
methanol and kept at this temperature for 10 min. They are then transferred to PBS.
This ﬁxation procedure causes rapid dehydration and precipitation of proteins
that often deforms tissues and, in our hands, produces curled cilia. Curling can be
avoided by detergent treatment with 0.1% Triton-X100 in BRB80 for 1 min prior
to ﬁxation (Figure 4(B)).
1.3.2 Immunoﬂuorescence
1.3.2.1 Materials
•
Saturation solution: 10% FBS, 0.1% Triton-X100, and PBS
•
Rinsing solution: 0.1% Triton-X100, PBS
FIGURE 4 Examples of ﬁxation.
(A) Examples of short paraformaldehyde (PFA) ﬁxations (6 min) of dissected lateral ventricle
walls with different detergent pretreatments (1 min). Walls were stained for centrins (recognizing
basal bodies, Red, 20H5) and a cell surface marker that is enriched in ependymal cells (Green,
CD24). (B) Examples of different ﬁxations of ependymal culture cells, with or without a 1-min
0.1% Triton-X100 detergent pretreatment, and subsequent staining for glutamylated tubulin
(GT335). Scale bar ¼ 5 mm. (See color plate)
26
CHAPTER 2 Ependymal cell differentiation

FIGURE 5 Table of currently used cilia markers with representative image. Fixations used in
the representative images are in bold.
Scale bar ¼ 5 mm.
1. Methods
27

•
Slides, 24  40 mm coverslips
•
Fluoromount G (SouthernBiotech)
•
Small spoon to manipulate the dissected lateral wall
1.3.2.2 Procedure
•
Prior to immunostaining, dissected lateral walls or cells on coverslips are incu-
bated 1 h in the saturation solution.
•
We typically incubate the samples 2 h at room temperature with the primary
antibodies. However, overnight incubation at 4 C may improve staining for
some markers. Incubation with secondary antibodies is performed for 1 h.
Note: Each dissected lateral wall is incubated with the primary and secondary
antibodies in the saturation solution in a 2-mL Eppendorf tube (volumes should
be adapted to the age of the animals: 100 mL for P0 to 400 mL for adult telen-
cephalon) and on Paraﬁlm for the coverslips in a humidiﬁed chamber (45 mL are
sufﬁcient for one coverslip).
•
Lateral walls or cells are rinsed after the primary and secondary antibodies for at
least 2 5 min in the rinsing solution in 6- or 24-well plates, respectively.
Note: Manipulation of the dissected lateral walls should be kept at a minimum to
avoid damage. We usually use a small spoon to transfer the wall to the 2-mL
Eppendorf tube and then pour off the wall from the 2-mL tubes into the rinse
solution in a 6-well plate.
•
Dissected lateral walls should be further dissected prior to mounting. Cut the
cortex around and underneath the lateral wall. Care should be exercised,
since the wall is curved and is not at the same depth in the rostral and caudal
parts; the rostral part should be undercut ﬁrst then the caudal part. Forceps
can be inserted into the remaining thalamus in order to maintain the struc-
ture while cutting. Finally, the thalamus should be cut away. Transfer the
lateral wall in a large drop (approximately 100 mL put on the coverslip using
a 1-mL tip) of Fluoromount onto a slide. We usually put two dissected lateral
walls on one slide. Cover the samples with the coverslip. Make sure that the
amount of mounting media is sufﬁcient for the surface of the coverslip,
otherwise the sample might be damaged by the pressure generated while
covering it.
•
The cells on coverslips are quickly rinsed in water to remove salts and mounted
on a drop of Fluoromount with the cells face down on the slide.
•
Allow the Fluoromount to dry before observation.
1.3.3 Cilia markers
Different markers recognize primary and/or motile cilia, notably, antibodies that
recognize proteins linked to the ciliary membrane or various posttranslational mod-
iﬁcations of microtubules that are enriched in the axoneme. In the following section,
we will describe a few markers that we recently used (see also Figure 5 for refer-
ences, ﬁxation procedures and antibody concentrations).
28
CHAPTER 2 Ependymal cell differentiation

1.3.3.1 Signalling and membrane proteins
It is well established that primary cilia are sensory organelles in which signalling
molecules are concentrated (Valente, Rosti, Gibbs, & Gleeson, 2013). However,
the kinds of the signalling molecules in cilia vary according to cell type. In the lab-
oratory, we currently use two different antibodies against signalling molecules to
label the primary cilia of RGCs:
•
Arl13b (ADP-ribosylation factor like 13b), a small GTPase of the Arf/Arl family
that speciﬁcally associates with the ciliary membrane through a palmitoyl
moiety (Cevik et al., 2010; Duldulao, Lee, & Sun, 2009; Horner & Caspary,
2011). We observe Arl13b mostly on primary cilia, however, residual staining of
motile cilia is sometimes visible. Interestingly, it has been shown that ciliary
membrane and Arl13b staining may remain at the basal body after axoneme
resorption during the cell cycle (Paridaen, Wilsch-Brauninger, & Huttner,
2013).
•
Adenylate cyclase III that converts ATP to cAMP is present on RGC primary
cilia (Bishop, Berbari, Lewis, & Mykytyn, 2007).
Several studies have identiﬁed receptors on motile cilia; for example, the bitter
taste receptor T2R on airway epithelial cells (Shah, Ben-Shahar, Moninger, Kline, &
Welsh, 2009) or progesterone (Nutu et al., 2009; Teilmann, Clement, Thorup,
Byskov, & Christensen, 2006), estrogen (Shao et al., 2007), and interleukin-6
(Shao et al., 2009) receptors on oviduct epithelium. Motile ependymal cilia can
also be enriched in receptors such as platelet-derived and epidermal growth factor
receptors (Danilov et al., 2009), and in signalling molecules such as polycystin-1
(Wodarczyk et al., 2009) or Vangl2 (Guirao et al., 2010). However, we usually stain
the motile cilia with the pan-ependymal surface marker CD24.
•
CD24, a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored membrane protein attached to
the exterior leaﬂet of the plasma membrane, is enriched at the surface of
ependymal cells and therefore along the ciliary membrane, thus allowing the
detection of motile cilia (Calaora, Chazal, Nielsen, Rougon, & Moreau, 1996;
Mirzadeh et al., 2008). Rare long-primary cilia can sometimes be observed with
this antibody. Coupled to a ﬂuorophore, this antibody can be used for video
microscopy experiments.
•
CD133 (also named prominin1) is a multipass membrane protein proposed to
play a role in the organization of the apical membrane and bind cholesterol.
Like CD24, it is enriched at the surface of ependymal cells including along
motile cilia (Pfenninger et al., 2007). It might also label primary cilia and/or the
cell surface of neural stem cells (Coskun et al., 2008).
1.3.3.2 Posttranslational microtubule modiﬁcations
Microtubules are the structural basis of the ciliary axoneme (Satir & Christensen,
2007). A particularity of axonemal microtubules is the large number of posttransla-
tional tubulin modiﬁcations; thus, many antibodies that speciﬁcally detect those
1. Methods
29

modiﬁcations have been used as cilia markers. A more detailed analysis of the dy-
namics of posttranslational tubulin modiﬁcations in ependymal cells indicates that
the presence of these modiﬁcations on ciliary axonemes depends on the develop-
mental stage, i.e., the maturity of the cilia (Bosch Grau et al., 2013); thus, the anti-
bodies should be chosen with care.
The tubulin-modiﬁcation marker, most commonly used for ciliary staining, is the
antibody 6-11B-1 (LeDizet & Piperno, 1991; Piperno & Fuller, 1985), which specif-
ically detects the acetylation of lysine-40 of alpha-tubulin. Though the modiﬁed res-
idue lies inside the assembled microtubules, the antibody nicely labels acetylated
microtubules in ﬁxed cells. Primary cilia are also completely labeled, indicating
that the ﬁxation procedure might partially damage axonemal microtubules giving
access to the previously hidden epitope for this antibody. On motile cilia ﬁxed
with PFA, however, 6-11B-1 strongly labels the tip of the cilia; labeling decreases
toward the base of the cilia. This effect is more pronounced in aged cilia and be-
comes problematic for the labeling of motile cilia in the ventricle walls of adult
mice. This can be circumvented by ﬁxation with cold methanol after Triton-X100
treatment, which allows staining of the entire length of primary and motile cilia
(Figure 6(A)).
All other tubulin-modiﬁcation markers used to label cilia detect post-translational
modiﬁcations in the carboxy-terminal tails of tubulin, such as (poly)glutamylation,
(poly)glycylation, detyrosination, and D2-tubulin. Since the carboxy-terminal tails
FIGURE 6 Examples of immunostaining of posttranslational tubulin modiﬁcations.
(A) Immunostaining of tubulin acetylation (6-11B1) in PFA or triton-MetOH ﬁxed cells.
(B) Triple Immunostaining of tubulin polyglutamylation (green, polyE), monoglycylation (red,
TAP952) and acetylation (white, 6-11B1) in differentiating ependymal cells; monoglycylation
on primary or motile long cilia is shown. These antibodies can be labeled simultaneously
thanks to their different mouse subclasses (IgG1 and IgG2b). Scale bar ¼ 5 mm. (See color
plate)
30
CHAPTER 2 Ependymal cell differentiation

are situated outside the assembled microtubules (Janke & Bulinski, 2011), they are
freely accessible for the antibodies.
Tubulin glutamylation is detected with the antibody GT335 (Wolff et al., 1992),
which recognizes the branch point of the glutamate-side chain independently of its
ﬁnal length. Therefore, this antibody is a rather broad marker of tubulin glutamyla-
tion and polyglutamylation and nicely labels primary as well as motile cilia at all
developmental stages (Figure 1 and 2). More recently, an antibody that labels
long carboxy-terminal glutamate chains has been used successfully to detect poly-
glutamylation of microtubules (polyE), and is thus even more speciﬁc for primary
and motile cilia since axonemes are modiﬁed by long glutamate-side chains. The
antibody shows some sensitivity to the ﬁxation method used (Magiera & Janke,
2013), but once the experimental conditions have been determined, the antibody
is a nice cilia marker. For example, ﬁxation with Triton-X100 and methanol allow
robust staining, although methanol ﬁxation sometimes lead to spotty labeling with
this antibody. PolyE also visualizes the progression of glutamate-side chain elonga-
tion during axonemal ageing: a gradient of immunoreactivity is observed from the
base to the tip of the cilia (Figure 6(B)).
Glycylation and polyglycylation have so far been detected exclusively on ciliary
axonemes and seem to be particularly concentrated in motile cilia. Antibodies
against these modiﬁcations are thus ideal markers of motile cilia, although with
some limitations. The antibody TAP952 speciﬁcally and selectively detects mono-
glycylation, i.e., the addition of a single glycine residue onto its modiﬁcation
siteda glutamate residue within the primary sequence of tubulin. Thus, in contrast
to GT335 for glutamylation, TAP952 cannot detect glycylation once the chains
become elongated. Longer glycine chains are detected by two other antibodies:
AXO 49 and polyG, which speciﬁcally recognize carboxy-terminal glycine chains
with more than three or four glycine residues, respectively. No antibody exists so
far for the detection of glycine side chains with two residues. In contrast to glutamy-
lation, glycylation is generated after ciliary assembly. Monoglycylation, detected
with TAP952, appears on long cilia, whereas polyglycylation, detected with polyG,
appears only on long mature cilia about one month after assembly of the motile
ependymal cilia (Figure 6(B); Bosch Grau et al., 2013). Primary cilia are only
slightly labeled with TAP952; only long primary cilia can be seen on developing
ventricle walls. It thus appears that TAP952, a good marker of mature motile cilia,
does not efﬁciently stain primary cilia.
Detyrosinated tubulin and D2-tubulin also accumulate in axonemal microtu-
bules; thus, antibodies speciﬁc for those modiﬁcations (anti-detyr-tubulin and
anti-D2-tubulin polyclonal antibodies, Millipore) can be used as markers of both pri-
mary and motile cilia. The generation of D2-tubulin is a follow-up modiﬁcation of
detyrosination and might thus appear slightly later than detyrosination. However,
D2-tubulin has an important advantage: it is scarcely found on cytoplasmic micro-
tubules of ciliated cells.
Finally, the monoclonal antibody 1D5 is a very good cilia marker; however, this
antibody detects two distinct tubulin modiﬁcations and can therefore not been used
1. Methods
31

to draw conclusions on the modiﬁcation status of the observed cilia. 1D5 is speciﬁc
to C-terminal sequences of two glutamate residues; it thus labels detyrosinated
tubulin as well as polyglutamylated tubulin, both of which are enriched in cilia.
Thus, due to the large spectrum of posttranslational tubulin modiﬁcations on
ciliary axonemes, many tubulin-modiﬁcation-speciﬁc antibodies can be used as cilia
markers. However, it should not be forgotten that each of these modiﬁcations plays a
functional role in cilia. Furthermore, not all of the modiﬁcations are present on all
subtypes of cilia, and are not necessarily labeled with equal intensity over the whole
length of the ciliary axoneme. We therefore recommend testing different combina-
tions of antibodies to assure reliable labeling of cilia under speciﬁc experimental
conditions.
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, we have described the protocols currently used to stain different
types of cilia in differentiating ependymal cells in vivo or in vitro. We also gave
an overview of the different markers we use to recognize primary or motile cilia,
with their speciﬁcities and ﬁxation requirements. The ependymal system is unique
in that it allows analysis of the transition between primary and motile cilia in vivo
as well as in vitro.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work summarized in this chapter was supported by the CNRS, the ENS, the Institut Curie,
the INSERM, the FPGG for a 3T grant, the ANR grants ANR-12-BSV4-0006 (NS) and 08-
JCJC-0007 (CJ), the ARC (PJA-20131200184), the “Investissements d’Avenir” program of
the French Government and implemented by the ANR (ANR-10-LABX-54 MEMO LIFE
and ANR-11-IDEX-0001-02 PSL* Research University), a start-up grant from the City of
Paris (NS), the FRM grant DEQ20081213977 (CJ), the HFSP grants RGP0023/2008 (CJ)
and RGY0074/2007 (NS), the INCA grant 2009-1-PL BIO-12-IC-1 (CJ) and La Ligue contre
le cancer-comite´ de Paris (RS14/75-88).
REFERENCES
Banizs, B., Pike, M. M., Millican, C. L., Ferguson, W. B., Komlosi, P., Sheetz, J., et al. (2005).
Dysfunctional cilia lead to altered ependyma and choroid plexus function, and result in the
formation of hydrocephalus. Development, 132, 5329e5339.
Bishop, G. A., Berbari, N. F., Lewis, J., & Mykytyn, K. (2007). Type III adenylyl cyclase
localizes to primary cilia throughout the adult mouse brain. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 505, 562e571.
Bosch Grau, M., Gonzalez Curto, G., Rocha, C., Magiera, M. M., Marques Sousa, P.,
Giordano, T., et al. (2013). Tubulin glycylases and glutamylases have distinct functions
in stabilization and motility of ependymal cilia. Journal of Cell Biology, 202, 441e451.
32
CHAPTER 2 Ependymal cell differentiation

Bre, M. H., Redeker, V., Quibell, M., Darmanaden-Delorme, J., Bressac, C., Cosson, J., et al.
(1996). Axonemal tubulin polyglycylation probed with two monoclonal antibodies: wide-
spread evolutionary distribution, appearance during spermatozoan maturation and
possible function in motility. Journal of Cell Science, 109(Pt 4), 727e738.
Calaora, V., Chazal, G., Nielsen, P. J., Rougon, G., & Moreau, H. (1996). mCD24 expression
in the developing mouse brain and in zones of secondary neurogenesis in the adult. Neuro-
science, 73, 581e594.
Callen, A. M., Adoutte, A., Andrew, J. M., Baroin-Tourancheau, A., Bre, M. H., Ruiz, P. C.,
et al. (1994). Isolation and characterization of libraries of monoclonal antibodies directed
against various forms of tubulin in Paramecium. Biology of the Cell, 81, 95e119.
Carlen, M., Meletis, K., Goritz, C., Darsalia, V., Evergren, E., Tanigaki, K., et al. (2009). Fore-
brain ependymal cells are notch-dependent and generate neuroblasts and astrocytes after
stroke. Nature Neuroscience, 12, 259e267.
Caspary, T., Larkins, C. E., & Anderson, K. V. (2007). The graded response to Sonic Hedge-
hog depends on cilia architecture. Dev Cell, 12, 767e778.
Cevik, S., Hori, Y., Kaplan, O. I., Kida, K., Toivenon, T., Foley-Fisher, C., et al. (2010). Jou-
bert syndrome Arl13b functions at ciliary membranes and stabilizes protein transport in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Journal of Cell Biology, 188, 953e969.
Coskun, V., Wu, H., Blanchi, B., Tsao, S., Kim, K., Zhao, J., et al. (2008). CD133þ neural
stem cells in the ependyma of mammalian postnatal forebrain. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 1026e1031.
Danilov, A. I., Gomes-Leal, W., Ahlenius, H., Kokaia, Z., Carlemalm, E., & Lindvall, O.
(2009). Ultrastructural and antigenic properties of neural stem cells and their progeny
in adult rat subventricular zone. Glia, 57, 136e152.
Duldulao, N. A., Lee, S., & Sun, Z. (2009). Cilia localization is essential for in vivo functions
of the Joubert syndrome protein Arl13b/Scorpion. Development, 136, 4033e4042.
Guirao, B., Meunier, A., Mortaud, S., Aguilar, A., Corsi, J. M., Strehl, L., et al. (2010).
Coupling between hydrodynamic forces and planar cell polarity orients mammalian
motile cilia. Nature Cell Biology, 12, 341e350.
Horner, V. L., & Caspary, T. (2011). Disrupted dorsal neural tube BMP signaling in the
cilia mutant Arl13b hnn stems from abnormal Shh signaling. Developmental Biology,
355, 43e54.
Ibanez-Tallon, I., Pagenstecher, A., Fliegauf, M., Olbrich, H., Kispert, A., Ketelsen, U. P.,
et al. (2004). Dysfunction of axonemal dynein heavy chain Mdnah5 inhibits ependymal
ﬂow and reveals a novel mechanism for hydrocephalus formation. Human Molecular
Genetics, 13, 2133e2141.
Janke, C., & Bulinski, J. C. (2011). Post-translational regulation of the microtubule cytoskel-
eton: mechanisms and functions. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 12, 773e786.
LeDizet, M., & Piperno, G. (1991). Detection of acetylated alpha-tubulin by speciﬁc
antibodies. Methods in Enzymology, 196, 264e274.
Levilliers, N., Fleury, A., & Hill, A. M. (1995). Monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies detect a
new type of post-translational modiﬁcation of axonemal tubulin. Journal of Cell Science,
108(Pt 9), 3013e3028.
Magiera, M. M., & Janke, C. (2013). Investigating tubulin posttranslational modiﬁcations
with speciﬁc antibodies. Methods in Cell Biology, 115, 247e267.
Marshall, W. F., & Kintner, C. (2008). Cilia orientation and the ﬂuid mechanics of
development. Current Opinion in Cell Biology, 20, 48e52.
References
33

Mirzadeh, Z., Doetsch, F., Sawamoto, K., Wichterle, H., & Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2010). The
subventricular zone en-face: wholemount staining and ependymal ﬂow. Journal of Visu-
alized Experiments. pii: 1938. doi: 10.3791/1938.
Mirzadeh, Z., Merkle, F. T., Soriano-Navarro, M., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M., & Alvarez-
Buylla, A. (2008). Neural stem cells confer unique pinwheel architecture to the ventricular
surface in neurogenic regions of the adult brain. Cell Stem Cell, 3, 265e278.
Nutu, M., Weijdegard, B., Thomas, P., Thurin-Kjellberg, A., Billig, H., & Larsson, D. G.
(2009). Distribution and hormonal regulation of membrane progesterone receptors beta
and gamma in ciliated epithelial cells of mouse and human fallopian tubes. Reproductive
Biology and Endocrinology, 7, 89.
Paridaen, J. T., Wilsch-Brauninger, M., & Huttner, W. B. (2013). Asymmetric inheritance of
centrosome-associated primary cilium membrane directs ciliogenesis after cell division.
Cell, 155, 333e344.
Paturle-Lafanechere, L., Manier, M., Trigault, N., Pirollet, F., Mazarguil, H., & Job, D.
(1994). Accumulation of delta 2-tubulin, a major tubulin variant that cannot be tyrosi-
nated, in neuronal tissues and in stable microtubule assemblies. Journal of Cell Science,
107(Pt 6), 1529e1543.
Pfenninger, C. V., Roschupkina, T., Hertwig, F., Kottwitz, D., Englund, E., Bengzon, J., et al.
(2007). CD133 is not present on neurogenic astrocytes in the adult subventricular zone,
but on embryonic neural stem cells, ependymal cells, and glioblastoma cells. Cancer
Research, 67, 5727e5736.
Piperno, G., & Fuller, M. T. (1985). Monoclonal antibodies speciﬁc for an acetylated form of
alpha-tubulin recognize the antigen in cilia and ﬂagella from a variety of organisms. Jour-
nal of Cell Biology, 101, 2085e2094.
Rogowski, K., Juge, F., van Dijk, J., Wloga, D., Strub, J. M., Levilliers, N., et al. (2009). Evolu-
tionary divergence of enzymatic mechanisms for posttranslational polyglycylation. Cell,
137, 1076e1087.
Rogowski, K., van Dijk, J., Magiera, M. M., Bosc, C., Deloulme, J. C., Bosson, A., et al. (2010).
A family of protein-deglutamylating enzymes associated with neurodegeneration. Cell,
143, 564e578.
Rudiger, A. H., Rudiger, M., Wehland, J., & Weber, K. (1999). Monoclonal antibody ID5:
epitope characterization and minimal requirements for the recognition of polyglutamy-
lated alpha- and beta-tubulin. European Journal of Cell Biology, 78, 15e20.
Satir, P., & Christensen, S. T. (2007). Overview of structure and function of mammalian cilia.
Annual Review of Physiology, 69, 377e400.
Shah, A. S., Ben-Shahar, Y., Moninger, T. O., Kline, J. N., & Welsh, M. J. (2009). Motile cilia
of human airway epithelia are chemosensory. Science, 325, 1131e1134.
Shang, Y., Li, B., & Gorovsky, M. A. (2002). Tetrahymena thermophila contains a conven-
tional gamma-tubulin that is differentially required for the maintenance of different
microtubule-organizing centers. Journal of Cell Biology, 158, 1195e1206.
Shao, R., Nutu, M., Karlsson-Lindahl, L., Benrick, A., Weijdegard, B., Lager, S., et al. (2009).
Downregulation of cilia-localized Il-6R alpha by 17beta-estradiol in mouse and human
fallopian tubes. American Journal of Physiology: Cell physiology, 297, C140eC151.
Shao, R., Weijdegard, B., Fernandez-Rodriguez, J., Egecioglu, E., Zhu, C., Andersson, N.,
et al. (2007). Ciliated epithelial-speciﬁc and regional-speciﬁc expression and regulation
of the estrogen receptor-beta2 in the fallopian tubes of immature rats: a possible mecha-
nism for estrogen-mediated transport process in vivo. American Journal of Physiology:
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 293, E147eE158.
34
CHAPTER 2 Ependymal cell differentiation

Sharma, N., Berbari, N. F., & Yoder, B. K. (2008). Ciliary dysfunction in developmental
abnormalities and diseases. Current Topics In Developmental Biology, 85, 371e427.
Spassky, N., Merkle, F. T., Flames, N., Tramontin, A. D., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M., & Alvarez-
Buylla, A. (2005). Adult ependymal cells are postmitotic and are derived from radial glial
cells during embryogenesis. Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 10e18.
Teilmann, S. C., Clement, C. A., Thorup, J., Byskov, A. G., & Christensen, S. T. (2006).
Expression and localization of the progesterone receptor in mouse and human reproduc-
tive organs. Journal of Endocrinology, 191, 525e535.
Valente, E. M., Rosti, R. O., Gibbs, E., & Gleeson, J. G. (2013). Primary cilia in neurodeve-
lopmental disorders. Nature Reviews Neurology, 10, 27e36.
Warn, R. M., Harrison, A., Planques, V., Robert-Nicoud, N., & Wehland, J. (1990). Distribu-
tion of microtubules containing post-translationally modiﬁed alpha-tubulin during
Drosophila embryogenesis. Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton, 17, 34e45.
Wodarczyk, C., Rowe, I., Chiaravalli, M., Pema, M., Qian, F., & Boletta, A. (2009). A novel
mouse model reveals that polycystin-1 deﬁciency in ependyma and choroid plexus results
in dysfunctional cilia and hydrocephalus. PLoS One, 4, e7137.
Wolff, A., de Nechaud, B., Chillet, D., Mazarguil, H., Desbruyeres, E., Audebert, S., et al.
(1992). Distribution of glutamylated alpha and beta-tubulin in mouse tissues using a spe-
ciﬁc monoclonal antibody, GT335. European Journal of Cell Biology, 59, 425e432.
Zappaterra, M. W., & Lehtinen, M. K. (2012). The cerebrospinal ﬂuid: regulator of neurogen-
esis, behavior, and beyond,. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences, 69, 2863e2878.
References
35

===== DellAnno2018_NatComm_NeuroEpithelialStemCell-SCI =====
ARTICLE
Human neuroepithelial stem cell regional speciﬁcity
enables spinal cord repair through a relay circuit
Maria Teresa Dell’Anno1,2, Xingxing Wang
1,2, Marco Onorati
3,4, Mingfeng Li4, Francesca Talpo4,
Yuichi Sekine
1,2, Shaojie Ma
4, Fuchen Liu
4, William B.J. Cafferty
2, Nenad Sestan
1,4,5 &
Stephen M. Strittmatter
1,2,4
Traumatic spinal cord injury results in persistent disability due to disconnection of surviving
neural elements. Neural stem cell transplantation has been proposed as a therapeutic option,
but optimal cell type and mechanistic aspects remain poorly deﬁned. Here, we describe
robust engraftment into lesioned immunodeﬁcient mice of human neuroepithelial stem cells
derived from the developing spinal cord and maintained in self-renewing adherent conditions
for long periods. Extensive elongation of both graft and host axons occurs. Improved
functional recovery after transplantation depends on neural relay function through the
grafted neurons, requires the matching of neural identity to the anatomical site of injury,
and is accompanied by expression of speciﬁc marker proteins. Thus, human neuroepithelial
stem cells may provide an anatomically speciﬁc relay function for spinal cord injury recovery.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
OPEN
1 Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and Repair (CNNR) Program, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06536, USA. 2 Department of Neurology,
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. 3 Unit of Cell and Developmental Biology, Department of Biology, University of Pisa, Pisa 56127, Italy.
4 Department of Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. 5 Department of Genetics, of Psychiatry and of Comparative Medicine,
and Yale Child Study Center, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. These authors contributed equally: Maria Teresa Dell’Anno, Xingxing
Wang, Marco Onorati. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.M.S. (email: stephen.strittmatter@yale.edu)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;

T
raumatic spinal cord (SC) damage results in cell loss at the
injury level, as well as disconnection of surviving neurons,
with an irreversible interruption of the information ﬂow to
and from the brain. The implantation of neural stem cells (NSCs)
at the lesion site has been considered an appealing potential
treatment for decades, and several approaches have been pro-
posed. Mechanistically, the hypothesized beneﬁts of transplanta-
tion are diverse, including replacement of lost neurons, creation
of a conducive axon growth environment for host axons, pro-
duction of growth factors, and provision of glial cells to assist
function of surviving neurons. In order for these mechanisms to
occur, graft integration into the host is critical and deﬁning the
parameters that regulate its success is fundamental to facilitate
translation of cell-based therapies to the clinic. Unfortunately, at
present, neither the identity nor the selection path for the most
appropriate cell population for optimal graft integration are
known.
Human NSC transplants for spinal cord injury (SCI) have been
limited to partially characterized human cell lines1–3 or to fetal
NSCs collected after 8 post-conceptional weeks (PCW)4–6.
Although fetal NSCs can be propagated in vitro, neither their
long-term stability nor the preservation of their regional identity
in vivo have been demonstrated7. Fetal NSCs exhibit molecular
markers suggestive of radial glia and appear to differentiate more
easily toward the glial fate, whereas their neurogenic potential is
largely restricted to GABAergic neurons both in vitro and
in vivo7,8. In most previous reports, NSCs were cultured in sus-
pension as neurospheres, a method that often leads to a sig-
niﬁcant reduction in self-renewal competency and in the
neurogenic capacity of the cells9,10.
As an alternative, human embryonic stem (ES) or induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cells are an in vitro source of neural
progenitors and their application to SCI treatment is currently
being investigated11–14. During human pluripotent stem cell
differentiation, neural progenitors exhibit spontaneous self-
organization into transient structures termed “rosettes”. Cells
within rosettes exhibit morphological and gene expression mar-
kers of neuroepithelial progenitors and are molecularly distinct
from radial glia-like NSCs15. However, the identity and the
physiological relevance of cells derived in vitro from pluripotent
sources are unclear because cells could acquire transcriptional
and epigenetic programs in vitro that diverge from cell states
in vivo16.
To understand how regional cell identity affects graft integra-
tion, we analyzed the engraftment of a novel human NSC
population that retains over time the transcriptional proﬁle
acquired in vivo. In contrast to other NSC sources, human neu-
roepithelial stem (NES) cells derived from tissues collected at an
embryonic stage of the neural tube development, typically from 5
to 8 PCW, possess unique advantages. NES cells can be propa-
gated as monolayers for a virtually unlimited number of passages,
retain a high and unaltered neurogenic potential over time and
preserve the molecular and transcriptional signature of their tis-
sue of origin17,18.
We derived SC-NES cells from human post-mortem specimens
and propagated them without genetic manipulation. Human SC-
NES cells exhibited excellent integration properties in a rodent
SCI model and established functional connections with local
neurons. Through the application of chemogenetics to diverse
behavioral paradigms, we show that SC-NES cells form a relay
system through the lesioned area reconnecting spared host neural
elements. In contrast, NES cells derived from neocortex (NCX-
NES cells) fail to acquire a mature neuronal phenotype when
transplanted into SC, fail to integrate and fail to extend neurites.
Importantly, NCX-NES cell integration is dramatically enhanced
in the cerebral cortex, demonstrating that anatomical matching of
graft with recipient tissue is critical for functional neuronal net-
works. These ﬁndings provide key mechanistic, molecular and
practical information to develop human cell transplantation
therapy for SCI.
Results
Human SC-NES cells are tripotent and highly neurogenic. Here
we derived human SC-NES cells from six embryonic post-
mortem specimens in a range of 5–8 PCW (Fig. 1a)18. The SC
samples
(Supplementary
Fig.
1a)
were
dissected
free
of
meninges and dorsal root ganglia and dissociated to a single-
cell suspension. After 24 h of plating, SC-NES cells formed
neural rosettes with typical radial organization and apico-basal
orientation of the developing neural tube (Fig. 1a and Supple-
mentary Fig. 1b). SC-NES cells exhibit progenitor cell char-
acteristics and express the canonical NSC markers nestin,
SOX2, vimentin, phospho-vimentin and PAX6 (Fig. 1b–d, f).
KI67 staining conﬁrmed the state of active proliferation of SC-
NES cells in vitro (Supplementary Fig. 1c). Next, we investi-
gated whether SC-NES cells retain their positional identity after
long-term expansion. Therefore, we veriﬁed the expression of
the caudal transcription factor HOXB9 (Fig. 1e) and conﬁrmed
immunolabelling speciﬁcity by lack of HOXB9 expression in
NCX-NES cells (Supplementary Fig. 1d). Self-renewing SC-NES
cells were maintained for >35 passages with no signs of
senescence or chromosomal instability (Fig. 1g).
A 30-day differentiation protocol involving mitogen with-
drawal
coupled
with
neurotrophin
addition
induced
the
acquisition of a neuronal phenotype. SC-NES cells gave rise
to RBFOX3- (also known as NeuN) positive neurons (Supple-
mentary Fig. 1e) accounting for 79.2 ± 0.1% of cells (Supple-
mentary Fig. 1i). Neurons also expressed the pan-neuronal
markers MAP2, neuroﬁlament (NEFL) and TUBB3 (Fig. 1h–i)
whereas 11.2 ± 0.2% of cells were positive for the early post-
mitotic neuronal marker doublecortin (DCX) (Supplementary
Fig. 1f, i). Among mature neurons, 1% of the cells expressed
choline acetyltransferase (CHAT), a feature of spinal motor
neurons, in agreement with SC-NES cell anatomical origin
(Fig. 1i Supplementary Fig. 1i). A subpopulation of cells
expressed astrocyte and oligodendrocyte markers including
GFAP and O4 (Supplementary Fig. 1g–i), conﬁrming SC-NES
cell tri-potent differentiation properties. In addition, we tested
SC-NES-derived neurons for the expression of pre- and post-
synaptic markers, PSD-95 and synaptophysin (SYP) (Fig. 1j, k),
and for electrophysiological properties. Upon 90 days of in vitro
differentiation SC-NES-derived neurons displayed ionic cur-
rents and elicit spontaneous repetitive action potentials (Fig. 1l,
m), consistent with a fully functional neuronal phenotype
(Supplementary Table 1).
Human SC-NES cells survive and differentiate in a SCI model.
Human SC-NES cells were transduced with GFP-coding lentiviral
vector and grafted into the lesion site of genetically immunode-
ﬁcient mice 10 days after thoracic SC dorsal hemisection (Fig. 2a).
Anatomical analysis revealed that SC-NES cells survived in all
grafted animals and consistently ﬁlled the lesion cavity at 8 weeks
post-grafting (Fig. 2b, c). Grafts in 3 out of 9 animals exhibited a
rift near the graft center (Supplementary Fig. 2a) which contained
collagen and SOX10-positive host Schwann cells (Supplementary
Fig. 2b-c). The rift separated the graft into two segments and
contained very few grafted-cell-derived neurites (Supplementary
Fig. 2d).
In agreement with in vitro data, the majority (55.6 ± 3.5%) of
transplanted SC-NES cells differentiated into RBFOX3-positive
neurons (Fig. 2d–p), whereas 27.9 ± 2.1% of cells expressed
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

human GFAP (Fig. 2e–p). APC-positive mature oligodendro-
cytes accounted for 1% of implanted cells (Fig. 2f). Co-staining
for RBFOX3 and human nuclei conﬁrmed the human origin of
grafted neurons (Fig. 2g, h). These cells also expressed the
mature neuronal proteins TUBB3 and HNCAM (Fig. 2i–j). In
addition to general neuronal markers, 14.7 ± 1.4% of grafted
SC-NES cells were positive for CHAT (Fig. 2k–l′). Inhibitory
GAD1-positive neurons and excitatory VGLUT1 (SLC17A7)-
positive neurons were less frequent, and accounted for 2% and
1% of grafted cells, respectively (Fig. 2m–o). No cells within the
grafts expressed the serotonergic neuron marker, 5-HT.
In accordance with literature for other transplants6,11,19,20, we
observed that some grafted cells migrated into host SC and
formed satellite clusters. We analyzed the SC from the brainstem
to conus medullaris, and found that 5 out of 7 animals exhibited
ectopic nodules. The vast majority of clusters were found just
below the meninges (Supplementary Fig. 2e) within 11 mm from
the graft center. Dispersion of cells into parenchyma occurred in
one single recipient animal at a 100–200 µm distance (Supple-
mentary Fig. 2f). In addition, some grafted cells were located in
the central canal (Supplementary Fig. 3c) at 7–12 mm from the
injection site.
A subset of grafted cells (6.6 ± 1.7%) were positive for KI67 or
expressed nestin and DCX, thus indicating that a fraction of cells
remained in active phases of the cell cycle after 8 weeks
(Supplementary Fig. 2g-i). However, the percentage of proliferat-
ing graft cells was not higher than the fraction of mitotic cells
present in uninjured SC, which accounts for 10% of cells
including central canal, gray and white matter21. Of note, SC-NES
cells retained their regional identity in vivo and expressed the SC-
speciﬁc transcription factor HOXB9 (Supplementary Fig. 2j-l).
Human SC-NES cells elongate long distance axons in the host.
Graft-derived neurons extended many projections into host SC
(Supplementary Fig. 3a). Emerging GFP-labeled processes were
observed mostly in white matter (69.8 ± 3.5%) rather than in gray
matter (30.1 ± 3.5%) (Fig. 3a, b), proving that SC-NES cells are
not affected by myelin-associated inhibitors present in adult
recipient tissues. We veriﬁed that SC-NES cell-derived neurons
SC-NES cell derivation
In vitro propagation
Developing spinal cord 
Neural differentiation
Nestin SOX2 DAPI
VIM P-VIM DAPI
PAX6 DAPI
HOXB9 DAPI 
2
3
4
5
1
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
X
Y
MAP2 NEFL DAPI
h
CHAT TUBB3 DAPI
i
j
PSD95 SYP 
PSD95 SYP 
k
20 mV
200 ms
2 nA
3 ms
b
c
d
e
a
g
f
l
m
Nestin SOX2 PAX6
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
VIM
PVIM
% of positive cells
Fig. 1 Characterization of human NES cells in proliferation and after in vitro differentiation. a Schematics of the experimental procedure. SC-NES cells were
derived from the SC of a human post-mortem specimen at 6 post-conceptional weeks (PCW) and propagated in vitro. After differentiation SC-NES cells
give rise to neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. b–d SC-NES cells are positive for pan-neural stem cell markers nestin, SOX2, vimentin (VIM),
phospho-vimentin (P-VIM) and PAX6. e SC-NES cells retain their regional identity as proved by the positive staining for the SC-speciﬁc transcription factor
HOXB9. f Quantiﬁcation of nestin, SOX2, PAX6, VIM, P-VIM positive cells. g SC-NES cells retain a normal euploid karyotype after 25 passages. h, i
Differentiation of SC-NES cells to MAP2-, TUBB3-, and neuroﬁlament- (NEFL) positive neurons. SC-NES cells also generate choline acetyltransferase-
(CHAT) positive neurons in agreement with their anatomical origin. j, k Mature neurons also express pre- and post-synaptic markers such as PSD95 and
synaptophysin (SYP). l Total inward and outward ionic currents elicited at test potentials ranging from –70 to +40 mV from a holding voltage of –90 mV.
(M) Subthreshold and suprathreshold voltage responses to a family of injected steps of current (0 pA; 20 pA; 40 pA; 60 pA; 80 pA) from a resting
potential of −71 mV. Scale bars: b–d 100 µm; e 20 µm; h 100 µm; m 20 µm; j 10 µm; k 1 µm
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3

do not express Nogo receptor 1 (NgR1), which is known to
mediate axonal growth repression exerted by ligands Nogo A,
Myelin Associated Glycoprotein (MAG) and Oligodendrocyte
Myelin Glycoprotein (OMgp)22–25, thus providing a possible
mechanism for the robust axonal growth observed in white
matter (Supplementary Fig. 3b). Notably, GFP-positive projec-
tions grew in parallel linear trajectories in white matter and were
ramiﬁed in gray matter within close proximity to host neurons in
a pattern that is very similar to endogenous axonal ﬁbers
(Fig. 3c–e). The axonal nature of projections was conﬁrmed by
GFP colocalization with the axon-speciﬁc marker, human neu-
roﬁlament (NEFL) (Fig. 3f, g). SC-NES cell-derived axons did not
appear to be myelinated by host oligodendrocytes (Fig. 3h). The
absence of myelination of human axonal ﬁbers in rodent hosts
has also been reported by others11 and may be attributable to a
lack of inter-species recognition.
Human SC-NES cell-derived axons extended over the entire
length of the SC from the injection site in the thoracic segment.
GFP-labeled terminals were observed cervically up to the medulla
oblongata and caudally in the conus medullaris (Fig. 3i–l). The
distance traversed by GFP-positive axons was 13 spinal segments
rostral and 6 segments caudal from the implantation site with a
length of 4 cm. The GFP-positive axons found in host tissue
emerged directly from the main body of the graft and not from
a
c
d
GFP HGFAP
e
GFP APC
f
b
RBFOX3 HuNu
g
lc
RBFOX3 
GFP TUBB3
h
i
GFP CHAT HuNu
GFP GAD1 HuNu
GFP VGLUT1
GFP HNCAM
j
k
l
l’
m
n
n’
o
p
RBFOX3
HGFAP
CHAT
Host-graft 
neural networks
Functional assay
GFP lentivirus transduction
GFP GFAP
GFP RBFOX3
GFP GFAP
SC-NES cell graft
SC trauma
NOD-SCID mouse
SC-NES cells
0
20
40
60
80
% of positive cells
Fig. 2 Human SC-NES cell graft survival and in vivo differentiation in a model of SCI. a Schematics of the experimental procedure. SC-NES cells were
transduced with a GFP lentiviral construct before engraftment. Recipient immunodeﬁcient (NOD/SCID) mice underwent dorsal SC hemisection and
received SC-NES cell injection onto the lesion site 10 days after. b GFP-labeled SC-NES cells were implanted into the site of the injury. Horizontal section
immunolabelled for GFP and GFAP indicates that cell implants survive and distribute into the lesion cavity. Rostral is to left, caudal is to right. c High
magniﬁcation of the lesion core (lc) showing the correct placement of the cells in the injured area. d The majority of the cells within the graft differentiates
toward the neuronal fate giving rise to RBFOX3-positive neurons. e, f SC-NES cells also generate astrocytes positive for human GFAP (HGFAP) and
oligodendrocytes positive for APC. g, h Low magniﬁcation image of grafted cells immunostained with RBFOX3 and human nuclei (HuNu) antibodies,
conﬁrming the human origin of differentiated cells. i, j Grafted GPF-labeled cells are also positive for the neuronal markers TUBB3 and HNCAM. k–l′ A
fraction of GFP-labeled SC-NES cells colocalize with the motor neuronal marker choline acetyltransferase (CHAT) and co-staining with HuNu antibody
conﬁrms the human origin of the cells. m–n′ Immunostaining for GFP, HuNu and the inhibitory neuronal marker glutamate decarboxylase 1 (GAD1)
showing colocalization of GAD1 staining with GFP and HuNu. o Double labeling for GFP and vesicular glutamate transporter 1 (VGLUT1) showing a graft-
derived human neurite co-expressing VGLUT1. p Quantiﬁcation of RBFOX3-positive neurons (55.6 ± 3.6%) and HGFAP-positive astrocytes (27.9 ± 2.2%)
representing the two largest cellular subtypes in the graft. Among neurons, CHAT-positive motor neurons were the most abundant subtype accounting for
up to 14.7% of grafted cells. Scale bars: b 500 µm; c 200 µm; d 20 µm; e 40 µm; f 4 µm; g, h 500 µm; i 40 µm; j 250 µm; k 20 µm; l, l′ 10 µm; m, 20 µm; n, n′
10 µm; o, 20 µm
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

the few cells of ectopic central canal nodules, which appeared
tightly clustered and devoid of protrusions >10 µm (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 3d-g).
Thus, human SC-NES cells exhibit excellent survival properties
and appear impervious to myelin-associated inhibitors with
consequent growth of long-distance projections to re-establish a
connection between the SC segments above and below the
trauma.
Human SC-NES cells establish a functional neuronal network.
We sought to determine whether SC-NES cells form neuronal
networks within the host. To this purpose we labeled grafts with
anti-human synaptophysin (HSYP) and examined RBFOX3-
positive neurons in the gray matter of recipient SC (Fig. 4a). We
found
HSYP-positive
puncta
surrounding
host
neurons,
consistent with synapses between grafted cells and the host
(Fig. 4b). Similarly, we investigated the formation of synaptic
connections between host ﬁbers and the graft. In particular, we
analyzed two descending pathways: the corticospinal tract (CST)
and the raphespinal tract. Biotin dextran amine (BDA)-labeled
CST ﬁbers regenerated into the graft (Fig. 4c, d) and colocalized
with the pre-synaptic marker SYP, as well as the GFP-positive
human projections, thus establishing a mechanism for host-graft
connectivity (Fig. 4e). No CST axons extended beyond the graft
into the caudal SC. Raphespinal 5-HT-positive ﬁbers were also
found to grow into the graft (Fig. 4f, g) and formed synapses with
human cells (Fig. 4h). Notably, 5-HT ﬁbers were observed
throughout the entire graft (Fig. 4j–l).
Grafted animals were also subject to functional analysis.
Behavioral outcomes of control group and SC-NES cell recipients
GFP RBFOX3
a
b
GFP RBFOX3
GFP HNEFL
e
f
GFP MAG
g
i
GFP RBFOX3
GFP RBFOX3
GFP RBFOX3
GFP HNEFL
g
h
j
k
l
Conus medullaris
Cervical spinal cord
Medulla oblongata
l
GFP RBFOX3
c
d
GFP 
GFP RBFOX3
***
0
20
40
60
80
100
GM
WM
% of total GFP+ axons
Fig. 3 Extensive axonal outgrowth from human SC-NES cell grafts. a GFP and RBFOX3 immunolabeling on a horizontal section of SC grafted with SC-NES
cells. GFP-expressing cells show a massive axonal elongation rostral and caudal to the trauma site (caudal shown). b Quantiﬁcation of graft-derived axons
in the gray (GM) and white matter (WM) of the recipient SC showing a preferential axonal growth in the WM. c, d GFP-positive axons grow in a parallel
pattern in the WM and acquire a more ramiﬁed morphology in the GM identiﬁed by the RBFOX3 staining. e GFP-expressing axon terminals are closely
associated with host RBFOX3-positive neurons. f, g GFP-labeled projections arising from the graft express human neuroﬁlament (HNEFL), conﬁrming their
identity as axons. h GFP and myelin associated glycoprotein (MAG) staining reveals a lack of myelination of the human ﬁbers. i–l GFP and RBFOX3 staining
of the recipient SC at different levels. Human GFP-positive axonal ﬁbers elongate throughout the entire length of the SC from the original injection site in
the thoracic segment. GFP-positive axons can be found in the cervical portion and more rostrally in the medulla oblongata. Human axons also grow caudally
reaching the conus medullaris. Data are expressed as mean ± s.e.m (***P < 0.001; Student’s t-test). Scale bars: a 200 µm; c, d 50 µm; e 10 µm; f–h 10 µm; i–k
100 µm; l 50 µm
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5

RBFOX3 HSYP
RBFOX3 HSYP
a
b
b
GFP BDA
c
GFP BDA
d
GFP BDA HSYP
e
GFP 5-HT
f
g
GFP 5-HT
GFP 5-HT GFAP
i
GFP 5-HT
l
l
k
k
j
j
GFP 5-HT
GFP 5-HT
GFP 5-HT HSYP
h
Fig. 4 Graft-Host and Host-graft interactions. a Human synaptophysin (HSYP) staining identiﬁes grafted SC-NES cells. RBFOX3-positive neurons indicate
the gray matter of the recipient SC. b High magniﬁcation image of a host RBFOX3-positive neuron surrounded by HSYP-positive puncta, suggesting the
establishment of synaptic contacts between the graft and the host. c Host corticospinal axons labeled with BDA regenerate into GFP-expressing SC-NES
cell grafts. d Higher magniﬁcation of BDA positive ﬁbers in the graft. e Adjacent signal of GFP, BDA and HSYP signal indicating the formation of novel
synapses between the host CST and implanted cells. f Host serotonergic axons immunolabelled for 5-HT elongate into the GFP-positive SC-NES cell graft.
g Higher magniﬁcation of 5-HT positive ﬁbers in the graft. h Host 5-HT ﬁbers are proximal with HSYN and GFP-positive terminals indicating the
establishment of synaptic contacts between the host raphespinal ﬁbers and grafted cells. i 5-HT-positive ﬁbers elongate through the entire length of the
cell implant. Rostral is on the right and caudal is on the left. j–l High magniﬁcation of boxed areas in (i) showing serotonergic terminals intermingled with
GFP-labeled graft cells close to the rostral graft-host interface (j), in the middle of the graft (k) and in proximity of the lesion core (l). Arrowheads indicate
5-HT-positive ﬁbers. Scale bars: a 200 µm; b 10 µm; c 100 µm; d 50 µm; e 10 µm; f 100 µm; g 50 µm; h 10 µm; i 500 µm, j–l 50 µm
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

were measured by Basso Mouse Scale (BMS) starting 7 days after
injury, but prior to engraftment26. At the pre-graft evaluation,
both groups had substantial loss of locomotor function with an
average BMS score <1 (slight ankle movement). The SC-NES cell
recipient animals showed a mild improvement by weeks 7 and 8
with a ﬁnal score of 4 (occasional stepping), whereas control
animals scored 3 (paw placement with or without weight support)
(Fig. 5a). We determined the extent of tissue spared from injury,
and conﬁrmed that the lesion was comparable between controls
and SC-NES grafted mice (Fig. 5b). Next, we performed a
correlation analysis between spared tissue and BMS score at
8 weeks. We observed a statistically signiﬁcant difference in the
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Pre-CNO
CNO
Wash-out
BMS score at 8 weeks
R2 = 0.65
R2 = 0.71
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
50
100
BMS score at 8 weeks
Spared tissue (%)
Control
SC-NES
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
–1 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
BMS score
Spared tissue (%)
Weeks post-graft
Control (n = 14)
SC-NES (n = 19)
Graft
*
SC-NES
*
*
*
*
SC-NES
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
Stride length
Base of support
Pre-CNO
CNO
Wash-out
i
Stride length
**
*
Base of support
n.s.
j
k
25
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
–1 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
BMS score
Weeks post-graft
Control (n = 6)
SC-NES (n = 6)
*
*
SC-NES
Control
Control
SC-NES
0
20
40
60
80
n.s.
Pre-CNO
CNO
Wash-out
Pre-CNO
CNO
Wash-out
Distance (cm)
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
Pre-CNO
CNO
Wash-out
0
30
60
90
Distance (cm)
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
CNO-induced decrease in BMS score 
% Missed steps
Fig. 5 Human SC-NES cells form a relay system in the injured SC. a Hindlimb locomotion: BMS scores before and after dorsal SC hemisection in animals
subject to cell implant (n = 19) and in controls (n = 14). The ﬁrst time point indicates the locomotor performance one week after injury and three days prior
to cell engraftment. b Spared tissue quantiﬁcation in control and treated animals. c Correlation analysis of spared tissue percentage and the BMS score at
8 weeks in a subgroup of animals. Each symbol represents an animal. The correlation shows a signiﬁcant difference between SC-NES cell recipient animals
and the control group. The blue line indicates the percentage of spared tissue equal to 25%. Animals on the right of the blue line were selected for a
stratiﬁcation of the original cohort of animals shown in a. d BMS scores including SC-NES cells recipient animals (n = 6) and control animals (n = 6) with a
percentage of spared tissue greater than 25%. e BMS score of SC-NES cells recipient animals at 8 weeks. Each dot represents an animal. SC-NES cells were
transduced with the hM4Di-mcherry construct prior to surgical implantation. Animals were scored before CNO administration (Pre-CNO), 30 min after
CNO administration (CNO), and 24 h after (wash-out). f The per-animal change in BMS score before and 30 min after CNO administration is plotted for
SC-NES cell-treated and control animals. g Grid-walking test: percentage of missed steps of SC-NES cell recipient animals before CNO treatment, under
CNO effect and 24 h after drug administration (wash-out). h Schematics of the foot print test. Base of support and stride length were measured. i
Representative images of SC-NES cell recipient animals footprints before, during and after CNO injection. Black arrows indicate the stride length for one
representative step in all three conditions. j Quantiﬁcation of stride length in SC-NES cell recipient animals pre-CNO, upon CNO treatment and after drug
wash-out. k Quantiﬁcation of base of support distance. Data are expressed as means ± s.e.m. (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; Student’s t-test for comparisons
between two groups and repeated measures ANOVA for BMS tests)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7

linear regression between the two groups indicating that cell
recipient mice had better locomotor performance than control
animals with a comparable injury (Fig. 5c). The correlation
analysis revealed that the divergence in the behavioral outcome
was most prominent for animals with mild to moderate injury,
deﬁned as spared tissue >25% (Fig. 5c). Therefore, we stratiﬁed
the behavioral data, including mice with a lesion not greater than
the 75%. For mice with such mild to moderate injuries, there was
signiﬁcantly greater performance by cell recipient animals with a
BMS score of 5 (frequent or consistent plantar stepping) by week
8 post-implant, as compared to similarly injured control animals
scoring <3 (Fig. 5d).
The beneﬁcial effect of neural grafts within the injured SC has
been associated with diverse mechanisms. However, at present,
no direct evidence has been provided to demonstrate that neural
grafts can generate novel circuits within recipient SC. Here, to
assess the necessity for SC-NES cell neural relay function, we
transiently silenced their electrical activity using the hM4Di-
DREADD receptor. hM4Di is an engineered human muscarinic
receptor designed to be responsive to the otherwise inert ligand
Clozapine-N-Oxide (CNO) and mediates neuronal membrane
hyperpolarization with the consequent reduction in action
potential ﬁring27,28. First, we assessed the efﬁcacy of hM4Di-
CNO for SC-NES cells in vitro. We differentiated SC-NES cells to
achieve
ﬁring
of
spontaneous
action
potentials,
then,
we
transduced SC-NES cell-derived neurons with an hM4Di-
mcherry lentiviral construct (Supplementary Fig. 4a). Application
of CNO caused signiﬁcant hyperpolarization of membrane
potential and decrease in action potential frequency (Supple-
mentary Fig. 4b-d). SC-NES cells expressing hM4Di-mcherry
were then transplanted into hemisected SCs of immunodeﬁcient
mice. Animals were assessed by BMS scale at 8 weeks post-
implantation before CNO administration (Pre-CNO), 30 min
after injection (CNO) and 24 h later (wash-out). Upon CNO
administration, 6 out of 8 animals showed a signiﬁcant decline in
locomotor skills, with restoration of function after CNO wash-out
(Fig. 5e, f). Control lesioned animals underwent identical
functional testing but did not exhibit any signiﬁcant variation
in their performance with CNO treatment (Fig. 5f).
The same cohort of grafted and control mice was also evaluated
by grid-walking test where animals are assessed for their ability to
walk on a suspended grid by quantifying the percentage of
incorrectly placed steps29. SC-NES cell grafted animals showed a
signiﬁcantly greater percentage of missed steps during CNO
treatment as compared to pre-CNO and post-CNO wash-out
performances (Fig. 5g). For control animals there was no
detectable effect of drug on the grid-walking competency
(Supplementary Fig. 4e).
Finally, gait was assessed by the foot-print test29. We measured
the distance between the hindlimbs (base of support) and the
stride length (Fig. 5h). Paired testing revealed that, compared to
the pre-CNO assessment, drug treatment resulted in a signiﬁcant
reduction of the stride length for SC-NES cell recipient animals
with a recovery after wash-out (Fig. 5i–j). CNO did not alter
control animals’ performance (Supplementary Fig. 4f). Base of
support was not changed by CNO administration in either group
(Fig. 5k).
These data show that the transient silencing of SC-NES cells
abrogates the beneﬁcial effect of transplantation in three different
functional paradigms. The temporary interruption of SC-NES cell
electrical activity through a pharmaco-genetic tool has a direct
impact on the functional outcome of grafted mice thus providing
evidence that while SC-NES cells can act as a scaffold for severed
axons to regenerate, they can also create a relay system essential
for functionally reconnecting supraspinal axons with denervated
target neurons below the level of the trauma.
Human NES cell regional origin effects graft integration. Next,
we explored whether the beneﬁcial effects of SC-NES cells were
related to the regional identity of the cells. To this purpose, we
compared human SC-NES cells with human NES cells derived
from the NCX of an age-matched embryo. Upon in vitro differ-
entiation, SC- and NCX-NES cells appeared indistinguishable:
both displayed a mature neuronal phenotype and gave rise to a
similar number of RBFOX3-positive neurons (Supplementary
Fig. 5a-c)18. However, when transplanted in the injured SC, NCX-
NES cells did not integrate in the parenchyma and formed dense
clusters at the injection site with drastically reduced axonal
elongation compared to their SC-derived counterparts (Fig. 6a–c).
Notably, SC-NES cells distributed more broadly into SC tissue
over a much larger area (Fig. 6d–f). The signiﬁcant reduction in
the volume of NCX-NES cell grafts did not appear to be asso-
ciated with a higher number of apoptotic events as no statistical
difference was observed in the quantiﬁcation of active caspase 3
positive-cells in both SC- and NCX-NES cell implants (Supple-
mentary Fig. 5d). In addition, KI67 staining performed at an early
stage of in vivo cell differentiation (i.e., 2 weeks post-implanta-
tion) did not reveal a signiﬁcant difference between the two cell
types (Supplementary Fig. 5e), thus excluding enhanced mitosis
as a possible mechanism behind the larger volume of SC-NES cell
transplants. NCX-NES cells in vivo also appeared to be sub-
stantially undifferentiated. Immunostaining for pan-neuronal
markers RBFOX3 and TUBB3 revealed no colocalization with
NCX-NES cells (Fig. 6g–h), whereas the vast majority of the cells
remained immuno-positive for the neural progenitor marker
nestin (Supplementary Fig. 5f-g).
We analyzed interactions between NCX grafts and the host, but
found no BDA-labeled host CST ﬁbers establishing connections
with grafted NCX-NES cells (Supplementary Fig. 5h). Unlike SC-
derived NES cells, NCX-NES cells failed to produce any
functional improvement in recipient animals over 8 weeks (Fig. 6i
and Supplementary Fig. 5i). This cannot not be attributed to
greater injury severity, since spared tissue was similar in graft
recipients and controls (Fig. 6j).
Of note, when placed into the motor cortex of immunode-
pressed mice, NCX-NES cells displayed a mature morphology at
8 weeks after engraftment with highly branched neurites and a
wide distribution in the tissue (Fig. 6k, m). In the same location,
SC-NES cells formed small tight clusters with short linear
projections and a drastically reduced spreading in the parench-
yma (Fig. 6l–m).
Our data show that the integration of human NES cells into a
SCI model is strictly related to cellular regional identity and that
the anatomical match of neural implants with the recipient tissue
is a fundamental requirement for connectivity.
Global transcriptome analysis of grafted human SC-NES cells.
To analyze molecular differences between SC- and NCX-NES
cells associated with their radically different adaptation in the
lesioned SC, we performed a global RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq)
analysis of tissue from both SC- and NCX-NES grafts. In order to
segregate intrinsic from extrinsic factors contributing to graft
integration, differentially expressed (DEX) genes were also com-
pared to the transcriptional proﬁle of SC- and NCX-NES cells
in vitro before and after neural differentiation (Fig. 7a). Principal
component analysis (PCA) of SC- and NCX-NES cells conﬁrmed
a clear separation of groups (Fig. 7b). In particular, we identiﬁed a
ﬁrst principal component (PC1) segregating in vitro from in vivo
samples, whereas a third principal component (PC3) separates
samples based on anatomical derivation (Supplementary Fig. 6a-
b). Gene-ontology analysis showed that DEX genes upregulated
in SC-NES cell grafts belonged to the “neurogenesis” ontology
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

GFP 
GFP 
b
GFP GFAP
GFP GFAP
e
GFP RBFOX3
GFP TUBB3
n.s.
*
GFP HuNu
GFP HuNu
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Graft distribution (µm2 × 103)
Number of slices 
NCX-NES
SC-NES
R
C
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
d
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
–1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
BMS score
Weeks post graft
Control (n = 14)
NCX-NES (n = 9)
Graft
a
SC-NES
NCX-NES
SC-NES
NCX-NES
NCX-NES
SC-NES
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
250 µm
500 µm
Mean GFP axons/subject
SC-NES
NCX-NES
Graft area (mm2)
SC-NES NCX-NES
c
0
20
40
60
80
NCX-NES
Control
***
***
Spared tissue (%)
Fig. 6 Regionally matched NES cell grafts integrate in the lesioned SC. a GFP immunostaining of human SC-NES cells grafts in the lesioned SC 8 weeks after
implantation. SC-NES cells integrate in the tissue and show a massive axonal elongation. b GFP immunostaining of human NCX-NES cell grafts. The cells
form tight clusters in the host SC with a poor axonal extension. c Quantiﬁcation of GFP-positive axons per subject in SC- and NCX-NES cell transplants. The
plot indicates the number of axons at 250 and 500 µm from the caudal graft-host interface. d Quantiﬁcation of SC- and NCX-NES cell graft areas. e, f GFP
and GFAP staining of SC- and NCX-NES cell grafts at the injection site showing a larger extension of SC-NES cell grafts in the host tissue. g, h Grafted NCX-
NES cells are negative for the pan-neuronal markers RBFOX3 and TUBB3. i Hindlimb locomotion: BMS scores of NCX-NES cell recipient animals (n = 9)
and control animals (n = 14) suggesting a lack of functional recovery in treated animals. j Spared tissue quantiﬁcation in control and NCX-NES cell grafted
mice. The histogram shows that the extent of the lesion in both groups is not statistically different. k, l GFP and human nuclei (HuNu) immunostaining of
NCX-NES cells implanted in the motor cortex of immunodeﬁcient mice two months after surgery. m Rostro (R)-caudal (C) spread and graft extension in
the coronal plane two months after engraftment of SC- and NCX-NES cells into the motor cortex of adult immunodeﬁcient mice. Data are expressed as
mean ± s.e.m (*P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001; Student’s t-test). Scale bars: a, b, 500 µm; e, f, 200 µm, g, h, k, l, 50 µm
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9

a
c
Transcriptome analysis
DEX genes/gene network
Global transcriptional comparison 
with in vitro samples
SC graft
NCX graft
SC-NES
NCX-NES
SC neurons
NCX neurons
GFP HMTURN
SC-NES
NCX-NES
HMTURN
GFP HMTURN
HMTURN
GFP PTN
PTN
GFP PTN
PTN
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
PC1 (64.44%)
PC3 (8.92%)
NCX-NES 1
NCX-NES 2
NCX-NES 3
NCX Neuron 2
NCX Neuron 1
NCX Neuron 3
PC2 (15.51%)
SC-NES 3
SC-NES 2
SC-NES 1
SC graft 3
SC Neuron 3
SC Neuron 2
SC Neuron 1
NCX graft 2
NCX-graft 1
NCX graft 3
SC graft 2
SC graft 1
–20
0
20
–50
0
50
100
–40
–20
0
20
40
b
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
MTURN
ATCAY
PTN
KAL1
SYT13
SYT4
HOXB4
HOXB9
OTX2
FOXG1
Log2 normalized gene expression
NCX graft
SC graft
*** ** ***
**
**
**
** **
**
−2
−1
0
1
MTURN
ATCAY
PTN
 Log2 normalized gene expression
NCX graft
NCX-NES
NCX neuron
SC graft
SC-NES
SC neuron
n.s.
n.s.
SC
NCX
***
***
*** **
Fig. 7 Global transcriptome analysis reveals SC-NES cell neuronal commitment after transplantation. a Schematics of the experimental procedure. SC- and
NCX-NES cell grafts were isolated from recipient mice 8 weeks after implantation. RNA-seq was performed to identify differentially expressed (DEX) genes
in the two samples. The expression level of DEX genes was eventually compared with in vitro samples: proliferating cells from both SC and NCX (SC-NES;
NCX-NES), and cells upon 8 weeks of differentiation (SC Neurons; NCX Neurons). b 3D plot of the principal component analysis (PCA) of SC- and NCX-
NES cells in proliferation (NES), after in vitro differentiation (neuron) or in vivo transplant for 8 weeks (graft). Each dot represents a sample. c Box plot of
normalized gene expression for selected genes in SC- and NCX-NES cell grafts. The black bar within each box represents the median value. Vertical bars
indicate the maximum and minimum values. d Box plot of normalized gene expression of maturin (MTURN), caytaxin (ATCAY) and pleiotrophin (PTN)
genes across all SC ad NCX samples. The black bar within each box represents the median value. Vertical bars indicate the maximum and minimum value.
e–h Human MTURN (HMTURN) and GFP stainings of SC- and NCX-NES cells 8 weeks after engraftment. Samples derived from the SC express HMTURN
after grafting, whereas grafted NCX cells are HMTURN-negative. i–l Human PTN (PTN) and GFP stainings conﬁrming the expression of PTN in grafted SC-
NES cells and its absence in grafted NCX-NES cells. Scale bars: e–h 20 µm; i–l 50 µm. (**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; Student’s t-test)
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

cluster (GO: 0007399; P value 1.3 × 10−2), supporting our his-
tological data reporting the in vivo neural differentiation of SC-
NES cells compared to undifferentiated NCX-NES cells. Among
the top 50 up-regulated genes in the SC-NES cell grafts were
genes related to neuronal maturation, such as maturin (MTURN)
30 and caytaxin (ATCAY)31, as well as genes involved in axonal
elongation (pleiotrophin, PTN)32 and cell adhesion (anosmin,
KAL1)33. The maturation of SC-NES cells was also conﬁrmed by
the up-regulation of synaptic genes SYT4 and SYT13, reinforcing
our observation of graft–host interaction (Fig. 7c). Differential
expression of SC- and NCX-positional genes, such as HOXB4 and
HOXB9 or FOXG1 and OTX2 respectively, conﬁrmed the long-
term preservation of positional identity after transplantation
(Fig. 7c).
Interestingly, while MTURN and ATCAY were upregulated by
in vitro NCX-NES cell-derived neurons, their expression was
strongly reduced in the grafts. On the other hand, the expression
of
these
genes
was
maintained
by
SC-NES
cells
during
engraftment, with no signiﬁcant difference between SC-NES
cell-derived neurons and SC-NES cell grafts (Fig. 7d). PTN
expression was drastically reduced in NCX-NES cell grafts
compared to NCX-NES cell-derived neurons, with less reduction
observed in SC-NES cell grafts compared to the same cells after
in vitro neural differentiation (Fig. 7d). Finally, we validated our
transcriptome analysis with immunostainings for MTURN and
PTN. The cytosolic protein MTURN was visualized in the soma
and neurites of grafted SC-NES cells (Fig. 7e–f), whereas PTN was
secreted into the extracellular environment (Fig. 7i–j). Neither
protein was detected in the NCX-NES cell grafts (Fig. 7g–l).
To extract additional biologically relevant information, we
applied weighted gene co-expression correlation network analysis
(WGCNA) to identify gene modules with similar variation across
in vitro and in vivo samples and identiﬁed overall 23 modules
(Supplementary Fig. 7, Supplementary Data 1). We observed that
module 1 (M1) identiﬁes genes upregulated in grafted cells from
both NCX and SC, suggesting that implantation itself impacts
NES cell transcriptional proﬁle. Genes in M9 were upregulated in
grafted SC-NES cells and mostly related to synaptic signaling
(GO:
0099536;
P
value
4.48 × 10−14),
ion
transmembrane
transport (GO: 0034220; P value 3.48 × 10−10), neurogenesis
(GO; 0048666 P value 1.3 × 10−6) and neuron projection
development (GO: 0031175; P value 4.43 × 10−6). Module M8,
on the other hand, clustered genes related to forebrain neuronal
differentiation, revealing that while NCX-NES cells have the
potential to differentiate, they fail to do so upon implantation into
SC.
Thus, global RNA proﬁling provides strong evidence for
selective integration into SC of human SC-NES cells as compared
to NCX-NES cells. The ﬁndings indicate that upregulation of
genes involved in neural precursor maturation, neurite extension,
and synapse formation plays a crucial role in graft integration,
and that host environment determines the transcriptional proﬁle
of implanted cells. Therefore, SC-NES cell integration results
from both intrinsic and extrinsic factors, with an anatomical
match of grafted cells to recipient tissue being required for
successful SCI treatment.
Transplantation in a model of spinal cord contusion. To
explore the translational impact of our ﬁndings, we challenged
SC-derived NSCs with an allograft procedure in a clinically
relevant model of SCI. For this purpose, we derived NSCs from
the embryonic SC primordia of Sprague Dawley rats (r-NSCs)
ubiquitously expressing the GFP reporter gene and transplanted
into rats with a contusion of thoracic SC. We used rats as reci-
pients since contusion is more controllable and reproducible in
larger species, and we administered cyclosporine A as immuno-
suppressant in place of genetic immunodeﬁciency. Anatomical
analysis 2 months after engraftment conﬁrmed that r-NSCs
successfully survived in host SC, ﬁlled the contusion cavity and
elongated bilaterally many GFP-positive axons, most of which
were
myelinated
by
host
oligodendrocytes
(Supplementary
Fig. 8a-d). No graft rifts were observed. Functional analysis by
Basso Beattie and Bresnahan (BBB) test34 revealed improved
motor performance in the transplanted group as compared to
control rats, which reached signiﬁcance at 7 and 8 weeks post-
graft (Supplementary Fig. 8e). These results conﬁrmed that SC-
derived NSCs yield beneﬁt in a clinically relevant SCI model.
Discussion
In this study, we report the derivation and characterization of
human SC-NES cells as candidates for cell-based therapy in SCI
treatment. Previous investigations on SC-derived NSCs were
limited to the application of one single fetal cell line (566RSC)1,2,7
or to fetal NSCs cultured as neurospheres with the consequent
reduction of the neurogenic potential4,5. Here we show that SC-
NES cells can be successfully derived from human SC primordia
and can be cultured long-term in adhesion without genetic
immortalization. Further, we demonstrate that human SC-NES
cells are highly expandable and retain over time intact karyotype
and neurogenic capacity. In vitro experiments conﬁrm that SC-
NES cells are immunopositive for canonical NSC markers and
can be efﬁciently differentiated toward the neuronal and glial fate.
Importantly, SC-NES cells retain their regional commitment after
propagation as demonstrated by the expression of speciﬁc tran-
scription factors and the neurochemical identity of neural
progeny35,36.
When transplanted into injured SC, SC-NES cells exhibit
excellent integration properties: they differentiate into neurons
and extend long-distance axons reaching the rostral and caudal
extremities of the recipient SC. Previous work has emphasized the
importance of mechanical and trophic support to guarantee cell
survival and neurite extension from grafted cells1,11. Human SC-
NES cells, on the other hand, are intrinsically prone to elongate
long distance axonal connections with no need of growth factor-
enriched matrices. We also observed that SC-NES cells produce
an amelioration of locomotor deﬁcits and that the extent of the
functional improvement depends on lesion severity. The inﬁl-
tration of collagen and the subsequent formation of an imper-
vious ﬁssure within some grafts may have attenuated the
behavioral outcome. However, the formation of a rift could be
due to the hemisection surgical procedure which inevitably
compromises meningeal integrity. In fact, no rifts were observed
in the SC contusion experiment where dura mater was left intact.
However, since contusion is the most common type of clinical
SCI lesion, the formation of the rift may not be a limiting factor
for potential clinical applications.
The relevance of graft rostro-caudal origin has not been sys-
tematically explored with human cell sources, though brain pre-
cursor transplantation has been described37,38. For rodent neural
precursor transplantation, there has been a direct comparison of
cells established from SC versus hindbrain versus telencephalon6
and substantially greater host CST growth was observed with SC-
matched transplants. However, the relative degree of engraftment
for different source cells, and the converse engraftment of dif-
ferent source cells into NCX have not been reported previously.
Here, in order to assess whether the engraftment potential of SC-
NES cells is correlated to their anatomical derivation, we chal-
lenged NCX-NES cells with an identical experimental paradigm.
Interestingly, we found that NCX-NES cells aggregate, forming
dense clusters in the SC with a remarkably poor graft neurite
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11

extension. On the other hand, when placed into NCX, they dis-
tribute widely and elongate branched projections suggestive of
efﬁcient integration. Thus, matching
NES cell
sources to
engraftment site is essential not only for host CST axon growth
into the graft, but also for human neuron engraftment per se, and
most critically for graft axon extension.
To investigate the molecular mechanism responsible for the
striking difference in the engraftment properties of SC- and
NCX-NES cells, we performed global transcriptional investiga-
tion of implanted cells. Grafted SC-NES cells upregulate genes
related to neuronal maturation (MTURN, ATCAY), cell adhe-
sion (KAL1), axonal elongation (PTN), and synapse establish-
ment (SYT13, SYT4). These six genes could be considered as
positive markers of engraftment in order to delineate the
molecular signature of cell populations suitable to achieve a
successful integration. Moreover, release of secreted PTN into
cerebrospinal ﬂuid may provide an engraftment biomarker
monitored by lumbar puncture during future transplantation
studies. Two negative markers of engraftment have also been
proposed by Ladewig and colleagues39 who found that the
secretion of FGF2 and VEGF by implanted neural progenitors
impairs the integration in the tissue through chemoattraction.
Additional studies may determine whether these markers could
be used to screen cell populations before their implantation,
thereby optimizing the experimental procedure and facilitating
clinical transition. Such biomarkers may be especially relevant in
the development of novel differentiation protocols from patient-
derived pluripotent stem cells in order to enhance their inte-
gration potential and maximize their potential beneﬁt.
The beneﬁcial effect of NSCs in rewiring the lesioned SC occurs
through a range of mechanisms including growth factor secre-
tion40–42, severed axon myelination43, and enhancement of sev-
ered axon regeneration1,6,11. Grafted cells can provide a scaffold
for severed axons to regenerate, and descending ﬁbers from the
CST, rubrospinal or raphespinal tracts have been observed to
enter the graft1,6,11. However, the extent of axonal regeneration
beyond the lesion is much reduced if not completely absent, and
it is unlikely to support a functional beneﬁt. It has also been
proposed that NSCs can form relay circuits in the injured SC
which are comparable to those formed by propriospinal circuits
after incomplete SCI44–47. One key aspect of a relay system is that
injured axons do not need to regenerate long distances and the
onus for axon growth is placed on the transplant-derived neu-
rons, which can be selected for their ability to extend long axons
in vivo. Nevertheless, no proof has been provided previously to
demonstrate a graft-mediated neural relay function. Using a
pharmaco-genetic approach to obtain a transient silencing of
implanted cells, we provide the ﬁrst evidence that human SC-NES
cells establish a functional circuit in recipient SC. Interruption of
the circuit by the temporary silencing of SC-NES cell-derived
neurons resulted in loss of the functional beneﬁt in three different
behavioral paradigms. Thus, SC-NES cells restore the disrupted
connectivity by forming an intermediate station between the
rostral and caudal segments of damaged SC.
The transition of human cell therapy to the clinic will likely
require more systematic investigations. While recent studies show
that human cell transplantation is possible in non-human pri-
mates48, practical issues remain to be addressed. For instance,
further studies are needed to understand guidance of extending
axons to appropriate targets and to determine what effect newly
generated circuits may have for autonomic and sensory function.
Our investigation of human NES cells provides tools to
understand the molecular features necessary to achieve successful
engraftment in terms of both efﬁcient cell integration and host
axonal growth. Having the means in hand to delineate the tran-
scriptional proﬁle of human cells with a high engraftment
potential provides an important instrument for future develop-
ment in the ﬁeld.
Methods
Human tissue procurement. All work was performed according to the NIH
guidelines for the acquisition and distribution of human tissue for bio-medical
research purposes and with the approval by the Human Investigation Committees
and Institutional Ethics Committees of each institute from which samples were
obtained. De-identiﬁed postmortem human brain and SC specimens were provided
by the Joint MRC/Wellcome Trust (grant #099175/Z/12/Z) Human Developmental
Biology Resource (http://hdbr.org). Appropriate informed consent was obtained
and all available non-identifying information was recorded for each specimen.
Tissue was handled in accordance with ethical guidelines and regulations for the
research use of human brain tissue set forth by the NIH (http://bioethics.od.nih.
gov/humantissue.html) and the WMA Declaration of Helsinki (http://www.wma.
net/en/30pubblications/10policies/b3/index.html).
Human NES cell derivation. De-identiﬁed prenatal human samples were staged, as
previously described49. Human NES cells were derived from dorsal forebrain and
SC of six post-mortem specimens ranging from 5 to 8 PCW (Carnegie stages
15–23). After removal of all meninges, the NCX and SC tissues were dissected into
small fragments (~1 mm2) in cold PBS. Then, samples were collected by cen-
trifugation at 150 × g for 3 min. The pellets were incubated on ice for 15 min, gently
ﬂicking every 2 min. Subsequently, samples were incubated with 0.05% trypsin
(Gibco, #25200056) at room temperature for 1–2 min and dissociated by pipetting
up and down every 30 s until a single cell suspension was obtained. Trypsin was
inactivated with PBS supplemented with 10% fetal bovine Serum (FBS, Invitrogen,
#16140-071) and cell suspension was centrifuged at 150 × g for 3 min. The cell
pellet was resuspended with NES medium prepared with DMEM/F12 (Gibco,
#PHG0311) with the addition of B27 supplement (1:1000, Invitrogen, #175040-44),
N2 supplement (1:100 Gibco, #17502-048), 20 ng/ml FGF2 (Gibco, #13256-029),
20 ng/ml EGF (Gibco, #PHG0311), 1,6 g/l glucose, 20 µg/ml insulin (Sigma,
#I9278) and 5 ng/ml BDNF (R&D Systems Inc, #248-BD-01M). 10 µM Rock
Inhibitor (Y-27632, Stemgent, #04-0012) was added to increase cell viability. The
cells were then plated onto dishes coated with poly-L-ornithine (0.01%, Sigma,
#P4957), laminin (5 µg/ml, Invitrogen, #23017-015) and ﬁbronectin (1 µg/ml,
Corning, #354008). Coated dishes were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C and rinsed three
times with distilled water prior to be used for cell culture. Medium was changed 12
h after plating and the cells were passaged using 0.25% trypsin within 3 days and
replated to obtain a monolayer of cells at a density of ~105 cells/cm2. Half of the
media was changed every 2–3 days to allow culture conditioning. In the trans-
plantation studies, we used one male SC-NES cell line (HSB318) and one female
NCX-NES cell line (HSB325).
Maintenance and differentiation of NES cell lines. NES cells were kept in
proliferation in T25 ﬂasks coated with poly-L-ornithine (0.01%), laminin (5 µg/ml)
and ﬁbronectin (1 µg/ml). Cells were expanded in NES medium and reached
conﬂuency (0.5–1 × 105 cells/cm2) in about 7 days. Cells were split 1:2 every
5–7 days with 0.25% trypsin. The expansion rate of the cells was constant over
time. Half volume of the medium was changed every 2–3 days. For cryopre-
servation, cells were trypsinized and ~2 × 106 cells were pelleted (200 × g for 3 min)
and resuspended in cryopreservation medium containing 10% DMSO and 90%
NES medium. For resuscitation, cells were rapidly thawed at 37 °C, resuspended in
pre-warmed culture media, centrifuged for 3 min at 200 × g, resuspended in NES
medium, and replated on coated plates. Neuronal differentiation of NES cells was
performed in two steps. For the pre-differentiation step NES cells were seeded at a
density of 0.5 × 105 cells/cm2 in a T25 coated ﬂask in NES medium without EGF
and FGF2. After 7 days, cells were dissociated and replated at a density of 0.8–1 ×
105 cells/cm2 in BrainPhys Medium (Stem Cell Technologies, Cambridge, MA,
#05790) supplemented with B27 (2%), N2 (1%) and BDNF (20 ng/ml). Half
volume of the medium was changed every 2–3 days and neurons were differ-
entiated up to 3 months.
Animals. Mice: 8–10 weeks old female NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ mice
(Jackson Laboratories) were used in the present study as NES cell recipients. Rats:
SD-Tg(CAG-EGFP)CZ-004 Osb rats were a generous gift from Dr. Jeffery Kocsis
(Yale University, Department of Neurology) and were used to derive GFP-positive
NSCs. At 10–11 weeks old female wild type Sprague Dawley rats were used as
recipients for rat NSCs grafts. All animals were housed on a 12 h light/12 h dark
cycle and had free access to food and water throughout the study. All experimental
procedures were performed in compliance with animal protocols approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Yale University.
Karyotype analysis. Karyotype analysis was performed by core facility at the
Department of Genetics at the Yale School of Medicine. Brieﬂy, the cells were
cultured in the presence of 0.1 µg/ml colcemid for up to 4 h and then ﬁxed.
Metaphase spreads were analyzed.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Electrophysiology. Electrophysiological experiments were performed on differ-
entiated SC-NES cells infected with the hM4Di-mcherry lentiviral construct.
Recordings were performed at 21–23 °C using the whole-cell patch-clamp tech-
nique in voltage- and current-clamp conﬁgurations. Cells were continuously per-
fused with an extracellular solution composed by 125 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 26
mM NaHCO3, 15 mM glucose, 1.3 mM MgCl2, 2.3 mM CaCl2, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4
(bubbled with 95% O2, 5% CO2) and were visualized using an Axioskop FS2
microscope (Zeiss) equipped with epiﬂuorescence and infrared differential inter-
face contrast (DIC) optic. An X-Cite 120LED lamp (Excelitas) and an appropriate
ﬁlter set were used to identify mcherry-positive cells. Pipettes were produced from
borosilicate glass capillary tubes (Sutter Instruments) by mean of a horizontal
puller (P-2000, Sutter instruments) and ﬁlled with the following intracellular
solution: 130 mM K-gluconate, 4 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 5 mM
creatine phosphate, 2 mM Na2ATP, 0.3 mM Na3GTP, 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.3 with
KOH). Membrane voltage was corrected off-line for a calculated liquid junction
potential of −10 mV. Series resistance was always compensated by 70–80% and
monitored throughout the experiment. Clozapine-N-oxide [10 μM] (Sigma, St.
Louis, MO #C0832) was applied in the bath through perfusion. Recordings were
made with a MultiClamp 700B ampliﬁer (Molecular Devices) and digitized with a
Digidata 1322 computer interface (Molecular Devices). Data were acquired at a
sampling frequency of 20 kHz and ﬁltered at 10 kHz using the software Clampex
9.2 (Molecular Device). Software Clampﬁt 10.2 (Molecular Devices) and OriginPro
8 (Microcal) were used for data analysis.
Immunoﬂuorescence. NES cells were washed with PBS and ﬁxed with 4% for-
maldehyde for 10 min at RT. After three additional washes in PBS, cells were left in
blocking solution (PBS supplemented with 1% horse serum and 0.1% Triton) for 1
h at RT. Cells were incubated with primary antibodies o/n at 4 °C. Primary anti-
bodies were diluted as follows: Nestin (1:200 R&D systems #MAB1259); PAX6
(1:200 BD Bioscience #561462); phospho-vimentin (1:200 Abcam #ab22651);
SOX2 (1:400 Millipore #ab5603); vimentin (1:200 Abcam #ab16707); CHAT (1:500
Millipore #AB144P); Doublecortin (1:200 Cell Signaling #4604); GFAP (1:500
Sigma #G3893); RBFOX3 (1:500 Millipore #MAB377); TUBB3 (1:1000 Abcam
#ab107216); Neuroﬁlament (1:200 Millipore #MAB1615); MAP2 (1:1000 Millipore
#AB5622); O4 (1:200 R&D systems #MAB1326) PSD95 (1:250 Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc #51-6900); Synaptophysin (1:500 Millipore #MAB329); KI67 (1:500
Abcam #ab16667); HOXB9 (1:200 Abcam #ab66765). The following day, cells were
washed in PBS three times before being incubated with Alexa 568 or Alexa
488 secondary antibodies (1:500 Invitrogen) for 1 h at RT. The samples were ﬁnally
mounted using mounting medium (Life Technologies #P36935) containing DAPI.
Western blot. NES or HEK 293 cells were washed with PBS and harvested in
radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer. WT or NgR1 KO mouse forebrain
were dissected and homogenized in RIPA buffer. The samples were then cen-
trifuged at 20,000 × g for 20 min. The lysate was resolved by SDS-PAGE, trans-
ferred to nitrocellulose membranes, immunoblotted with anti-β-actin (1:3000
Sigma-Aldrich, #A1978), and anti-NgR1 (1:1000 R&D Systems, AF1440) primary
antibodies o/n at 4 °C. After primary antibody incubation, secondary antibodies
(Odyssey IRDye 680 or 800) were applied for 1 h at room temperature. Membranes
were then washed and visualized using a Licor Odyssey Infrared imaging system.
Thoracic dorsal hemisection surgery. Mice were ﬁrst anesthetized with 4% iso-
ﬂuorane and maintained with 2% isoﬂuorane throughout the whole procedure. A
laminectomy was performed to expose the dorsal portion of the SC corresponding
to the T8 and T9 levels. The dorsal hemisection was performed at the T8 level with
a pair of microscissors to a depth of 1.1 mm to completely sever the dorsal and
dorsolateral CST. The lateral portions of the SC were scraped with a 30 gauge
needle to ensure the completeness of the lesion. Muscle and skin overlying the
lesion were sutured with 4.0 vicryl. All animals received subcutaneous injection of
100 mg kg−1 ampicillin and 0.1 mg kg−1 buprenorphine twice a day for the ﬁrst
two days after surgery. Bladders of injured animals were expressed manually on a
daily basis throughout the whole experiment.
SC contusion surgery. Female Sprague–Dawley rats (10–11 weeks, 220–240 g)
were used in this study. Animals were anesthetized with intraperitoneal injection of
ketamine (60 mg kg−1) and xylazine (10 mg kg−1) mixture. A laminectomy was
conducted at the caudal portion of T6 and all of T7 spinal levels. A T7 severe
contusion injury (weight of 10 g, height of 50 mm) was produced with the MASCIS
impactor. After the spinal contusion, muscle and skin layers were sutured with 4.0
polyglactin. Bladders of injured animals were expressed manually twice a day
throughout the whole experiment.
Cell engraftement. Ten days after mouse dorsal hemisection surgery, lesioned
animals underwent a second procedure for NES cell implantation. Mice were
anesthetized with 4% isoﬂuorane and maintained anesthetized with 2% isoﬂuorane
until the procedure was completed. The original incision was reopened and the SC
re-exposed. NES cells were resuspended in BrainPhys medium supplemented with
10 µM Rock Inhibitor and 20 ng/ml BDNF at a density of 250,000 cells/µl. NES
cells were kept on ice throughout the procedure. Two injections were performed on
the injury site, each delivering 1 µl of cell suspension at a distance of ~1 mm one
from the other. The injection was performed using a glass capillary attached to a
syringe (Hamilton, Reno, NV) and a micropump (Ultramicropump III, World
Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL). The rate on the injection was 250 nl/min and
the capillary was left in place for two additional minutes before withdrawal.
Control animals underwent the same surgery and received a vehicle injection. At
the end of the procedure, the muscle and the skin were sutured with vicryl 4.0 and
animals received ampicillin 100 mg kg−1 subcutaneous injection for 3 days. Ani-
mals survived 8 weeks before being sacriﬁced for the histological analysis.
Nine days after rat SC contusion, animals underwent surgery for NSCs
engraftment. Embryonic day 13.5 (E13.5) SC from transgenic SD-EGFP rats
provided donor tissue for grafting. Rat NSCs were resuspended in a ﬁbrin matrix
enriched with growth factors, as previously described1. Starting 24 hours before cell
transplantation and throughout the whole experiment rats were treated with
cyclosporine A (15 mg kg−1) as immunosuppressant drug administered i.p. on a
daily basis. The graft mixture (250,000 cells/µl) was microinjected into three sites
on the lesion delivering 3 µl per injection. Animal underwent functional testing for
up to 8 weeks and were sacriﬁced for the anatomical analysis through transcardial
perfusion with 4% formaldehyde.
For NCX transplantation, mice were anesthetized with 4% isoﬂuorane as
previously described. A craniotomy was performed using a micromotor system
(Foredom, Bethel, CT) exposing the motor cortex. The cortex was damaged by
aspiration of a portion 1 × 1 mm2. A volume of 1 µl of NES cell suspension
(250,000 cells/µl) was injected onto the damaged area using a glass capillary
attached to syringe (Hamilton, Reno, NV) and a micropump (World Precision
Instruments, Sarasota, FL). Animals were kept for 8 weeks before being sacriﬁced
for histological analysis.
Anterograde labeling of the CST. Six weeks after injury, descending CST ﬁbers of
grafted mice were labeled with BDA (0.1 g/ml in sterile normal saline, Thermo-
Fisher Scientiﬁc # D1956) by injection into ﬁve spots of the right motor cortex. The
skulls of anesthetized mice were tightly ﬁxed to a stereotaxic apparatus (Kopf,
Tujunga, CA). Craniotomy over the motor cortex area was carried out using a
micromotor system (Foredom, Bethel, CT). The injection area on the right hemi-
sphere was deﬁned in a rectangle with one side measuring 2 mm (from 1.0 mm
anterior to −1.0 mm posterior to the bregma) and one side measuring 1.5 mm
(lateral to the bregma). Injections were performed using a glass capillary attached to
a microsyringe (Hamilton, Reno, NV) at a 0.7 mm depth. Each injection delivered
75 nl of BDA solution into the motor cortex at a rate of 75 nl/min. The tip of the
glass capillary was left in place for two additional minutes before withdrawal. Two
weeks later, the animals were sacriﬁced by transcardial perfusion with PBS followed
by 4% formaldehyde. To visualize the BDA, a tyramide signal ampliﬁcation ﬂuor-
escence system (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA) was used.
Immunohistochemistry. After perfusion tissues were removed, post-ﬁxed over-
night in 4% formaldehyde at 4 °C, and cryoprotected in 30% sucrose (Sigma-
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) until they sank before being sectioned on a Leica cryostat.
SC sections were cut horizontally at a thickness of 30 µm. Brain sections were cut
sagitally at a thickness of 40 μm. Sections were washed three times in PBS between
each step in the immunodetection protocol. For detection of the antigens with
ﬂuorescent antibodies, the protocol was performed as follows: sections were left in
blocking solution (PBS supplemented with 1% horse serum and 0.1% Triton) for 1
h at RT and then incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies diluted in
blocking solution. Primary antibodies were diluted as follows: APC (1: 200 Milli-
pore #OP80); active (cleaved) Caspase 3 (1:150 Millipore #AB3623); CHAT (1:500
Millipore #AB144P); Collagen type IV (1:500 Biogenex #AM379-10M); Dou-
blecortin (1:200 Cell Signaling #4604); GAD1 (1:250 R&D systems #AF2086); GFP
(1:1000 Life Technologies #A11122 or SantaCruz Biotechnologies #sc-9996); GFAP
(1:500 Sigma #G3893); HOXB9 (1:200 Abcam #ab66765); Human GFAP (1:1000
Takara #Y40420); Human Neuroﬁlament (gift from Dr. Virginia Lee and Dr. John
Trojanowski, University of Pennsylvania, used undiluted); Human Nuclei (1:200
Millipore #MAB1881); Human NCAM (1:1000 SantaCruz Biotechnologies #sc-106
incubated at RT); Human Synaptophysin (1:1000 eBioscience #14-6525-82); KI67
(1:500 Abcam #ab16667); Nestin (1:200 R&D systems #MAB1259); Human
MTURN (1:1000 Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc # PA5-56177); RBFOX3 (1:500 Milli-
pore #MAB377 or #ABN78); MAG (1:200 Millipore #MAB1567); Pleiotropin
(1:100 abcam #ab93685); SOX10 (1:250 Abcam #ab155279); Synaptophysin
(1:1000 Millipore #MAB329); TUBB3 (1:1000 Abcam #ab107216); Vglut2 (1:1000
Millipore #MAB5504); 5HT (1;10000 Immunostar #20080); Alexa 568-conjugated
streptavidin (1:500 Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc #S11226) to label BDA traced CST
axons. The following day, sections were incubated for 1 h at RT with appropriate
Alexa 488, Alexa 568 or Alexa 647 (1:500 Invitrogen) secondary antibodies. The
sections were ﬁnally covered with mounting medium (Life Technologies #P36935)
containing DAPI before being coverslipped. All images were acquired using a Carl
Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope. Image processing was performed using Zeiss
Zen, Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator.
Quantiﬁcation of cell types in the graft and axons. Cellular differentiation in the
grafts was determined by counting individual cells labeled for RBFOX3, GFAP,
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13

KI67, CHAT or caspase 3 in 8 randomly selected ﬁelds (4 sections per animal, 2
ﬁelds per section) and expressing them as a percentage of the total number of
human nuclei positive cells in the ﬁeld. Cells were visualized using a Carl Zeiss
LSM 710 confocal microscope at a magniﬁcation of ×63. The counting was per-
formed using the built-in plugin of the Image J program. The number of GFP
labeled human axons emerging from the graft was quantiﬁed using a Carl Zeiss
LSM 710 confocal microscope. For every 6th consecutive horizontal section, a
mediolateral line was drawn 250 and 500 µm caudal to the graft/host interface
under a ×40 magniﬁcation. The tissue was then examined under a ×600 magni-
ﬁcation and GFP labeled axons that intersected this line were marked and counted.
To estimate the total number of axons/subjects, the number of axons counted on
sections was multiplied by 6. To visualize axons in the gray matter sections were
co-stained with RBFOX3 antibody.
Behavioral analysis. A total of 64 mice underwent SC mid-thoracic dorsal
hemisection studies in two batches. Forty-nine (49) mice underwent hemisection
injury and were tested for their locomotor ability using the Basso Mouse Scale
(BMS)26 7 days after lesion. Seven out of 49 mice were eliminated from further
study because of unsuccessful hemisection surgery, deﬁned by BMS score higher
than 2 on day 7. The remaining 42 mice were randomized to receive vehicle
injection (14 mice), SC-NES cell injection (19 mice) or NCX-NES cell injection (9
mice) at 10 days after hemisection. These 42 animals were followed by BMS
behavioral test performed by two investigators blinded to the treatment for a total
of 8 weeks after cell implantation, then received BDA injection and were processed
for histological analysis. A post-hoc subgroup analysis of behavior in 25 (9 controls,
10 SC-NES and 6 NCX-NES cell recipients) out of 42 animals were used for spared
tissue assessment and correlation studies.
In a separate experiment, 15 mice underwent hemisection injury and received
SC injection of either hM4Di-expressing SC-NES cells (8 mice) or vehicle
injections (7 mice) 10 days after hemisection. Their behavior was assessed by BMS,
grid walking and footprint test with and without CNO administration 8 weeks after
transplantation. Grid walking and footprint analysis were performed for animals
able to walk, i.e. scoring at least 4 at the BMS test. For the footprint analysis
animals had water-based nontoxic paint placed on the plantar surfaces of all four
limbs (red on forelimbs and blue on hindlimbs) and were then run three times
along a 1 m long narrow corridor lined with absorbent paper. Stereotyped gait and
motor coordination parameters, including hindlimb stride length and hindlimb
base of support, were measured from three complete step cycles from the middle of
the runway. Animals were trained for one week in order to collect the baseline
scores. To validate the behavioral outcome upon silencing NES cells, animals were
given an i.p. injection of CNO, (1 mg kg−150) and were tested 30 min later. The
wash-out scores were collected 24 h later. For the grid-walking test mice were
placed on an elevated 45 × 45 cm metal grid with 2.5 × 2.5 cm square spacing
covered by a dark box to make the environment more comfortable for the animals.
Mice were videotaped via reﬂection from a mirror placed under the grid and
allowed to explore the grid for 3 min. Videos were scored for the percentage of
impaired steps out of the ﬁrst 50 steps for each hindlimb individually. Impaired
steps included a foot slip where the limb fell between the rungs or an incorrectly
placed step where either the ankle or the tips of the digits were placed on the rung
instead of proper grasping of the rung. Similar to the footprint test, baselines scores
were collected after one week of training. The CNO effect was recorded 30 min
after i.p. administration, whereas the drug wash-out assessment was performed on
the following day.
Rats were evaluated using the BBB locomotor scale34 two days before cell
implantation and every week until killing.
Transcriptome analysis. For the transcriptome analysis each sample was handled
in triplicate. Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy plus minikit (Quiagen,
#74134) according to manufacturer’s instruction. mRNA libraries were prepared
according to the TruSeq RNA Illumina kit protocol and sequenced using a HighSeq
2500 sequencing system (Illumina). The sequenced reads were clipped one
nucleotide in both ends, leaving 74 nucleotide long reads for sequence alignment to
human reference genome (GRCh38/hg38) by using the STAR software51. Beyond
default parameters in the alignment procedure, human gene annotation retrieved
from the GENCODE project (version 21, http://www.gencodegenes.org/releases/21.
html) was additionally provided to improve exon–exon junction mapping. To
quantify accurately the origin of the genomic locus of short sequenced reads, only
the uniquely mapped reads were used for downstream analyses. FeatureCounts was
used to quantify expression proﬁles of each type of annotation entry retrieved from
GENCODE v2152. Additional quality control measures were introduced to assess
potential issues including reads classiﬁcation, mitochondrial contamination, and
gene coverage uniformity. R package DESeq2 was used to identify DEX genes49.
We generated two types of gene expression value, read counts and RPKM (reads
per kilobase of exon model per million mapped reads). The reads count per gene
served as the input for DESeq2. When performing the comparisons, DESeq2 ﬁrst
gets the mean expression level as a joint estimate for both groups, and then cal-
culates the difference as well as the P value for the statistical signiﬁcance of this
change. The adjusted P value was calculated based on multiple testing with the
Benjamini–Hochberg procedure, estimating the false discovery rate (FDR). To
detect statistically signiﬁcant DEX genes, FDR was set to be minor than 0.01. The
gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed using The Database for Annotation,
Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) version 6.8.
Weighted gene correlation network analysis (WGCNA). The R WGCNA
package was used to ﬁnd modules of highly correlated genes and characterize their
expression patterns53. Genes expressed in at least 25% of samples were included for
the analysis. Prior to module detection, scale-free topology was calculated to
determine soft power, which was set at 6 and used to generate dissimilarity matrix.
Then, module clustering was process based on dissimilarity matrix with minimum
module size setting at 100. Detected modules were further merged together if they
have very low dissimilarity (threshold = 0.2) and 23 modules were ﬁnally deter-
mined. To characterize the module expression pattern, we calculated the eigengene
of each module via moduleEigengenes function. Eigengene expression pattern was
shown using box plot.
Statistical analysis. For comparison between two groups two-tailed Student’s t-
test was used at a designated signiﬁcance level of P < 0.05. Measurements taken at
different time points were compared using the repeated measures one-way
ANOVA. Analyses were conducted using Excel and SPSS. For the electro-
physiology experiments, statistical signiﬁcance was determined by one-sample
Student’s t-test. All data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. The statistical details of the
experiments can also be found in the ﬁgure legends. No statistical methods were
used to calculate sample size estimates. No animal exclusions were made except for
the subgroup speciﬁed in Fig. 5d. Animals were allocated to injection groups in
alternating order by an observer unaware of treatment. All behavioral and histo-
logical analyses were conducted without knowledge of treatment group.
Data availability. All relevant data that support our experimental ﬁndings are
available from the authors. Supporting RNA-sequencing data are available on
NCBI GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus), accession number GSE107514.
Received: 12 January 2018 Accepted: 23 July 2018
References
1.
Lu, P. et al. Long-distance growth and connectivity of neural stem cells after
severe spinal cord injury. Cell 150, 1264–1273 (2012).
2.
van Gorp, S. et al. Amelioration of motor/sensory dysfunction and spasticity
in a rat model of acute lumbar spinal cord injury by human neural stem cell
transplantation. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 4, 57 (2013).
3.
Wictorin, K. & Bjorklund, A. Axon outgrowth from grafts of human
embryonic spinal cord in the lesioned adult rat spinal cord. Neuroreport 3,
1045–1048 (1992).
4.
Iwanami, A. et al. Transplantation of human neural stem cells for spinal cord
injury in primates. J. Neurosci. Res. 80, 182–190 (2005).
5.
Emgard, M. et al. Neuroprotective effects of human spinal cord-derived neural
precursor cells after transplantation to the injured spinal cord. Exp. Neurol.
253, 138–145 (2014).
6.
Kadoya, K. et al. Spinal cord reconstitution with homologous neural grafts
enables robust corticospinal regeneration. Nat. Med. 22, 479–487 (2016).
7.
Yan, J. et al. Extensive neuronal differentiation of human neural stem cell
grafts in adult rat spinal cord. PLoS Med. 4, e39 (2007).
8.
Sun, Y. et al. Long-term tripotent differentiation capacity of human neural
stem (NS) cells in adherent culture. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 38, 245–258 (2008).
9.
Suslov, O. N., Kukekov, V. G., Ignatova, T. N. & Steindler, D. A. Neural stem
cell heterogeneity demonstrated by molecular phenotyping of clonal
neurospheres. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 14506–14511 (2002).
10. Reynolds, B. A. & Rietze, R. L. Neural stem cells and neurospheres–re-
evaluating the relationship. Nat. Methods 2, 333–336 (2005).
11. Lu, P. et al. Long-distance axonal growth from human induced pluripotent
stem cells after spinal cord injury. Neuron 83, 789–796 (2014).
12. Nori, S. et al. Long-term safety issues of iPSC-based cell therapy in a spinal
cord injury model: oncogenic transformation with epithelial-mesenchymal
transition. Stem Cell Rep. 4, 360–373 (2015).
13. Salewski, R. P. et al. Transplantation of induced pluripotent stem cell-derived
neural stem cells mediate functional recovery following thoracic spinal cord
injury through remyelination of axons. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 4, 743–754
(2015).
14. Fujimoto, Y. et al. Treatment of a mouse model of spinal cord injury by
transplantation of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived long-term
self-renewing neuroepithelial-like stem cells. Stem Cells 30, 1163–1173 (2012).
15. Falk, A. et al. Capture of neuroepithelial-like stem cells from pluripotent stem
cells provides a versatile system for in vitro production of human neurons.
PLoS ONE 7, e29597 (2012).
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
14
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

16. Conti, L. & Cattaneo, E. Neural stem cell systems: physiological players or
in vitro entities? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11, 176–187 (2010).
17. Tailor, J. et al. Stem cells expanded from the human embryonic hindbrain
stably retain regional speciﬁcation and high neurogenic potency. J. Neurosci.
33, 12407–12422 (2013).
18. Onorati, M. et al. Zika virus disrupts phospho-TBK1 localization and mitosis
in human neuroepithelial stem cells and radial glia. Cell Rep. 16, 2576–2592
(2016).
19. Tuszynski, M. H. et al. Neural stem cell dissemination after grafting to CNS
injury sites. Cell 156, 388–389 (2014).
20. Steward, O., Sharp, K. G. & Matsudaira Yee, K. Long-distance migration and
colonization of transplanted neural stem cells. Cell 156, 385–387 (2014).
21. Guan, Y. J. et al. Increased stem cell proliferation in the spinal cord of adult
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis transgenic mice. J. Neurochem. 102, 1125–1138
(2007).
22. Fournier, A. E., GrandPre, T. & Strittmatter, S. M. Identiﬁcation of a receptor
mediating Nogo-66 inhibition of axonal regeneration. Nature 409, 341–346
(2001).
23. Liu, B. P., Fournier, A., GrandPre, T. & Strittmatter, S. M. Myelin-associated
glycoprotein as a functional ligand for the Nogo-66 receptor. Science 297,
1190–1193 (2002).
24. Cafferty, W. B., Duffy, P., Huebner, E. & Strittmatter, S. M. MAG and OMgp
synergize with Nogo-A to restrict axonal growth and neurological recovery
after spinal cord trauma. J. Neurosci. 30, 6825–6837 (2010).
25. Schwab, M. E. & Strittmatter, S. M. Nogo limits neural plasticity and recovery
from injury. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 27, 53–60 (2014).
26. Basso, D. M. et al. Basso Mouse Scale for locomotion detects differences in
recovery after spinal cord injury in ﬁve common mouse strains. J.
Neurotrauma 23, 635–659 (2006).
27. Armbruster, B. N., Li, X., Pausch, M. H., Herlitze, S. & Roth, B. L. Evolving the
lock to ﬁt the key to create a family of G protein-coupled receptors potently
activated by an inert ligand. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 5163–5168 (2007).
28. Rogan, S. C. & Roth, B. L. Remote control of neuronal signaling. Pharmacol.
Rev. 63, 291–315 (2011).
29. Siegel, C. S., Fink, K. L., Strittmatter, S. M. & Cafferty, W. B. Plasticity of intact
rubral projections mediates spontaneous recovery of function after
corticospinal tract injury. J. Neurosci. 35, 1443–1457 (2015).
30. Martinez-De Luna, R. I., Ku, R. Y., Lyou, Y. & Zuber, M. E. Maturin is a novel
protein required for differentiation during primary neurogenesis. Dev. Biol.
384, 26–40 (2013).
31. Sikora, K. M., Nosavanh, L. M., Kantheti, P., Burmeister, M. & Hortsch, M.
Expression of Caytaxin protein in Cayman Ataxia mouse models correlates
with phenotype severity. PLoS ONE 7, e50570 (2012).
32. Paveliev, M. et al. HB-GAM (pleiotrophin) reverses inhibition of neural
regeneration by the CNS extracellular matrix. Sci. Rep. 6, 33916 (2016).
33. Diaz-Balzac, C. A., Lazaro-Pena, M. I., Ramos-Ortiz, G. A. & Bulow, H. E. The
adhesion molecule KAL-1/anosmin-1 regulates neurite branching through a
SAX-7/L1CAM-EGL-15/FGFR receptor complex. Cell Rep. 11, 1377–1384
(2015).
34. Basso, D. M., Beattie, M. S. & Bresnahan, J. C. A sensitive and reliable
locomotor rating scale for open ﬁeld testing in rats. J. Neurotrauma 12, 1–21
(1995).
35. Onorati, M. et al. Preservation of positional identity in fetus-derived neural
stem (NS) cells from different mouse central nervous system compartments.
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 68, 1769–1783 (2011).
36. Hook, L. et al. Non-immortalized human neural stem (NS) cells as a scalable
platform for cellular assays. Neurochem. Int. 59, 432–444 (2011).
37. Cummings, B. J. et al. Human neural stem cells differentiate and promote
locomotor recovery in spinal cord-injured mice. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
102, 14069–14074 (2005).
38. Salazar, D. L., Uchida, N., Hamers, F. P., Cummings, B. J. & Anderson, A. J.
Human neural stem cells differentiate and promote locomotor recovery in an
early chronic spinal cord injury NOD-scid mouse model. PLoS ONE 5, e12272
(2010).
39. Ladewig, J., Koch, P. & Brustle, O. Auto-attraction of neural precursors and
their neuronal progeny impairs neuronal migration. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 24–26
(2014).
40. Lu, P., Jones, L. L., Snyder, E. Y. & Tuszynski, M. H. Neural stem cells
constitutively secrete neurotrophic factors and promote extensive host axonal
growth after spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol. 181, 115–129 (2003).
41. Yan, J., Welsh, A. M., Bora, S. H., Snyder, E. Y. & Koliatsos, V. E.
Differentiation and tropic/trophic effects of exogenous neural precursors in
the adult spinal cord. J. Comp. Neurol. 480, 101–114 (2004).
42. Hawryluk, G. W. et al. An in vivo characterization of trophic factor
production following neural precursor cell or bone marrow stromal cell
transplantation for spinal cord injury. Stem. Cells Dev. 21, 2222–2238 (2012).
43. Yasuda, A. et al. Signiﬁcance of remyelination by neural stem/progenitor cells
transplanted into the injured spinal cord. Stem Cells 29, 1983–1994 (2011).
44. Lu, P., Kadoya, K. & Tuszynski, M. H. Axonal growth and connectivity from
neural stem cell grafts in models of spinal cord injury. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
27, 103–109 (2014).
45. Bonner, J. F. & Steward, O. Repair of spinal cord injury with neuronal relays:
from fetal grafts to neural stem cells. Brain Res. 1619, 115–123 (2015).
46. Bareyre, F. M. et al. The injured spinal cord spontaneously forms a new
intraspinal circuit in adult rats. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 269–277 (2004).
47. Courtine, G. et al. Recovery of supraspinal control of stepping via indirect
propriospinal relay connections after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 14, 69–74
(2008).
48. Rosenzweig, E. S. et al. Restorative effects of human neural stem cell grafts on
the primate spinal cord. Nat. Med. 24, 484–490 (2018).
49. Anders, S. & Huber, W. Differential expression analysis for sequence count
data. Genome Biol. 11, R106 (2010).
50. Dell’Anno, M. T. et al. Remote control of induced dopaminergic neurons in
parkinsonian rats. J. Clin. Invest. 124, 3215–3229 (2014).
51. Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29,
15–21 (2013).
52. Habegger, L. et al. RSEQtools: a modular framework to analyze RNA-Seq data
using compact, anonymized data summaries. Bioinformatics 27, 281–283
(2011).
53. Langfelder, P. & Horvath, S. WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation
network analysis. BMC Bioinf. 9, 559 (2008).
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Trojanowski and Dr. Lee for providing the anti-human neuroﬁlament
antibody and Dr. Broccoli for the hM4Di-mcherry construct. We thank Dr. Lisgo for
human tissue procurement. We also thank Hiam Naiditch and Tomoko Sekine-Konno
for their contribution to the behavioral analysis. This material is based upon work
supported by the State of Connecticut under the Regenerative Medicine Research Fund
to M.T.D.’A and M.O. Its contents are solely responsibility of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of the State of Connecticut or Connecticut
Innovations, Incorporated. This work was also supported by grants from the Wings for
Life to X.W., from the Falk Medical Research Trust to S.M.S., and from the N.I.H. to S.M.
S.
Author contributions
M.T.D.’A. conceived and carried out the experiments, interpreted the results and wrote
the manuscript. X.W. performed the spinal cord lesions. M.O. provided the NCX-NES
cells and contributed to the interpretation of the transcriptome analysis. M.L. performed
the RNA-seq data analysis, S.M. performed the WGCNA analysis, F.T. performed the
electrophysiology experiments. Y.S and W.B.J.C. contributed to the behavioral analysis.
F.L. assisted in cell culture work. N.S. and W.B.J.C. contributed to the manuscript pre-
paration. S.M.S. contributed to the conception of the project and the interpretation of the
results and wrote the manuscript.
Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
018-05844-8.
Competing interests: S.M.S. is a co-founder of ReNetX Bio, which seeks to develop
NgR1-based therapies for neural repair. The remaining authors declare no competing
interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3419 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05844-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
15

===== Dias2021_NatComm_Pericyte+FibroticScar =====
ARTICLE
Pericyte-derived ﬁbrotic scarring is conserved
across diverse central nervous system lesions
David O. Dias
1,8, Jannis Kalkitsas1,8, Yildiz Kelahmetoglu
1, Cynthia P. Estrada2, Jemal Tatarishvili3,
Daniel Holl1, Linda Jansson
3, Shervin Banitalebi4, Mahmood Amiry-Moghaddam4, Aurélie Ernst
1,5,
Hagen B. Huttner6, Zaal Kokaia
3, Olle Lindvall3, Lou Brundin
2, Jonas Frisén1 & Christian Göritz
1,7✉
Fibrotic scar tissue limits central nervous system regeneration in adult mammals. The extent
of ﬁbrotic tissue generation and distribution of stromal cells across different lesions in the
brain and spinal cord has not been systematically investigated in mice and humans. Fur-
thermore, it is unknown whether scar-forming stromal cells have the same origin throughout
the central nervous system and in different types of lesions. In the current study, we com-
pared ﬁbrotic scarring in human pathological tissue and corresponding mouse models of
penetrating and non-penetrating spinal cord injury, traumatic brain injury, ischemic stroke,
multiple sclerosis and glioblastoma. We show that the extent and distribution of stromal cells
are speciﬁc to the type of lesion and, in most cases, similar between mice and humans.
Employing in vivo lineage tracing, we report that in all mouse models that develop ﬁbrotic
tissue, the primary source of scar-forming ﬁbroblasts is a discrete subset of perivascular cells,
termed type A pericytes. Perivascular cells with a type A pericyte marker proﬁle also exist in
the human brain and spinal cord. We uncover type A pericyte-derived ﬁbrosis as a conserved
mechanism that may be explored as a therapeutic target to improve recovery after central
nervous system lesions.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
OPEN
1 Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. 2 Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska University Hospital,
Solna, Sweden. 3 Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. 4 Division of Anatomy, Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Basic
Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. 5 Group Genome Instability in Tumors, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.
6 Department of Neurology, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. 7 Ming Wai Lau Centre for Reparative Medicine, Stockholm Node, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. 8These authors contributed equally: David O. Dias, Jannis Kalkitsas. ✉email: christian.goeritz@ki.se
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;

R
egeneration of the central nervous system (CNS) in adult
mammals is limited. Scar tissue that forms after CNS
lesions is essential for sealing off the injured tissue and
containing the damage1–4. However, it also functions as a per-
manent barrier to regenerating axons, contributing to the long-
lasting functional deﬁcits observed after injury5,6.
The mature CNS scar is a compartmentalized, multicellular
structure.
Non-neural
cells,
including
extracellular
matrix
(ECM)-producing stromal ﬁbroblasts and peripherally derived
macrophages, constitute the ﬁbrotic, or stromal, component of
the scar2. Most research has focused on reactive astrocytes and
NG2-expressing glia constituting the glial component of the
scar5,7, and much less is known about ﬁbrotic scar tissue.
Using in vivo lineage tracing, we previously identiﬁed a small
subset of perivascular cells, named type A pericytes, as the cellular
origin of stromal ﬁbroblasts present in ﬁbrotic scar tissue after
penetrating spinal cord injury. Type A pericytes are initially
recruited to mediate wound closure, but consequently form
ﬁbrotic scar tissue, which constitutes a barrier for axon
regeneration6. Type A pericytes are located in the vascular wall
encased by basal lamina and represent about 10% of all platelet-
derived growth factor receptor-beta (PDGFRβ)-expressing peri-
vascular cells on the microvasculature in the uninjured adult
mouse spinal cord. They can be distinguished from other non-
scar-forming perivascular cells by the expression of the glutamate
aspartate transporter GLAST (gene name Slc1a3), which can be
used for selective targeting of type A pericytes. Following spinal
cord injury, type A pericytes enter the lesion site with sprouting
vessels during a transient phase of vascular remodeling. Between
3 and 9 days post-injury, type A pericytes proliferate intensely,
break through the surrounding vascular basal lamina and migrate
into the lesion, where they cluster and contribute to the formation
of the ﬁbrotic scar3.
Although different cell types were proposed to contribute to
ﬁbrotic scarring8–11, the cellular origin of scar-forming ﬁbroblasts
following CNS lesions in the brain remains elusive, due to the lack of
in vivo genetic fate mapping studies required to unequivocally trace
cells and establish lineage relationships. It is also unclear to what
extent ﬁbrotic scar tissue enriched in stromal ﬁbroblasts is formed in
humans after CNS lesions, such as spinal cord injury, stroke, multiple
sclerosis (MS), and glioblastoma multiforme (GBM).
Here, we show that ﬁbrotic scar tissue formation by type A
pericytes is preserved throughout the CNS, while the extent and
distribution of stromal cells varies depending on the lesion. Type
A pericytes are the main source of PDGFRβ-expressing stromal
cells in mouse models of penetrating and non-penetrating spinal
cord injuries, traumatic brain injury, ischemic stroke and MS, but
contribute less extensively to tumor stroma. Furthermore, as in
the mouse, we ﬁnd a subset of perivascular cells with a type A
pericyte marker proﬁle in the healthy human brain and spinal
cord. After spinal cord injury, humans develop non-neural,
ﬁbrotic scar tissue with large numbers of non-vessel-associated
stromal ﬁbroblasts. In spinal cords of individuals with active MS,
PDGFRβ-expressing stromal cells mostly accumulate in the
perivascular space. In comparison, PDGFRβ-expressing stromal
cells increase in density but remain mostly associated with the
vasculature in stroke patients with subcortical ischemic lesions
and in the stroma of aggressive grade IV human GBM tumors.
Results
Genetic labeling of type A pericytes in the adult mouse CNS.
We
employed
GLAST-CreERT2
transgenic
mice12
carrying
Rosa26-enhanced yellow ﬂuorescent protein (R26R-EYFP) or
Rosa26-tdTomato
(R26R-tdTom)
reporter
alleles
(hereafter
referred
to
as
GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP
or
GLAST-
CreERT2;R26R-tdTom) to genetically fate map type A pericytes, as
previously established in the spinal cord3,6 (Supplementary
Fig.
1a).
Upon
tamoxifen-mediated
genetic
recombination,
GLAST-expressing type A pericytes are inheritably labeled by
EYFP or tdTom expression. Under homeostatic conditions, type
A pericytes are associated with blood vessels throughout the gray
and white matter spinal cord parenchyma and distribute along
the capillary bed, and upstream venous and arterial vasculature3
(Supplementary Fig. 1b–d). Type A pericytes express the widely
used pericyte markers PDGFRβ and CD13 (also known as ami-
nopeptidase N), and T-box transcription factor 18 (Tbx18), but
are not marked by desmin and alpha smooth muscle actin
(αSMA), found in other mural cells (i.e., type B pericytes and
vascular smooth muscle cells)3 (Supplementary Fig. 1e–i).
GLAST-expressing type A pericytes had typical ultrastructural
features of pericytes including being juxtaposed to the capillary
endothelial cells and being embedded within the basal lamina
(Supplementary Fig. 2a, b). As previously described3, at positions
where processes intersect, type A pericytes were commonly
located abluminal to the other, non-recombined, pericytes (i.e.
type B pericytes) (Supplementary Fig. 2c).
Likewise, we detected recombined perivascular cells with similar
distribution along the vasculature, sharing the same marker
expression and comprising about 10% of all PDGFRβ-expressing
perivascular cells in the uninjured adult cerebral cortex and
striatum (Supplementary Fig. 3a–h), identifying them as type A
pericytes. Apart from type A pericytes, we observed occasional
recombination in a small subset of ependymal cells and white
matter radial astrocytes in the spinal cord3 and associated with the
vasculature in the meninges surrounding the brain and spinal cord
(Supplementary Figs. 1b, 3a). Additionally, the GLAST-CreERT2
transgene allows recombination in a subset of parenchymal
astrocytes throughout the brain (i.e. striatal and cortical astrocytes,
Supplementary Fig. 4a–e), as well as in subventricular zone
astrocyte-like neural stem cells12,13. Astrocytes, ependymal cells,
and their respective progeny do not participate in ﬁbrotic scar
tissue formation14 and do not express the stromal marker
PDGFRβ, which allows us to distinguish them from type A
pericyte-derived scar-forming ﬁbroblasts.
Type A pericytes contribute to ﬁbrotic scar formation follow-
ing penetrating and non-penetrating spinal cord injury. To
compare the contribution of type A pericytes to ﬁbrotic scarring
after penetrating and non-penetrating spinal cord injury, we lineage
traced type A pericytes after a dorsal funiculus incision3,14,15 and
after a complete crush injury16, respectively (Fig. 1 and Supple-
mentary Fig. 5). Injuries were performed following a clearing period
of 7 days after tamoxifen-mediated recombination, ensuring that all
recombination occurs prior to lesioning3,6.
We compared type A pericyte-derived scar formation during
the subacute phase at 5 days post-injury (dpi), at the time of glial-
stromal border establishment at 14 dpi, and at a chronic time
point at 6–7 weeks post-injury (wpi). While the uninjured spinal
cord only contained a small number of recombined (EYFP+) type
A pericytes (Fig. 1a, b and Supplementary Figs. 1, 5a, b), we found
many EYFP+ type A pericyte-derived cells within the lesioned
parenchyma at all studied time points after complete spinal crush
and dorsal funiculus incision (Fig. 1c–h and Supplementary
Fig. 5c–h).
At 5 dpi, the total number of EYFP+ cells expressing the
stromal marker PDGFRβ+ had drastically increased in the lesion
core compared to uninjured conditions, and most recombined
cells were no longer associated with the blood vessel wall
(Fig. 1i–k and Supplementary Figs. 5i–k, 6a). EYFP+ cells
proliferated (Ki67+) both when associated with and away from
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

the vessel wall and expressed the (myo)ﬁbroblast markers αSMA
and vimentin17 (Fig. 1l, m, s and Supplementary Fig. 5l, m, r).
While we found type A pericytes and progeny expressing the
NG2 proteoglycan, the majority of EYFP+ cells did not share this
marker after injury (Supplementary Fig. 6b), suggesting that type
A pericyte progeny is distinct from NG2-expressing cells involved
in scar formation after spinal cord injury18. In addition, we
observed that type A pericytes and progeny were embedded in
collagen I-positive ECM in the lesion core and surrounding tissue
(Supplementary Fig. 6c).
At 14 dpi the ﬁbrotic lesion core was ﬂanked by glial ﬁbrillary
acidic protein (GFAP)+ astrocytes, establishing a sharp border
between the glial and ﬁbrotic scar compartments (Figs. 1n, o and
Supplementary Fig. 7a–c). As a result of lesion border formation,
type A pericyte-derived cells apposed to reactive glia at the glial-
ﬁbrotic interface exhibited a distinct morphology and arranged
differently compared to EYFP+ cells in the inner core of the
ﬁbrotic scar (Supplementary Fig. 7b, c). In regions of the scar
devoid of type A pericyte-derived cells, we could observe GFAP+
astrocyte processes crossing the lesion site, forming glial bridges
% EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells 
/ total PDGFRβ+ cells
5 days
PDGFRβ EYFP
Pdx EYFP
Pdx EYFP
14 days
GFAP EYFP
Uninj. 5d
14d
7w
i
j
k
n
p
t
w
0
500
1,000
1,500
No. EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells
(per mm2)
Uninj. 5d
14d
7w
0
20
40
60
80
100
5d
7d
+TAM
Clearing
5d, 14d, 7w
Analysis
Injury
c
5 days
14 days
7 weeks
GFAP EYFP
a
d
e
f
o
ON
OFF
OFF
OFF
ON
ON
ON
u
Uninj. 5d
14d
7w
% EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells
0
50
100
Lesion model: Complete spinal cord crush 
2 sec
No. EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells 
(per section)
h
0
100
200
300
Uninj. 5d
14d
7w
****
***
**
***
***
**** ****
****
ns
***
***
***
ns
ns
Uninj. 5d
14d
7w
****
****
****
Distance of EYFP+ PDGFRβ+
cell soma from nearest vessel surface (μm)  
0
50
100
150
200
PDGFRβ EYFP
GFAP EYFP
Uninjured
GFAP EYFP
Ki67 EYFP Pdx 
αSMA EYFP
Fibronectin EYFP
Collagen I EYFP
Vimentin EYFP
PDGFRβ EYFP Pdx DAPI 
b
l
m
q
r
s
v
5 days
Lesion core
Lesion core area (mm2)
g
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
5d
14d
7w
*
*****
ns
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3

(Fig. 1n, o). EYFP+ cells retained expression of PDGFRβ and
Tbx18 after dissociation from the vascular wall, and were
surrounded by ﬁbronectin- and collagen I-positive ECM deposits
(Fig. 1o-r and Supplementary Figs. 5n–q, 6c, d). The number of
EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells peaked at 14 dpi and then dropped by 6–7
wpi, as the scar matured (Fig. 1h and Supplementary Fig. 5h).
Over time, the lesion site condensed (Fig. 1g and Supplementary
Fig. 5g), leading to increased EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cell density in the
lesion core (Fig. 1t and Supplementary Fig. 5s).
Fibrotic scar tissue contains PDGFRβ+ stromal cells associated
with the blood vessel wall (ON the vessel), representing perivascular
cells, and extravascular (OFF the vessel) PDGFRβ+cells, represent-
ing stromal ﬁbroblasts. We noticed that spinal cord injury triggered
robust detachment of recombined cells from the blood vessel wall.
Approximately 56 ± 4% and 74 ± 6% of EYFP+ cells that expressed
PDGFRβ were no longer associated with the vascular wall (i.e. no
contact of processes or soma with the blood vessel, and soma >8 μm
from the blood vessel surface) at chronic stages after dorsal
funiculus incision and complete spinal cord crush, respectively
(Fig. 1u, v and Supplementary Figs. 5t, u, 8a–e).
After complete spinal cord crush injury, the overall contribu-
tion of type A pericytes to all PDGFRβ+ stromal cells in the
ﬁbrotic lesion core was on average 80% at all time points
investigated. This value is likely to represent an underestimate as
incomplete recombination is expected3,6 and the highest animal
showed up to 95% contribution (Fig. 1w). These results were
further corroborated using the dorsal funiculus incision model
(Supplementary Fig. 5v).
Type A pericytes reacted in a similar manner and showed
comparable dynamics in response to penetrating and non-
penetrating lesions to the spinal cord (Fig. 1 and Supplementary
Fig. 5). Although astrocyte- and ependymal cell-derived progeny
participate in glial scar formation, they do not contribute to the
ﬁbrotic compartment of the scar14 and do not express the stromal
marker PDGFRβ. Virtually all recombined cells found within the
ﬁbrotic scar expressed the stromal marker PDGFRβ (Fig. 1j, o and
Supplementary Fig. 5i, n), ruling out signiﬁcant contribution
from sparsely recombined ependymal cells and radial astrocytes
to ﬁbrotic scar-forming cells, as previously established3.
We conclude that nearly all scar-forming PDGFRβ+ stromal
cells derive from type A pericytes after penetrating and non-
penetrating injuries to the spinal cord.
Type A pericytes contribute to ﬁbrotic scar formation follow-
ing traumatic brain injury. To investigate whether type A
pericyte-derived scarring is conserved throughout the CNS, we
lineage traced type A pericytes after a stab wound to the brain
(Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 9a).
Small stab lesions restricted to the cerebral cortex mainly
induce gliosis19 and do not generate extensive ﬁbrotic tissue, as
seen by no substantial increase in PDGFRβ+ stromal ﬁbroblasts
at 14 dpi (Supplementary Fig. 9b–f). As expected, we observed
recombined GFAP+ astrocytes (Supplementary Fig. 9b) but little
to no contribution of lineage traced type A pericytes after small
cortical stab lesions (Supplementary Fig. 9c–f). In contrast, larger
cortico-striatal stab lesions triggered robust ﬁbrotic and glial
scarring and allowed to investigate the contribution of type A
pericytes to ﬁbrotic scarring in the brain (Fig. 2a–h). At 5 dpi, we
found that type A pericyte-derived EYFP+ cells expressing the
stromal marker PDGFRβ dispersed over the lesion core and
no longer associated with the blood vessel wall (Fig. 2d, i–k).
EYFP+ cells proliferated both associated with and away from the
vascular wall and expressed the (myo)ﬁbroblast markers αSMA
and vimentin (Fig. 2l, m, s). The number of recombined
PDGFRβ+ stromal cells peaked at 14 dpi and then dropped by 7
wpi (Fig. 2h). At 14 dpi a compact ﬁbrotic scar core ﬁlled with
type A pericyte-derived stromal cells was walled off by partially
recombined GFAP-expressing astrocytes (Fig. 2e, n–p) and
remained up to 7 wpi (Fig. 2f, Supplementary Fig. 8f, g). As
observed after spinal cord injury, EYFP+ cells were embedded
in ﬁbronectin- and collagen I- rich ECM (Fig. 2q, r). Overtime,
the scar matured and condensed, leading to an increase in
EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cell density in the lesion core (Fig. 2g, t).
About half of the EYFP+ cells that expressed PDGFRβ were no
longer associated with the blood vessel wall in the lesion core
(Fig. 2u, v). After cortico-striatal stab wounds around 80% of all
PDGFRβ+ stromal cells associated with the ﬁbrotic scar were
recombined at all time points investigated (Fig. 2w). This
number may underrepresent the contribution of type A pericytes
as recombination is expected to be incomplete. As for spinal cord
injury, we conclude that almost all scar-forming PDGFRβ+
stromal cells derive from type A pericytes after cortico-striatal
stab lesions.
Fibrotic scar tissue only formed following larger cortico-
striatal stab lesions as opposed to smaller injuries restricted to
the cerebral cortex. To investigate whether the anatomical
location or lesion size inﬂuence ﬁbrotic scar tissue generation,
we next lineage traced type A pericytes following a stab
wound restricted to the cerebral cortex with the same depth and
size as the cortico-striatal stab lesion. We refer to this lesion
Fig. 1 Type A pericytes are the main source of stromal ﬁbroblasts that form ﬁbrotic scar tissue after non-penetrating spinal crush injury. a A subset of
perivascular cells, named type A pericytes, is recombined (EYFP+, arrowheads) in the uninjured spinal cord of GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP mice. b Type A
pericyte (EYFP+) lining the endothelial wall (marked with podocalyxin, Pdx) and expressing the pericyte marker PDGFRβ. c Lesion model and experimental
timeline. Red represents the lesion. Distribution of EYFP+ cells and GFAP+ glial cells at 5 dpi (d), 14 dpi (e) and 7 wpi (f). Lesion core area (g) and number
of EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells per section (h). EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells are bordered by GFAP+ reactive astrocytes (i, j) and locate outside the vascular wall (Pdx+;
arrowheads) at 5 dpi (k). Inset in (k) shows magniﬁed boxed region. EYFP+ cells proliferate (Ki67+) while associated with (arrowheads) or away from
(arrows) the vascular wall (l), and express the (myo)ﬁbroblast marker αSMA (m) at 5 dpi. n A sharp lesion border forms at 14 dpi, segregating the glial
(GFAP+) and ﬁbrotic (EYFP+) compartments of the scar. Arrowheads point at a glial bridge. EYFP+PDGFRβ+stromal cells populate the lesion core (o) and
a fraction is located away from the vascular wall (p) at 14 dpi. EYFP+ cells are embedded in ﬁbronectin- (q) and collagen I- (r) rich ECM (14 dpi) and
express vimentin (s) (5 dpi). t Density of EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells in the ﬁbrotic core. u Percentage of EYFP+ cells that express PDGFRβ (EYFP+PDGFRβ+
cells) associated with (ON vessel) or located away from (OFF vessel) the vascular wall. v Distance of EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells ON vessel (uninjured spinal
cord) or OFF vessel (after injury) from the nearest vessel surface. Each dot represents one cell. w Percentage of PDGFRβ+ cells that express EYFP out of
total PDGFRβ+cells. TAM tamoxifen; Scale bars: 200 μm (a, d–f), 100 μm (i–k, n–p), 50 μm (l, q, r), 25 μm (inset k, m, s) and 5 μm (b). Data shown as
mean ± s.e.m. n = 3 (Uninjured), n = 4 (5d), n = 5 (14d) and n = 3 (7w) animals in (g, h, t, u, w); n = 69 (Uninjured), n = 334 (5d), n = 423 (14d) and
n = 408 (7w) cells examined over 3 animals in (v). ns non-signiﬁcant; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001 by One-Way ANOVA followed by
Holm–Sidak post-hoc test in (g, h, t, w) and Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn’s post-hoc test in (v). Dashed lines in (n–p) outline the lesion core.
i, j, n, o denote paired images. Cell nuclei are labeled with DAPI. All images show sagittal sections. Images are representative of two independent
experiments. Source data and statistical details are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

model as large cortical stab wound (Fig. 3a). As opposed to
small cortical lesions (Supplementary Fig. 9), large cortical stab
wounds
triggered
widespread
glial
and
ﬁbrotic
scarring
and enabled us to examine the behavior and contribution of
type A pericytes to ﬁbrotic scarring in the cerebral cortex
(Fig. 3b–e).
At 5 dpi we found that type A pericytes and progeny co-
expressed Tbx18 and the stromal marker PDGFRβ and ﬁlled up
the ﬁbrotic lesion core, immediately ﬂanked by the glial scar
(Fig. 3b, d, f–h, Supplementary Fig. 10). Many recombined cells
no longer associated with the blood vessel wall, and expressed the
mitotic marker Ki67 (Fig. 3i, j) and the (myo)ﬁbroblast markers
αSMA and vimentin (Fig. 3k, r).
At 14 dpi recombined cells in the ﬁbrotic lesion core retained
expression of PDGFRβ and most remained dissociated from the
vascular wall (Fig. 3m–o). Type A pericyte-derived cells were
delimited by dense deposits of ﬁbronectin+ and collagen I+ ECM
(Fig. 3p, q). As observed after cortico-striatal stab lesions, GFAP-
expressing astrocytes making up the glial scar are partly
recombined (Fig. 3b, c, f, l).
5 days
PDGFRβ EYFP
Pdx EYFP
GFAP EYFP
14 days
n
h
t
Contr. 5d
14d
7w
*
Core
Penumbra
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
50
100
c
5 days
7 weeks
Contralateral side
GFAP EYFP
d
e
f
a
i
j
0
50
100
150
200
PDGFRβ EYFP
o
p
p
Contr. 5d
14d
7w
ON
ON
ON
ON
OFF
OFF
OFF
Contr. 5d
14d
7w
0
300
600
900
1,200
Contr. 5d
14d
7w
w
u
5d
7d
+TAM
Clearing
5d, 14d, 7w
Analysis
Injury
GFAP EYFP
Lesion model: Cortico-striatal stab wound
14 days
Ctx
St
No. EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells
(per section) 
No. EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells
(per mm2)
% EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells
****
****
****
ns
****
*
**
*
ns
*** ***
ns
ns**
*
Contr. 5d
14d
7w
0
20
60
100
Distance of EYFP+ PDGFRβ+
cell soma from nearest vessel surface (μm)  
****
****
****
40
80
Ki67 EYFP Pdx
αSMA EYFP
% EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells 
/ total PDGFRβ+ cells
Fibronectin EYFP
Collagen I EYFP
Vimentin EYFP
PDGFRβ EYFP Pdx DAPI
b
l
m
q
r
s
v
k
5 days
Lesion core
Lesion core area (mm2)
g
5d
14d
7w
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
**
***ns
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5

From 5 dpi to 14 dpi the number of recombined PDGFRβ+
stromal cells decreased while the scar dramatically compacted,
resulting in a higher cell density in the lesion core (Fig. 3s–u). At
both time points investigated, around 60% of the recombined
cells that expressed PDGFRβ were found away from the blood
vessel wall in the lesion core (Fig. 3v, w). In addition, we observed
that type A pericyte-derived cells contributed to ~70% of all scar-
forming PDGFRβ+ stromal cells after a large cortical stab wound
(Fig. 3x).
We conclude that larger mechanical injuries generate more
robust ﬁbrotic scarring when compared to smaller injuries.
Fibrotic scar tissue formation with substantial numbers of
PDGFRβ+ stromal cells is only triggered by large mechanical
injuries to the cerebral cortex. In line with this, we show that the
majority of all scar-forming PDGFRβ+ stromal cells generated
after large cortical stab lesions descend from type A pericytes.
Similar sized, large cortical and cortical-striatal lesions resulted
in a comparable stromal cell density after scar condensation at 14
dpi (Figs. 2t and 3u). However, the initial recruitment of type A
pericytes was stronger after cortical stab lesions, which developed
larger ﬁbrotic lesion cores when compared to cortico-striatal stab
wounds, as observed at 5 dpi. This initial difference was
compensated by a more efﬁcient resolution of ﬁbrotic cells
during scar maturation after cortical wounds compared to
cortico-striatal stab lesions (Fig. 2g, h and 3s, t).
Type A pericytes contribute to ﬁbrotic scar formation follow-
ing experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Next, we
explored the contribution of type A pericytes to ﬁbrotic scar
tissue formation after experimental autoimmune encephalomye-
litis (EAE), a widely accepted model of demyelinating diseases,
such as MS (Fig. 4). Because tamoxifen diminishes the clinical
severity of EAE20, we extended the clearing time after tamoxifen-
induced recombination to 50 days, before inducing EAE in adult
GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP transgenic mice (Fig. 4a). For EAE
induction, animals were immunized with myelin oligodendrocyte
glycoprotein (MOG) peptide emulsiﬁed in Complete Freund’s
Adjuvant (CFA) and received pertussis toxin. Animals receiving
CFA and/or pertussis toxin alone but not immunized with the
MOG peptide were used as control. Daily evaluation of clinical
symptoms and weight conﬁrmed that the animals manifested
signs of chronic disease-related neurological deﬁcits, starting
10 days after immunization (Fig. 4b, c).
All animals were sacriﬁced at 30 days post EAE induction,
during the chronic phase of the disease. EAE led to widespread
demyelination and scar formation throughout the spinal cord,
particularly evident in the ventral and ventrolateral white matter
of thoracic and lumbar spinal segments (Fig. 4d–g). We did not
observe weight loss, disease symptoms or myelin lesions in
control animals (Fig. 4b–d, h). In all demyelinated lesions we
found densely packed recombined cells intermingling with
CD45+
immune
cells,
including
inﬁltrating
CD3+
T-lymphocytes (Fig. 4i–k). Recombined cells expressed the
stromal marker PDGFRβ and a fraction no longer associated
with the vascular wall (Fig. 4l–o). In addition, we found that
recombined cells proliferated both in association with the blood
vessels and at a distance to them, expressed the (myo)ﬁbroblast
markers αSMA and vimentin and were surrounded by ECM
enriched in ﬁbronectin and collagen I (Fig. 4p–t). EAE led to a
robust increase in the number and density of type A pericyte-
derived (EYFP+) cells (Fig. 4u, v). Of all EYFP+ cells that
expressed PDGFRβ, around 30 % dissociated from the vascular
wall (Fig. 4w, x). Type A pericyte-derived cells accounted for
more than 90% of all the PDGFRβ+ stromal cells found in
demyelinated lesions (Fig. 4y).
In contrast to the spinal cord crush and stab lesions described
before, reactive astrocytes did not sharply wall off the entire
lesion, but were instead intermingled with recombined stromal
cells within the lesion (Fig. 4e, f). We conclude that ﬁbrotic scar
tissue is formed after EAE and that nearly all PDGFRβ+ stromal
cells are derived from type A pericytes.
Type A pericytes contribute to stromal cells following ischemic
lesions to the brain. We continued to explore whether ﬁbrotic
scar tissue formation is preserved in other types of CNS lesions,
and investigated the contribution of type A pericytes to an
ischemic lesion to the brain (Fig. 5). We induced experimental
stroke by a 35 min occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCA),
a procedure that generated an ischemic lesion with neuronal loss
primarily in the striatum, sparing the cerebral cortex13,21
(Fig. 5c).
Type A pericytes were fate mapped as described above for
spinal cord injury and traumatic brain injury. At all time points
investigated, we observed an increase in the number of lineage
traced type A pericytes co-expressing EYFP and PDGFRβ,
compared to the contralateral stroke side (Fig. 5a, b, d–q,
Supplementary Fig. 8h–j). EYFP+ stromal cells were interspersed
Fig. 2 Type A pericytes are the main source of stromal ﬁbroblasts that form ﬁbrotic scar tissue after cortico-striatal stab lesions. Type A pericytes and
parenchymal astrocytes are recombined (EYFP+) throughout the cerebral cortex (Ctx) and striatum (St) of GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP mice. b Type A
pericyte (EYFP+) encircling the endothelial tube (podocalyxin+, Pdx) and expressing the pericyte marker PDGFRβ in the cortex. c Lesion model and
experimental timeline. Red represents the lesion. Distribution of EYFP+ cells at 5 dpi (d), 14 dpi (e), and 7 wpi (f). The GFAP+ glial scar is partly
recombined. Type A pericyte-derived cells (EYFP+GFAP−cells) cluster in the lesion core. Inset in (d) shows magniﬁed boxed region. Lesion core area (g)
and number of EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells per section (h). EYFP+ cells express PDGFRβ (i, j) and a fraction is located outside the vascular wall (Pdx+;
arrowheads in k) at 5 dpi. Arrowheads point at protrusion-like structures in (j). Asterisk marks the lesion core; dashed line separates the lesion core from
penumbral tissue (i). Insets show magniﬁed boxed regions. EYFP+cells proliferate (Ki67+) while attached to the vascular wall (arrowheads) and away from
it (arrows) (l) and express the (myo)ﬁbroblast marker αSMA (m) at 5 dpi. n–p EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells occupy the lesion core and are bordered by
GFAP+ reactive glia at 14 dpi. q–s EYFP+ cells are surrounded by ﬁbronectin+ (q) and collagen I+ (r) ECM and express vimentin (s) at 14 dpi and 5 dpi,
respectively. t Density of EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells in the ﬁbrotic core. u Percentage of EYFP+ cells that express PDGFRβ (EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells) associated
with (ON vessel) or located away from (OFF vessel) the vascular wall. v Distance of EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells ON vessel (contralateral side to the lesion) or
OFF vessel (after injury) from the nearest vessel surface. Each dot represents one cell. w Percentage of PDGFRβ+ cells that express EYFP out of total
PDGFRβ+ cells. TAM tamoxifen; Scale bars: 400 μm (a, d, i), 100 μm (e, f, k, n–p), 50 μm (inset d, j, l), 25 μm (inset k, m, q–s), 10 μm (inset j) and 5 μm
(b). Data shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = 9 (Contralateral), n = 3 (5d), n = 3 (14d) and n = 3 (7w) animals in (g, h, t, u, w); n = 94 (Contralateral), n = 142
(5d), n = 194 (14d) and n = 397 (7w) cells examined over 3 animals in (v). ns non-signiﬁcant; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001 by One-
Way ANOVA followed by Holm–Sidak post-hoc test in (g, h, t, w) and Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn’s post-hoc test in (v). Dashed lines in (d–f, n,
o) outline the lesion core. n, o denote paired images. Cell nuclei are labeled DAPI. All images show sagittal sections. Images are representative of two
independent experiments. Source data and statistical test results are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

among CD45+ immune cells in the lesion (Fig. 5k, l, p, q). In
sharp contrast to spinal cord injury, large brain stab lesions and
EAE, the vast majority of PDGFRβ+ stromal cells, including
nearly all EYFP+ cells that expressed PDGFRβ, remained in
contact with the blood vessel wall at all time points investigated
(Fig. 5i–w, Supplementary Fig. 8h–j). Nonetheless, we detected a
small, but signiﬁcant increase in the mean distance of the EYFP+
cells’ soma to the nearest vessel surface, reﬂecting an altered
morphology and looser attachment of type A pericytes and
progeny to the blood vessel wall in response to stroke, when
compared to the contralateral control side (Fig. 5x). Recombined
cells proliferated, were encased by ﬁbronectin and collagen I
ECM, but did not express αSMA (Fig. 5r–u), indicating these cells
did not transition into (myo)ﬁbroblasts.
The number of recombined PDGFRβ+ stromal cells that had
drastically increased in the ischemic lesion core at 5 days after
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7

stroke declined over time along with condensation of the lesion,
keeping the cell density stable (Fig. 5g, h, v). While in the
contralateral, non-ischemic side, type A pericytes accounted for
~10% of all PDGFRβ+ cells, 40–60% (depending on the time
point) of the PDGFRβ+ cells covering blood vessels in the
ischemic lesion core were recombined and, therefore, originated
from type A pericytes (Fig. 5y).
Interestingly, in cases in which the MCA was occluded for
45 min, resulting in an ischemic lesion core that extended from
the striatum into the cortex (cortico-striatal stroke)21 (Supple-
mentary Fig. 11a), many PDGFRβ+ cells could be observed at a
distance from the blood vessel wall, primarily in the cortex but
also in the striatum. The vast majority of these PDGFRβ+ stromal
cells were recombined and, therefore, originated from type A
pericytes (Supplementary Fig. 11b–o).
We then asked whether the anatomical location of the stroke and
environmental differences between the cortex and the striatum
inﬂuence the generation of ﬁbrotic scar tissue and type A pericyte
detachment from the blood vessel wall. For this, we modeled
ischemic lesions restricted to the cerebral cortex by a permanent
occlusion of the distal portion of the MCA22 (Fig. 6a) and lineage
traced type A pericytes as aforementioned.
At both 5 days and 14 days after stroke, we found an increased
number and density of recombined PDGFRβ+ stromal cells
compared to the contralateral stroke side (Fig. 6b–u). In contrast
to striatal ischemic strokes, 60–70% of the recombined cells that
expressed PDGFRβ were no longer associated to the vascular wall
in the lesion core (Fig. 6i, o, v, w). Recombined cells proliferated
while associated with vascular wall and away from it, were
bordered by dense ﬁbronectin+ and collagen I+ ECM and
expressed the (myo)ﬁbroblast markers αSMA and vimentin
(Fig. 6j, k, p–r). After cortical ischemic stroke, type A pericyte-
derived cells contributed ~80% to all scar-forming PDGFRβ+
stromal cells at all time points investigated (Fig. 6x). Recombined
reactive astrocytes, co-expressing EYFP or tdTom and GFAP (but
not PDGFRβ), could be observed in the lesion rim as part of the
glial scar across all ischemic stroke models (Figs. 5d–f, 6b, c, f, l
and Supplementary Figs. 7g, h and 11b, i).
In cortical lesions, type A pericyte-derived ﬁbroblasts aligned
with GFAP+ astrocytes along the glial-ﬁbrotic lesion border
(Fig. 6l, m and Supplementary Fig. 7d–f), as observed after spinal
cord injury (Fig. 1n, o and Supplementary Fig. 7a–c). In contrast,
in striatal lesions, where type A pericyte-derived cells remained at
the vessel wall, we observed no formation of an aligned lesion
border (Fig. 5m, n and Supplementary Fig. 7g–i), indicating that
stromal ﬁbroblast-reactive astrocyte contact is necessary for
compact border formation.
Collectively, we observed that in ischemic lesions conﬁned to
the striatum most of the PDGFRβ+ stromal cells are associated
with the vascular wall, while after cortical ischemic lesions a large
number of PDGFRβ+ stromal cells can also be found in distance
to the vessel wall. Type A pericytes contributed substantially to
both PDGFRβ+ stromal populations. In contrast to striatal
ischemic lesions, type A pericytes and progeny could be observed
away from the blood vessel wall in the striatum after cortico-
striatal ischemic lesions, hinting that environmental factors
associated with the cerebral cortex and/or adjacent brain
structures may impact on type A pericyte recruitment from the
vessel wall in the striatum.
Type A pericytes contribute to brain tumor stroma. Next, we
explored type A pericyte contribution to tumor stroma in the
murine glioma 261 (GL261) orthotopic glioma model23, which
mimics human GBM, the most frequent and aggressive malignant
brain tumor in adults24. For this, we injected mouse GL261 cells
in the striatum of adult GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP mice after
recombination and tamoxifen clearing (Fig. 7a). Animals devel-
oped visible tumors with abnormal and enlarged vasculature,
3 weeks after inoculation (Fig. 7b, c). The tumor mass covered
most of the striatal area and was surrounded by GFAP+ astro-
cytes that were partially recombined (Fig. 7d, e).
When compared to the contralateral side to the tumor, the
total number and density of type A pericytes in the tumor stroma
was reduced, in line with an overall reduction of pericyte coverage
in tumor-associated vessels25,26. Nonetheless, we observed that
about 30 ± 5% of all type A pericyte-derived EYFP+ cells were
located outside the blood vessel wall and dispersed among tumor
cells (Fig. 7f–h, o–r). In addition, we found that EYFP+ cells
proliferated in contact and away from the vessel wall, expressed
αSMA and vimentin and were surrounded by ﬁbronectin and
collagen I- enriched ECM (Fig. 7 i–n).
Overall, type A pericyte-derived cells accounted for 13 ± 2% of
all PDGFRβ+ cells in the tumor mass (Fig. 7s). In summary, we
found that type A pericytes contribute to tumor-associated
PDGFRβ+ stromal cells, however not as the main source.
Type A pericytes are required for extracellular matrix deposi-
tion after CNS lesions. The difference between striatal and cor-
tical ischemic lesions allowed us to investigate whether the
variable distribution of type A pericyte-derived stromal cells in
relation to the blood vessel wall inﬂuences the pathological out-
come of tissue ﬁbrosis, such as deposition of ﬁbrotic ECM
proteins.
Fig. 3 Type A pericytes are the main source of stromal ﬁbroblasts that form ﬁbrotic scar tissue after large stab lesions restricted to the cerebral
cortex. a Lesion model and experimental timeline. Red represents the lesion. Distribution of tdTom+ cells at 5 dpi (b, d) and 14 dpi (c, e). Type A pericyte-
derived cells (tdTom+PDGFRβ+ cells) cluster in the lesion core (dashed lines), bordered by a partially recombined GFAP+glial scar. f–i The lesion core
(GFAP−area; outlined by dashed lines) is ﬁlled with tdTom+PDGFRβ+ cells (f–h) located outside the vascular wall (podocalyxin+, Pdx) (i) at 5 dpi.
TdTom+ cells proliferate (Ki67+) while attached to the blood vessel wall (arrowheads) and away from it (arrows) (j) and express the (myo)ﬁbroblast
marker αSMA (k) at 5 dpi. l–o TdTom+ cells retain PDGFRβ+ expression and occupy the lesion core (outlined by dashed lines) surrounded by GFAP+ glial
cells at 14 dpi (l–n). A fraction of tdTom+ cells no longer associates with the vascular wall (o). p–r TdTom+ cells are surrounded by ﬁbronectin+ (p) and
collagen I+ (q) ECM and express vimentin (r) at 14 dpi and 5 dpi, respectively. Quantiﬁcation of the lesion core area (s), number of tdTom+PDGFRβ+ cells
per section (t), and density of tdTom+PDGFRβ+ cells (u) overtime. v Percentage of tdTom+ cells that express PDGFRβ (tdTom+PDGFRβ+ cells)
associated with (ON vessel) or located outside (OFF vessel) the vascular wall. w Distance of tdTom+PDGFRβ+ cells ON vessel (contralateral cortex) or
OFF vessel (after injury) from the nearest vessel surface. Each dot represents one cell. x Percentage of PDGFRβ+ cells that express tdTom out of total
PDGFRβ+ cells. TAM tamoxifen; Scale bars: 500 μm (b–e), 100 μm (f, g), 50 μm (h–o) and 20 μm (p–r). Data shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = 8
(Contralateral), n = 4 (5d), and n = 4 (14d) animals in (s–v, x). n = 131 (Contralateral), n = 401 (5d), and n = 117 (14d) cells examined over 4 animals in
(w). ns non-signiﬁcant; *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001 by two-sided, unpaired Student’s t test in (s), One-Way ANOVA followed by Holm–Sidak
post-hoc test in (t, u, x) and Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn’s post-hoc test in (w). b, d, c, e, f, g, l, m, n, o denote paired images. Images show
coronal sections. Images are representative of two independent experiments. Source data and statistical test results are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

In striatal lesions, in which type A pericytes remained attached
to the vascular wall (Fig. 8a), we observed a slight but not
signiﬁcant increase in the deposition of ﬁbronectin and collagen I
in the ischemic lesion core, compared to the contralateral stroke
side. On the contrary, cortical ischemic lesions, with widespread,
non-vessel-associated type A pericyte-derived ﬁbroblasts, led to a
robust increase in deposition of ﬁbronectin and collagen I in
comparison to striatal strokes and to the contralateral stroke side.
These results indicate that detachment of type A pericyte-derived
cells from the vascular wall, which leads to the generation of
stromal ﬁbroblasts, is required for the deposition of ﬁbronectin
and collagen I ECM proteins (Fig. 8b–e).
To validate this ﬁnding in an independent lesion model in the
brain, we experimentally limited the generation of type A pericyte
30 days EAE
Control
GFAP EYFP
w
a
5d
50d
+TAM
Clearing
30d
Analysis
MOG
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
0
1
2
3
4
Day post immunization
Clinical score
Control
EAE
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
70
80
90
100
110
120
Day post immunization
Body weight (%)
Control
EAE
0
1
2
3
No. Lesions (per section)
dWM
iWM
vlWM
vWM
0
100
200
300
400
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
50
100
b
c
g
Cervical
Thoracic
Lumbar
d
e
f
u
Contr. 30d
PDGFRβ EYFP Pdx
l
m
n
o
Contr. 30d
Contr. 30d
v
y
Contr.
30d
OFF
ON
ON
Lesion model: Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis (EAE)
No. EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells
(per section) 
No. EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells 
(per mm2)
% EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells
***
****
****
0
20
60
100
Distance of EYFP+ PDGFRβ+cell soma 
from nearest vessel surface (μm)  
40
80
Contr.
30d
****
% EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells 
/ total PDGFRβ+ cells
30 days EAE
CD45 EYFP FluoroMyelin
CD45 EYFP
CD3 EYFP
Ki67 EYFP Pdx
αSMA EYFP
Vimentin EYFP
Fibronectin EYFP
Collagen I EYFP
i
j
k
p
q
s
t
r
x
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
30d
h
Lesion area (mm2)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9

progeny in the context of cortico-striatal stab lesions. Cortico-
striatal stab lesions induced proliferation in type A pericytes and
led to a signiﬁcant generation of progeny (Fig. 2). We therefore
employed a cell-speciﬁc and inducible genetic strategy to inhibit
the generation of progeny by type A pericytes, via speciﬁcally
blocking injury-induced proliferation. This was achieved by
generating new transgenic mice that, in addition to carrying the
GLAST-CreERT2 and R26R-EYFP alleles, were homozygous for
H-Ras and N-Ras null alleles and for ﬂoxed K-Ras alleles27,
hereafter referred to as GLAST-Rasless-EYFP mice (Fig. 8f). Both
Cre+ and CreWT animals were treated with tamoxifen prior to
injury, but CreWT animals did not undergo genetic recombina-
tion and served as control.
As previously established after spinal cord injury3,6, tamoxifen-
induced genetic recombination in Cre+ GLAST-Rasless-EYFP
animals prior to stab injury resulted in the loss of all 3 Ras genes,
important players in mitogenic signaling and cell cycle progres-
sion,
speciﬁcally
in
type
A
pericytes
and
conferred
less
proliferative capacity to this population of cells upon injury
when compared to control animals, as assessed 5 dpi. Interest-
ingly, reduced proliferation of type A pericytes was paralleled by a
higher proportion of type A pericyte-derived cells remaining
attached to the vasculature (Supplementary Fig. 12a–f), suggest-
ing that proliferation is required for pericyte dissociation from the
vascular wall. Although we detected a decrease in the percentage
of proliferating recombined GFAP+ astrocytes, it did not lead to a
signiﬁcant change in the bulk of reactive GFAP+ astrocytes
participating in glial scar formation in comparison to control
animals (Supplementary Fig. 12g–j).
We next compared deposition of ﬁbronectin and collagen I
ECM proteins in CreWT versus Cre+ GLAST-Rasless-EYFP
animals at 14 days after cortico-striatal stab lesions. As expected,
CreWT control animals, where type A pericytes proliferate and
leave the blood vessel wall extensively, developed a dense ﬁbrotic
lesion core enriched in PDGFRβ-expressing stromal cells and
widespread deposition of ﬁbronectin and collagen I-rich ECM.
On the contrary, Cre+ animals, in which type A pericyte
proliferation was reduced and a higher percentage of cells
remained attached to the blood vessel wall, presented signiﬁcant
attenuation of ﬁbrotic scar tissue formation, revealed as smaller
lesions with decreased PDGFRβ+ scarring compared to control
animals. In these animals, we observed reduced deposition of
ﬁbronectin and collagen I compared to control animals (Fig. 8g–h
and Supplementary Fig. 12k). Interestingly, in CreWT control
animals ﬁbronectin and collagen I signals localized to the brain
surface (meninges) and within the brain parenchyma. Conversely,
in Cre+ animals, ﬁbronectin and collagen I signals remained
predominantly at the brain surface, while their deposition was
signiﬁcantly reduced within the brain parenchyma (Fig. 8g–h).
This suggests that type A pericytes contribute to ﬁbrotic ECM
deposition within the brain parenchyma and reduction of type A
pericyte-derived scarring does not substantially impact on
meningeal
ECM
deposition.
Taken
together,
these
results
demonstrate that the extent of type A pericyte progeny located
outside the vascular wall determines the magnitude of ﬁbrotic
ECM deposition after brain lesions, supporting previous observa-
tions after spinal cord injury3,6.
Fibrotic tissue forms after diverse types of CNS lesions in
humans. The experiments above show that GLAST+ type A
pericytes are the main source of PDGFRβ-expressing stromal cells
that constitute ﬁbrotic scar tissue following CNS lesions in the
mouse. We next sought to determine whether similar GLAST-
expressing perivascular cells exist in the human CNS (Fig. 9).
PDGFRβ-expressing perivascular cells, including pericytes with
characteristic protruding ovoid cell bodies and processes encir-
cling the endothelial wall of small caliber vessels, could be readily
identiﬁed associated with the vasculature in post-mortem healthy
tissue from human spinal cord (Fig. 9a–d) and occipital cortex
(Fig. 9e–h). Interestingly, we found numerous GLAST+PDGFRβ+
perivascular cells, deﬁned as blood vessel-associated cells positive
for PDGFRB and SLC1A3 mRNA signals, suggesting that the
human vasculature may contain cells that are similar to type A
pericytes in the mouse3. In line with this, we could also identify
GLAST−PDGFRβ+ perivascular cells and parenchymal (non-
blood vessel-associated) GLAST+PDGFRβ−cells, likely represent-
ing astrocytes (Fig. 9c, g).
We next investigated the composition of scar tissue that forms
following traumatic spinal cord injury in post-mortem spinal
cord tissue from six patients with massive compression or
contusion/cyst type injuries in the cervical region, who survived
for intervals up to 61 days after injury (Supplementary Table 1).
In all cases we found regions of non-neural scar tissue enriched in
PDGFRβ+ cells, often organized in clusters, and bordered by
reactive glia (Fig. 10a, b). The areas of perivascular ﬁbrosis were
much larger compared to the surrounding astroglial scar.
Signiﬁcant numbers of PDGFRβ+ cells within the lesion core
were found at a distance from a blood vessel wall (Fig. 10b inset).
Likewise, we detected increased perivascular aggregates of
PDGFRβ+ cells accompanied by gliosis in post-mortem spinal
cord samples from six patients diagnosed with chronic MS
(secondary progressive MS type), who survived for 17–56 years
after the disease onset (Supplementary Table 2, Fig. 10c–f). In
active and chronic active MS lesions PDGFRβ+ stromal cells were
Fig. 4 Type A pericytes are the main source of stromal ﬁbroblasts that form ﬁbrotic scar tissue after experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
a MOG35-55-induced EAE model and experimental timeline. Red represents the lesions. Clinical scores (b) and body weight curves relative to day 0 (pre-
immunization) (c) for EAE and control animals. Distribution of EYFP+cells (arrowheads) in the thoracic spinal cord of control (d) and EAE animals (e).
f Reactive astrocytes (GFAP+) intermingle with EYFP+ cells. g Distribution and number of lesions across the dorsal (dWM), intermediate (iWM),
ventrolateral (vlWM), and ventral (vWM) white matter. h Area occupied by EAE lesions. EYFP+ cells intermingle with CD45+ immune cells (i, j), including
inﬁltrating CD3+ T-lymphocytes (k) in demyelinated EAE lesions, identiﬁed as regions lacking ﬂuoromyelin signal (encircled by dashed lines).
EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells accumulate in EAE scars (l, m; arrowheads) and a fraction is located in distance to the vascular wall (podocalyxin+, Pdx; arrowheads)
(n, o). EYFP+ stromal cells proliferate (Ki67+) in association with the vascular wall (arrowheads) and away from it (arrows) (p), express the (myo)
ﬁbroblast markers αSMA (q) and vimentin (r) and are surrounded by ECM enriched in ﬁbronectin (s) and collagen I (t). Number (u) and density (v) of
EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells in control and EAE animals. w Percentage of EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells associated with (ON vessel) or located outside (OFF vessel) the
vascular wall. x Distance of EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells ON vessel (EAE control) or OFF vessel (EAE) from the nearest vessel surface. Each dot represents one
cell. y Percentage of PDGFRβ+ cells that express EYFP out of total PDGFRβ+ cells. TAM tamoxifen, MOG myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein. Scale bars:
200 μm (d, e, i, l), 100 μm (f, j, k, m, n), and 50 μm (o–t). Data shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = 5 (Control) and n = 4 (30d) animals in (b, c, g, h, u–w, y);
n = 118 (Control) and n = 367 (30d) cells examined over 4 animals in (x). ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001 by two-sided, unpaired Student’s t test in (u, v, y)
and two-sided Mann–Whitney test in (x). i, m, n denote paired images. All images show coronal sections. Images are representative of two independent
experiments. Source data and statistical test results are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

organized in multiple perivascular rings, and a substantial
number of cells no longer associated with the blood vessel wall
(Fig. 10e). Perivascular ﬁbrosis was closely associated with
demyelinated white matter regions.
Next,
we investigated
human
post-mortem
brain
tissue
obtained from 4 individuals that had a history of a supratentorial
territorial
or
lacunar
stroke,
involving
cerebral
cortical
and subcortical areas, and who died weeks to months after
infarction (Supplementary Table 3). We found that the density of
PDGFRβ+ cells was elevated in most of the subacute/chronic
lesions when compared to surrounding healthy tissue. PDGFRβ+
stromal cells within the ischemic lesion core mainly associated
with the vasculature after subcortical infarcts (Fig. 10g, h), as
observed following ischemic damage conﬁned to the striatum in
 5 days
PDGFRβ EYFP Pdx
Pdx EYFP
PDGFRβ EYFP
14 days
h
v
c
 5 days
14 days
7 weeks
Contralateral side
GFAP EYFP
Contr. 5d
14d
7w
Contr. 5d
14d
7w
y
d
e
0
200
400
600
800
j
i
Contr. 5d
14d
7w
0
100
200
300
0
20
40
60
80
0
50
100
Contr. 5d
14d
7w
w
m
n
o
ON
OFF
f
a
Ctx
St
5d
7d
+TAM
5d, 14d, 7w
Analysis
MCAO
Lesion model: Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) 
GFAP EYFP
35 min occlusion
n
% EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells
No. EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells
(per mm2)
No. EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells
(per section) 
**
****
ns
ns
**
****
****
****
ns
ns
****
****
****
ns
***
0
10
30
50
Distance of EYFP+ PDGFRβ+cell soma 
from nearest vessel surface (μm)  
20
40
Contr. 5d
14d
7w
**
****
***
% EYFP+ PDGFRβ+ cells 
/ total PDGFRβ+ cells
Ki67 EYFP Pdx
αSMA EYFP
CD45 EYFP Pdx
CD45 EYFP
CD45 EYFP Pdx
CD45 EYFP
Collagen I EYFP
Fibronectin EYFP
PDGFRβ EYFP Pdx DAPI
b
k
l
x
p
q
r
t
u
Ischemic core
s
Lesion core area (mm2)
g
0
1
2
3
4
5d
14d
7w
**
**
***
Clearing
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11

the mouse (Fig. 5). The lesion core was ﬂanked by a GFAP+
glial scar.
Finally, we investigated brain tissue samples from three
patients with aggressive grade IV GBM tumors (Supplementary
Table 4). All samples presented morphologically abnormal and
disorganized vasculature, as opposed to the thin-wall blood
vessels of non-malignant adjacent brain tissue. We observed
general aberrant hypervascularization within the tumor mass and
increased density of PDGFRβ+ stromal cells across all three
patient samples analyzed. Nonetheless, even within the same
tumor sample, we detected heterogeneity in the density of blood
vessels
(Supplementary
Table
4
and
Fig.
10i).
Although
malformed blood vessels often presented thick-wall and irregular
shape, we found that most of the PDGFRβ+ cells within the
tumor stroma remained associated with the vasculature (Fig. 10j).
In summary, we observed accumulation of PDGFRβ+ stromal
cells across all pathological tissues investigated, but their
distribution varied depending on the type of lesion. After spinal
cord injury and MS, we found accumulation of PDGFRβ+
stromal cells in extravascular positions, while we registered an
increased number of cells associated with the vasculature after
subcortical ischemic stroke and in GBM tumors.
Discussion
We identiﬁed a small subset of perivascular cells, termed type A
pericytes, as the main source of scar-forming PDGFRβ+ stromal
cells, contributing to ﬁbrotic tissue generation across a vast
number of lesions in the brain and spinal cord. We found that the
magnitude of ﬁbrotic scar tissue generation and the distribution
of PDGFRβ+ stromal cells depend on the extent and type of
lesion (Supplementary Fig. 13).
Importantly, perivascular cells with an analogous marker
proﬁle as type A pericytes are present along the human brain and
spinal cord vasculature and ﬁbrotic scarring is similar in human
pathological tissue and corresponding mouse models. Our ﬁnd-
ings suggest that ﬁbrotic scarring by a small subset of perivascular
cells, deﬁned as type A pericytes, is an evolutionary conserved
mechanism for scar formation in the CNS.
Non-penetrating spinal cord injury, in which the dura
mater remains relatively intact, limits the invasion of dura-
derived meningeal ﬁbroblasts into the lesion. Penetrating, and
non-penetrating spinal cord injury led to similar recruitment
of PDGFRβ+ stromal cells from the vascular wall, and con-
sequent ﬁbrotic scar tissue formation (Fig. 1 and Supple-
mentary Fig. 5). Nearly all PDGFRβ+ stromal cells derived
from type A pericytes, indicating that dura-derived ﬁbroblasts
are not the major source of stromal cells. In humans, we
observed extensive ﬁbrotic scar tissue formation enriched in
PDGFRβ+ stromal cells at subacute stages after massive
compression, as well as contusive injuries. These results, in
conjunction with previous reports acknowledging the accu-
mulation of inﬂammatory cells and ECM deposits1,28–31, show
cumulative evidence of ﬁbrotic scar tissue generation after
spinal cord injury in humans. In all 6 cases studied, regions of
non-neural tissue were much larger compared to the astrocyte
scar border (Fig. 10a, b).
EAE lesions generated substantial ﬁbrotic scar tissue enriched
in PDGFRβ+ stromal cells accumulating outside the blood vessel
wall (Fig. 4). Again, we found that nearly all PDGFRβ+ stromal
cells derived from type A pericytes. In spinal cords of individuals
with active MS lesions, we found PDGFRβ+ stromal cells accu-
mulating outside, but near the vascular wall (Fig. 10c–f), as
reported in MS brain lesions32.
Previous studies employed a Col1α1-GFP reporter line, which
labels perivascular ﬁbroblasts primarily located around large
diameter blood vessels, and described an increase in Col1α1-
producing cells following contusive spinal cord injury33 and
EAE34 in the mouse. Since Col1α1-GFP only reﬂects Col1a1
transcriptional
activity,
and
no
fate
mapping
of
Col1α1-
expressing
cells
had
been
employed,
the
contribution
of
Col1α1+ cells to scar-forming stromal ﬁbroblasts remained
speculative. A recent study lineage traced Col1α2-expressing cells
and showed that CNS perivascular ﬁbroblasts contributed to
ﬁbrotic scar formation following EAE35. Single-cell sequencing
analyses of vascular cells in the mouse brain revealed that in
addition to pericytes, GLAST (Slc1a3) is expressed by a subset of
perivascular ﬁbroblasts36, suggesting that type A pericytes could
be more heterogeneous than previously anticipated. Future stu-
dies exploring type A pericyte heterogeneity at the single-cell level
will be required to clarify this matter.
In comparison to spinal cord injury and EAE, stab lesions to
the mouse brain showed similar ﬁbrotic scar tissue formation
only after large cortical and cortico-striatal injuries, but not after
small injuries, restricted to the cortex (Figs. 2 and 3 and Sup-
plementary Fig. 9), indicating that larger mechanical injuries to
the brain are required for the generation of extensive ﬁbrotic scar
tissue. Nearly all PDGFRβ+ stromal cells derived from type A
pericytes after cortical and cortico-striatal stab lesions.
A recent study using a Tbx18-CreERT2 line to fate map peri-
cytes after discrete cerebral cortex stab lesions led to the gen-
eralized conclusion that pericytes do not contribute to ﬁbrotic
scar tissue after brain injury37. Since no substantial ﬁbrotic tissue
Fig. 5 Type A pericytes remain associated with the vascular wall following ischemic stroke conﬁned to the striatum. a Type A pericytes and parenchymal
astrocytes are recombined (EYFP+) throughout the cortex (Ctx) and striatum (St) of GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP mice. Dashed line separates cortex from striatum.
b Type A pericyte (EYFP+) encircling the endothelial tube (podocalyxin+, Pdx) and expressing the pericyte marker PDGFRβ in the striatum. c Lesion model and
experimental timeline. Red represents the lesion. Distribution of EYFP+ cells at 5 days (d), 14 days (e), and 7 weeks (f) following ischemia. Type A pericyte-derived
cells (EYFP+GFAP_ cells) occupy the ischemic lesion core (outlined by dashed lines), surrounded by a partially recombined GFAP+ glial scar. Lesion core area (g) and
number of EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells per section (h). EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells in the ischemic core (i) do not leave the vascular wall (Pdx+) (j). Magniﬁed boxed region in (i)
shown on the right. EYFP+ cells disperse among CD45+ immune cells at 5 days (k, l) and 14 days (p, q) after stroke. EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells occupy the lesion core,
bordered by partly recombined EYFP+PDGFRβ−glial cells at 14 days after stroke (m–o). k, p, m show overviews of the lesion and l, n, o, q close-ups of the ischemic
core. Dashed lines in (n, p) demarcate the glial-ﬁbrotic lesion border. EYFP+ cells proliferate (arrowheads in (r) point at Ki67+EYFP+ cells) and do not express αSMA
(s) at 5 days after stroke. Magniﬁed boxed region in (s) shown on the right. EYFP+ cells are encased by ﬁbronectin (t) and collagen I (u) ECM at 14 days after stroke.
v Density of EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells overtime. w Most EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells remain associated with the vascular wall (ON vessel) after striatal stroke. x Distance of
EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells from the nearest vessel surface in the contralateral striatum and after stroke. Each dot represents one cell. y Percentage of PDGFRβ + cells that
express EYFP out of total PDGFRβ+ cells. TAM tamoxifen; Scale bars: 200 μm (a, d–f, i, k, m), 100 μm (close up i, j, l, n–p), 50 μm (q–u) and 5 μm (b). Data shown as
mean ± s.e.m. n = 9 (Contralateral), n = 3 (5d), n = 3 (14d) and n = 3 (7w) animals in (g, h, v, w, y); n = 127 (Contralateral), n = 195 (5d), n = 248 (14d) and n = 122
(7w) cells examined over 3 animals in (x). ns non-signiﬁcant; **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001 by One-Way ANOVA followed by Holm–Sidak post-hoc test in
(g, h, v, y) and Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn’s post-hoc test in (x). Cell nuclei are labeled with DAPI. All images show coronal sections. Images are
representative of two independent experiments. Source data and statistical test results are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

is generated after small cortical lesions it is expected to observe no
recruitment of Tbx18-lineage cells and therefore our results
employing a similar injury paradigm are in line with their ﬁnd-
ings. We show that lineage-traced type A pericytes as well as their
progeny express Tbx18, suggesting that Tbx18-expressing peri-
vascular cells contribute to CNS ﬁbrosis in lesion models that
generate substantial ﬁbrotic scar tissue.
MCAO-induced hypoxic lesions restricted to the striatum
showed an increase of type A pericyte-derived PDGFRβ+ stromal
cells in association with the vascular wall, but little to no stromal
cells outside the vessel wall (Fig. 5). In sharp contrast, many type
A pericyte-derived PDGFRβ+ stromal cells could be found out-
side the vessel wall after cortical and cortico-striatal ischemic
lesions (Supplementary Figs. 6 and 11). Interestingly, a large
% tdTom+ PDGFRβ+ cells 
/ total PDGFRβ+ cells
u
w
x
No. tdTom+ PDGFRβ+ cells
(per mm2)
0
20
40
60
80
100
****
ns
Contr.
5d
14d
****
Contr.
5d
14d
****
**
****
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
v
0
50
100
Contr.
5d
14d
% tdTom+ PDGFRβ+ cells
ON
ON
OFF
ON
OFF
Contr.
5d
14d
20
60
100
Distance of EYFP+ PDGFRβ+cell soma 
from nearest vessel surface (μm)  
40
80
****
****
0
No. tdTom+ PDGFRβ+ cells 
(per section)
t
****
Contr.
5d
14d
*
0
400
800
1,200
1,600
****
Vimentin tdTom
 14 days
Pdx tdTom
n
o
m
l
GFAP tdTom
PDGFRβ tdTom
 5 days
5 days
14 days
GFAP tdTom
b
c
PDGFRβ tdTom
d
i
h
g
f
e
αSMA tdTom
Ki67 tdTom Pdx
Pdx tdTom
GFAP tdTom
PDGFRβ tdTom
Ischemic core
Fibronectin tdTom
Collagen I tdTom
r
q
p
j
k
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
Lesion core area (mm2)
s
5d
14d
**
a
Lesion model: Distal middle cerebral artery occlusion (dMCAO) 
5d
7d
+TAM
Clearing
5d, 14d
Analysis
dMCAO
Permanent occlusion
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13

number of type A pericytes and progeny could be observed away
from the blood vessel wall in the striatum only when the ischemic
lesion expanded from the striatum into the cerebral cortex, sug-
gesting that environmental cues associated with the cerebral
cortex and/or underlying corpus callosum white matter may
inﬂuence type A pericyte recruitment from the vessel wall. These
observations may explain previous results regarding pericyte
detachment from the vascular wall38,39 and suggest that the
location and magnitude of the ischemic insult dictate the dis-
tribution of type A pericyte progeny and generation of stromal
ﬁbroblasts. In the lesion core of
subcortical ischemic stroke
lesions in humans, we found nearly all PDGFRβ+ stromal cells
associated with the vascular wall (Fig. 10g, h).
In the GL261 murine glioma model, the vasculature is known
to present low coverage by pericytes26, including type A pericytes.
However, despite their reduced number, we observed PDGFRβ+
stromal cells outside tumor vessels interspaced with glioma cells,
partially derived from type A pericytes (Fig. 7). In human GBM
tumors, most PDGFRβ+ cells remained in close association with
the stroma vasculature (Fig. 10i, j).
A recent study investigates ECM deposition by pericytes after
ischemic stroke. The authors use conventional, non-conditional,
knock out (KO) mice for Rgs5, to alter the pericyte response to
injury. They propose that reducing the number of pericytes that
leave the blood vessel wall after ischemic stroke does not sig-
niﬁcantly impact on the deposition of collagen I and ﬁbronectin40.
Their interpretation is contrary to our observations, showing a
minimal increase in ECM deposition after striatal ischemic lesions,
where type A pericytes remain attached to the vascular wall, in
contrast to abundant deposition of ECM in conjunction with type A
pericyte recruitment after cortical ischemic lesions (Fig. 8a–e).
Additionally, attenuation of type A pericyte-derived scarring results
in decreased deposition of ﬁbronectin and collagen I after brain stab
wounds, showing that type A pericytes are required for ECM
deposition (Fig. 8f–h), as observed previously after spinal cord
injury3,6. These observations reveal that the number and location of
type A pericytes and progeny in relation to the vascular wall
inﬂuence the deposition of collagen I and ﬁbronectin ECM proteins
after injury. The different results by Roth et al. may be explained by
the fact that deletion of Rgs5 impacts not only on pericytes, but also
astrocytes, as indicated by the reduced thickening of the vascular
basal membrane and alteration of the glial scar in RGS5-KO
compared to WT mice in response to stroke. Since the glial scar
intimately borders the lesion core and there is crosstalk between
reactive astrocytes and ﬁbrotic cells (Supplementary Fig. 7), a less
pronounced glial scar can inﬂuence ﬁbrotic scar tissue generation
and ECM deposition.
Pericytes have been shown to be the main contributors to
ECM-producing (myo)ﬁbroblasts observed in dermal, renal,
hepatic and pulmonary ﬁbrotic tissue41–44, suggesting func-
tional similarities among pericytes in the CNS and peripheral
organs. Nonetheless, while pericyte heterogeneity has not been
extensively addressed in the context of peripheral organ ﬁbro-
sis, we deﬁne the origin of PDGFRβ-expressing stromal cells to
a speciﬁc perivascular subset, only accounting for 10% of all
CNS pericytes. This distinction is of special importance for the
design of potential therapeutic strategies to improve axonal
regeneration and functional recovery following CNS injury6, as
it may allow speciﬁc targeting of ﬁbrotic pericytes without
compromising the vast majority of pericytes and their functions
(i.e. maintenance of the blood-brain/spinal cord barrier and
blood ﬂow regulation)45,46.
Methods
Transgenic mice. GLAST-CreERT2 transgenic mice12 were crossed to the Rosa26-
enhanced yellow ﬂuorescent protein (EYFP)47 or Rosa26-tdTomato48 Cre-reporter
lines (obtained from the Jackson Laboratory, B6.129×1-Gt(Rosa)26Sortm1(EYFP)Cos/
J, JAX stock: 006148; B6.Cg-Gt(Rosa)26Sortm14(CAG-tdTomato)Hze/J, JAX stock:
007914) to generate GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP or GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-
tdTomato mice in which CreERT2 is hemizygous and Rosa26-EYFP or Rosa26-
tdTomato is either heterozygous or homozygous. For a set of experiments, GLAST-
CreERT2;R26R-EYFP were further crossed to Rasless mice27 to generate GLAST-
CreERT2;Rasless;R26R-EYFP mice, hereafter referred to as GLAST-Rasless-EYFP
mice. All Rasless mice used were homozygous for H-Ras and N-Ras null alleles and
homozygous for ﬂoxed K-Ras alleles.
All animals were in a C57BL/6J genetic background and ≥8 weeks old at
the onset of experiments. Animals were housed in group in a pathogen-free
facility with controlled humidity (50 ± 15%) and temperature (22 ± 2 °C),
with 12:12-h light:dark cycles and free access to food and water. All experimental
procedures were performed in accordance to the Swedish and European
Union guidelines and approved by the institutional ethical committees
(Stockholms Norra Djurförsöksetiska Nämnd or Malmö/Lunds
Djurförsöksetiska Nämnd).
Genetic labeling of transgenic mice. Genetic recombination in GLAST-
CreERT2;R26R-EYFP and GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-tdTomato mice was induced by a
daily intraperitoneal injection of 2 mg of tamoxifen (Sigma, 20 mg/ml in 1:9
ethanol:corn oil) for ﬁve consecutive days, as previously3,6.
For experiments involving GLAST-Rasless-EYFP mice, recombination was
induced using the same protocol aforementioned. Both Cre+ and CreWT mice,
homozygous for H-Ras and N-Ras null alleles and homozygous for ﬂoxed K-Ras
alleles, were treated with tamoxifen prior to injury, but CreWT animals did not
undergo genetic recombination and served as control.
Clearing period following tamoxifen-induced genetic recombination. A
potential confound with tamoxifen-inducible mouse studies is the effect of residual
tamoxifen in the CNS at the time of injury. Tamoxifen and its active metabolite
4-hydroxytamoxifen have a half-life of 6–12 h in the mouse49. Analysis of CreERT2
distribution in the adult mouse spinal cord 6 days after the last tamoxifen
administration has revealed no CreERT2 in the nucleus of cells at this time, directly
Fig. 6 Type A pericytes are the main source of stromal ﬁbroblasts that form ﬁbrotic scar tissue following cortical ischemic stroke. a Lesion model and
experimental timeline. Red represents the lesion. Distribution of recombined cells (tdTom+) at 5 days (b, d) and 14 days (c, e) after stroke. Type A
pericyte-derived cells (TdTom+PDGFRβ+) occupy the ischemic lesion core (outlined by dashed lines), ﬂanked by a partly recombined GFAP+ glial scar.
f–o The ischemic core is ﬁlled with tdTom+ cells that express PDGFRβ and delimited by GFAP+ glial cells at 5 days (f–h) and 14 days (l–n) after stroke.
Dashed lines separate the glial (GFAP+) and ﬁbrotic (tdTom+) scar compartments. A fraction of tdTom+ cells no longer associates with the vascular wall
(labeled by podocalyxin, Pdx) (i, o). TdTom+ cells proliferate (Ki67+) while attached to the vascular wall (arrowheads) and away from it (arrows) (j) and
express the (myo)ﬁbroblast marker αSMA (k). TdTom+ cells express vimentin (p) at 5 days after stroke and are surrounded by ﬁbronectin (q) and
collagen I (r) at 14 days after stroke. Quantiﬁcation of the lesion core area (s), number of tdTom+PDGFRβ+ cells per section (t) and density of
tdTom+PDGFRβ+ cells (u). v Percentage of tdTom+PDGFRβ+ cells associated with (ON vessel) or located outside (OFF vessel) the vascular wall.
w Distance of tdTom+PDGFRβ+ cells ON vessel (contralateral cortex) or OFF vessel (after stroke) from the nearest vessel surface. Each dot represents
one cell. x Percentage of PDGFRβ+ cells that express tdTom out of total PDGFRβ+ cells. TAM tamoxifen; Scale bars: 500 μm (b–e), 200 μm (f, g, l, m) and
50 μm (h–k, n–r). Data shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = 8 (Contralateral), n = 4 (5d) and n = 4 (14d) animals in (s–v, x); n = 252 (Contralateral), n = 286 (5d)
and n = 360 (14d) cells examined over 4 animals in (w). ns non-signiﬁcant; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001 by two-sided, unpaired Student’s t test in
(s), One-Way ANOVA followed by Holm–Sidak post-hoc test in (t, u, x) and Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn’s post-hoc test in (w). b, d, c, e, f, g, l, m
denote paired images. All images show coronal sections. Images are representative of two independent experiments. Source data and statistical test results
are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
14
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Fig. 7 Type A pericyte-derived cells contribute to the tumor stroma. a Glioblastoma model and experimental timeline. Red represents the tumor. b Tumor
cell mass is conﬁned to the striatum (hematoxylin and eosin stain). c Area occupied by the tumor cell mass. Distribution of EYFP+ cells in the contralateral
(d) and ipsilateral (e) side to the tumor. Type A pericytes and progeny (EYFP+GFAP−) are found within the tumor core, whereas partially recombined
GFAP+ reactive astrocytes border the tumor. Dashed line separates the cortex (Ctx) and striatum (St) in (d) and outlines the tumor core in (e). f, g
EYFP+ cells intermingle with GL261 tumor cells (labeled with an antibody against NG258). h A fraction of EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells locates outside the vascular
wall (arrowheads; endothelial cells marked by CD31), i, j EYFP+ cells proliferate in contact (arrowhead) and away (arrow) from the vascular wall. Insets in
(j) show a EYFP+ cell associated with the vascular wall (CD31+) expressing the mitotic marker Ki67. EYFP+ cells express αSMA (k; arrowhead) and
vimentin (l), and are surrounded by ﬁbronectin (m) and collagen I (n) ECM. Number (o) and density (p) of EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells in the tumor core and
contralateral side. q Percentage of EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells associated with (ON vessel) or located outside (OFF vessel) the vascular wall. r Distance of
EYFP+PDGFRβ+ cells ON vessel (contralateral side to the tumor) or OFF vessel (tumor) from the nearest vessel surface. Each dot represents one cell.
s Percentage of PDGFRβ+ cells that express EYFP out of total PDGFRβ+ cells. TAM tamoxifen; Scale bars: 1.5 mm (b), 200 μm (d, e), 100 μm (f, g), 50 μm
(i, k) and 20 μm (h, l, m, n, j and insets in j). Data shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = 3 (Contralateral) and n = 4 (3w) animals in (c, o, p, s); n = 3 (Contralateral)
and n = 5 (3w) animals in (q); n = 36 (Contralateral) and n = 189 (3w) cells examined over 3 animals in (r). ns non-signiﬁcant; **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001
by two-sided, unpaired Student’s t test in (o, p, s) and two-sided Mann–Whitney test in (r). f, g denote paired images. All images show coronal sections.
Images are representative of two independent experiments. Source data and statistical test results are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
15

demonstrating that tamoxifen has been cleared at this time point15. Moreover,
recent studies in the mouse spinal cord and brain have reinforced that 7 days is
enough time for tamoxifen to be fully metabolized to ineffective concentrations
that are insufﬁcient to result in further recombination50,51.
Therefore, in this study, injuries (spinal cord injuries, stab wound, and ischemic
stroke lesions) and tumor induction (GL261 murine glioma model) were
performed after a 7-days clearing period following the last tamoxifen injection.
Experimental autoimmune EAE was induced following a 50-day clearing period
after the last tamoxifen injection, because the clinical severity of the disease was
diminished if MOG-peptide immunization took place within 10 days after
tamoxifen treatment20.
Surgical procedures. For all surgical procedures, animals were anesthetized with
4% isoﬂurane until unconscious followed by 2% isoﬂurane during surgery. All
animals received analgesia (Temgesic/Buprenorphine, Schering-Plough, 0.1 mg/kg
body weight and Rimadyl/Carprofen, Pﬁzer, 5 mg/kg body weight; subcutaneous
injection) for post-operative pain relief and a uniform layer of eye gel (Viscotears/
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
16
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Carbomer, 2 mg/g, Novartis) was applied onto the eye ball to prevent drying. All
animals received local anesthesia (Xylocaine/Lidocaine, AstraZeneca, 10 mg/ml and
Marcain/Bupivacaine, AstraZeneca, 2 mg/kg body weight) 2–3 min prior to cra-
niotomies and spinal or brain lesions. For recovery from surgery, animals were
placed on a heating pad and only returned to their home cage once they were
fully awake.
Penetrating spinal cord injury: dorsal funiculus incision model. A laminectomy was
performed at the mid-thoracic level to expose the dorsal portion of the spinal cord
and the dorsal funiculus and adjacent gray matter were cut transversely to a depth
of ~0.6 mm with microsurgical scissors. This incision was extended rostrally with
microsurgical scissors to span one spinal segment3,6,15. Both male and female mice
were used.
GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP animals were sacriﬁced at 5 days (n = 3), 14 days
(n = 6), and 6 weeks (n = 4) after spinal cord injury. A separate cohort of animals
(n = 3) mice received no injury and served as uninjured control.
Non-penetrating spinal cord injury: complete spinal cord crush model. A lami-
nectomy was performed to expose the dorsal portion of the spinal cord at the
thoracic level 10 (T10). The spinal cord was then fully crushed for 2 s with Dumont
No.5 forceps (11295-00, Fine Science Tools) without spacers and that had been
ﬁled to a width of 0.1 mm for the last 5 mm of the tips16,52. Since this injury
paradigm minimizes mechanical disruption of the dura mater, it limits con-
founding factors such as invasion of dura-derived meningeal ﬁbroblasts into the
lesion.
To replace blood loss and prevent/treat bladder infections and post-operative
pain, antibiotics (Trimetoprimsulfametoxazol/Tribrissen vet, 400 mg/ml Sulfadizin,
80 mg/ml Trimetoprim, MSD Animal Health, 100 mg/kg body weight/24 h;
subcutaneous injection), warm sterile Ringer’s solution (500 μl; subcutaneous
injection) and analgesics (Rimadyl/Carprofen, Pﬁzer, 5 mg/kg body weight, once a
day and Temgesic/Buprenorphine, Schering-Plough, 0.1 mg/kg body weight, twice
per day; subcutaneous injection), were administered in the ﬁrst 3 days following
surgery. Bladders were manually expressed 2–3 times per day until the end of the
experiment. As practical reﬁnements to improve animal welfare, mice are housed
in group and provided a grid on the cage ﬂoor in conjunction with soft nesting
material and litter to help mobility. To facilitate animal’s hydration water bottles
with longer sprouts, hydration gel (HydroGel, Clear H2O) and moistened food
pellets are provided in the bottom of the cage. Locomotor recovery was assessed
using the Basso Mouse Scale53 open ﬁeld test on day 1 after injury and animals
showing incomplete paralysis of the hindlimbs were excluded from the experiment.
As pre-established, animals that lost more than 15% of their pre-operative
bodyweight were euthanized. Only female mice were used for this severe spinal
cord injury model.
GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP animals were sacriﬁced at 5 days (n = 4), 14 days
(n = 5), and 7 weeks (n = 3) after spinal cord injury. A separate cohort of animals
(n = 3) mice received no injury and served as uninjured control.
Stab lesions. Animals were placed in a stereotaxic frame and a unilateral cra-
niotomy (diameter of ~3 mm) was performed between cranial sutures bregma and
lambda above the right cerebral cortex (adapted from ref .19). An incision wound
was introduced into the right cortical parenchyma by inserting a sterile surgical
scalpel blade (Kiato, #11) positioned 90 degrees perpendicular to the brain surface
at 2.0 mm lateral and 1 mm anterior to bregma. To produce small stab wounds
restricted to the cerebral cortex, the scalpel blade was lowered −0.5 mm from the
brain surface in the dorsoventral axis to avoid direct damage to the deepest cortical
layers and underneath white matter, minimizing neuroblast migration from the
subventricular zone of the lateral ventricles and subgranular zone in the dentate
gyrus of the hippocampus into the injured cortex. For cortico-striatal stab wounds,
the blade was lowered −3 mm from the brain surface in the dorsoventral axis. The
lesions were created by moving the blade over 1.3 mm back and forth along the
anterior–posterior axis from 1 mm anterior to 0.3 mm posterior to bregma. The
craniotomy was then covered with bone wax (Ethicon) in order to preserve the
meninges and the brain surface. Both male and female mice were used. GLAST-
CreERT2;R26R-EYFP animals were sacriﬁced at 5 days (n = 3), 14 days (n = 4), and
7 weeks (n = 3) after cortico-striatal stab lesions. The contralateral side to the
lesion served as control (n = 10). A separate cohort of GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-
EYFP animals was sacriﬁced at 14 days after small stab lesions restricted to the
cerebral cortex (n = 3). For cortico-striatal stab lesion experiments involving
GLAST-Rasless-EYFP mice, animals were sacriﬁced at 14 days (n = 6 Cre+; n = 4
CreWT) after injury. To label dividing cells following cortico-striatal stab lesions, a
separate group of GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP (also referred to as GLAST-EYFP)
and GLAST-Rasless-EYFP mice was administered EdU (5-ethynyl-2’-deoxyuridine;
Molecular Probes #A10044) twice by intraperitoneal injections (12 mg/ml, 100 μl
per injection) at 6 h interval, followed by EdU administration in the drinking water
for 5 days (0.2 mg/ml and 1% sucrose, exchanged every 2–3 days and kept in dark).
Animals were sacriﬁced at 5 days (n = 3 GLAST-EYFP; n = 4 GLAST-Rasless-
EYFP Cre+) after injury. The contralateral side to the lesion served as control.
To generate large stab wounds restricted to the cerebral cortex, with similar
depth and size as cortico-striatal stab lesions, after craniotomy, an incision wound
was made to the right cortical parenchyma by inserting a sterile surgical scalpel
blade (Kiato, #11) positioned parallel to the brain surface at 3 mm lateral and 1 mm
anterior to bregma. The blade was slowly advanced from the brain surface 3 mm
deep inside the cerebral cortex in the right–left lateral axis. The lesions were created
by moving the blade over 1.3 mm back and forth along the anterior–posterior axis
from 1 mm anterior to 0.3 mm posterior to bregma. The craniotomy was
subsequently covered with bone wax (Ethicon) in order to preserve the meninges
and the brain surface. Both male and female mice were used. GLAST-
CreERT2;R26R-tdTom animals were sacriﬁced at 5 days (n = 4) and 14 days (n = 4)
after large stab lesions restricted to the cerebral cortex. The contralateral side to the
lesion served as control (n = 8).
Focal ischemic stroke. Focal ischemic stroke was induced by two methods. First
method is based on transient occlusion of the whole middle cerebral artery (MCA)
by intraluminal ﬁlament method21 leading to the selective lesion of the striatum or
the striatum and cerebral cortex, depending on the duration of the occlusion. The
second method induces the selective lesion of the cortex22 and this is achieved
through permanent occlusion of the distal cortical branch of the MCA.
Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)
Following a sagittal midline incision on the ventral surface of the neck, the common
carotid artery (CCA) and its proximal branches were isolated. After the CCA and the
external carotid artery (ECA) were ligated using a 4–0 silk suture (Ethicon), the internal
carotid artery (ICA) was temporarily clipped with a metal microvessel clip. A small
incision was made on the anterior surface of the ECA to insert a silicon-coated nylon
microﬁlament (Doccol Corporation). The microﬁlament was advanced through the ICA
until the branch point of the MCA and secured using the suture around the ECA. The
ﬁlament was carefully removed 35 min after the occlusion to restore the blood ﬂow in the
MCA and the ECA was ligated permanently. Transiently occluding the MCA for 35 min
led to ischemic lesions conﬁned to the striatum (striatal stroke). Only male mice were
used. GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP animals were sacriﬁced at 5 days (n = 3), 14 days
(n = 3), and 7 weeks (n = 3) after striatal stroke induction. The contralateral side to the
lesion served as control (n = 9).
Fig. 8 Type A pericytes are required for the generation of ﬁbrotic scar tissue and deposition of ECM after injury. a Schematic illustrations depicting the
contribution of type A pericytes to ischemic lesions conﬁned to the striatum or cortex (lesions represented in red). Upper row: Following striatal stroke,
type A pericytes and progeny increase in number but remain associated with the vascular wall (cells colored light green). Lower row: After cortical stroke,
type A pericyte-derived cells increase in number and dissociate from the vascular wall (cells colored dark green). Light colored regions represent peri-
lesion tissue and darker regions the ischemic stroke core. Representative overview images and quantiﬁcation of ﬁbronectin (b, c) and collagen I (d, e)
deposition in the lesion core. Dashed lines encircle the lesion core. f Genetic strategy to block the generation of progeny by type A pericytes. Tamoxifen
(TAM)-induced genetic recombination in Cre+ GLAST-CreERT2;Rasless;Rosa26-EYFP (GLAST-Rasless-EYFP) animals prior to injury results in inhibition of
injury-induced type A pericyte proliferation through cell-speciﬁc deletion of ﬂoxed K-Ras in mice with H-Ras and N-Ras null alleles. Both Cre+ and CreWT
animals are treated with tamoxifen prior to injury, but CreWT animals do not undergo genetic recombination and serve as control. Representative overview
images of ﬁbronectin (g) and collagen I (h) deposition in lesion core. Quantiﬁcation of the total lesion core volume (i) and lesion core volume covered by
PDGFRβ+stromal cells (j), ﬁbronectin (k) or collagen I (l) in CreWT and Cre+ GLAST-Rasless-EYFP animals, 14 days after a cortico-striatal stab wound.
TAM tamoxifen; Scale bars: 200 μm (g, h, striatal stroke in b, d) and 100 μm (cortical stroke in b, d). Data shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = 3 (Contralateral side
striatal stroke), n = 3 (Striatal stroke), n = 4 (Contralateral side cortical stroke), n = 4 (Cortical stroke), n = 4 (Stab wound CreWT) and n = 6 (Stab wound
Cre+) animals. ns non-signiﬁcant; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001 by One-Way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons post-hoc test in (c,
e) and two-sided Mann–Whitney test in (i–l). g, h denote paired images. Cell nuclei are labeled with DAPI. Images show coronal (a, b) and sagittal (g, h)
sections. Images are representative of two independent experiments. Source data and statistical test results are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
17

In a separate cohort of animals the MCA was occluded for 45 min, leading to ischemic
lesions that, in addition to the striatum, extended into the cerebral cortex (cortico-striatal
stroke). Only male mice were used. GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-tdTom animals were sacri-
ﬁced at 5 days (n = 3) and 14 days (n = 3) after cortico-striatal stroke induction.
Distal middle cerebral artery occlusion (dMCAO)
Skin was cut between the right eye and the right ear and a small hole was then drilled in
the cranium at the level of the MCA, the dura mater was removed, the distal portion of
the right MCA was exposed and occluded by cauterization. The artery was then cut off to
be sure that there was no remaining blood ﬂow to the corresponding cortical region.
After the skin had been sutured, mice were injected with 0.5 ml Ringer’s solution,
returned to their home cages, and placed on a heating pad.
Permanent occlusion of the distal portion of the MCA led to ischemic lesions conﬁned
to the cerebral cortex (cortical stroke). Only male mice were used. GLAST-
CreERT2;R26R-tdTom animals were sacriﬁced at 5 days (n = 4) and 14 days (n = 4) after
cortical stroke induction. The contralateral side to the lesion served as control (n = 8).
Healthy human spinal cord
UEA-1
PDGFRβ
Pdx 
Pdx PDGFRβ DAPI
PDGFRβ DAPI
a
b
Healthy human cortex
UEA-1
PDGFRβ
Pdx 
Pdx PDGFRβ DAPI
PDGFRβ DAPI
e
f
SLC1A3 mRNA 
UEA-1 DAPI
Merge
UEA-1 DAPI
SLC1A3 mRNA 
Merge
DAPI
DAPI
DAPI
c
d
g
SLC1A3 mRNA 
UEA-1 DAPI
Merge
DAPI
h
SLC1A3 mRNA DAPI
Merge
UEA-1 DAPI
PDGFRB mRNA
DAPI
PDGFRB mRNA
DAPI
PDGFRB mRNA
DAPI
PDGFRB mRNA
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
18
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). To induce EAE, animals were
anesthetized with isoﬂurane and immunized subcutaneously at the dorsal tail base with
300 μg of rodent MOG peptide (aminoacids 35–55) emulsiﬁed in CFA containing
5 mg/ml inactivated Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Difco). Pertussis toxin (75 ng/mouse
in PBS) was injected intravenously on the day of immunization and 48 h later.
Animals allocated to control groups received pertussis toxin only or CFA
containing 5 mg/ml inactivated Mycobacterium tuberculosis plus pertussis toxin,
but no MOG peptide.
The animals were weighted and neurological deﬁcits assessed daily until the end
of the experiment according to previous scoring methods54,55: 0—no apparent
symptoms, 1—ﬂaccid tail or wobbling gait, 2—ﬂaccid tail and wobbling gait, 2.5—
single limb paresis and ataxia, 3—double limb paresis, 3.5—single limb paralysis
and paresis of second limb, 4—complete paralysis of hind- and fore- limbs, 4.5—
moribund, 5—dead.
Both male and female mice were used. GLAST-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP animals
were sacriﬁced 30 days post-immunization with MOG peptide in CFA (EAE group,
n = 4), or pertussis toxin alone and/or CFA (control group, n = 5). Only animals
that have reached a clinical score of at least 3 by 30 days after EAE induction and
presented chronic neurological deﬁcits (and not relapse-remitting symptoms) were
analyzed in the EAE group.
Syngenic mouse model of glioblastoma. GL261 mouse glioma cells (DSMZ, ACC
802) were maintained in DMEM 1X, high glucose, GlutaMAX (+pyruvate) med-
ium (Life Technologies, 31966-021) supplemented with 10% heat inactivated Fetal
Bovine Serum and 1x Pen-Strep at 37 °C in a humidiﬁed atmosphere containing
5% CO2. Cells were cultured in the absence of antibiotics before transplantation.
Animals were head-ﬁxed in a stereotaxic frame and a burr hole was drilled over
the sensorimotor cortex to expose the brain. Fifty thousand GL261 cells were
resuspended in 1 μl of sterile phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and injected in the
striatum at 2.3 mm lateral to the midline, 0.1 mm posterior of the bregma and
2.3 mm ventral from dura, at a rate of 0.1 μl/min using a 10 μl syringe with a 26-
gauge beveled needle tip (Hamilton, 901RN) coupled to a microinjector
(UltraMicroPump III and Micro4 microsyringe pump controller, World Precision
Instruments). After injection, the needle was kept in place for an additional 5 min
to allow the cells to diffuse and prevent backﬂow of the cells to the surface, and
then slowly withdrawn. Both male and female mice were used. GLAST-
CreERT2;R26R-EYFP animals (n = 3–5) were sacriﬁced 3 weeks after inoculation of
the tumor cells. The contralateral side to the tumor served as control.
Human tissue collection and ethical compliance. The study was conducted
according to the Helsinki declaration and the protocols involving human tissue
samples were approved by the Regional Ethics Committee of Sweden (2010/313-
31/3). All human biospecimens were collected from consented participants or their
next-of-kin for use in future research.
Supplementary Tables 1–4 show the clinical and neuropathological data of all
subjects included in the study.
Stroke and glioblastoma samples. The institutional review boards and the local ethics
committee of the Medical Faculty of the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen,
Germany, approved the study and informed consent was obtained from the relatives of
all analyzed patients. For stroke samples, tissue collection was performed in such cases
that had a history of a supratentorial territorial or lacunar stroke involving cerebral
cortical and subcortical areas and died from a non-neurological cause. The lesion was
cut out according to the macroscopically visible infarct borders including a 0.5 cm rim
of surrounding healthy tissue. Healthy occipital cortex and healthy tissue from the
contralateral hemisphere in corresponding topography served as control tissue. Brain
tissue was frozen and stored at −80 °C until further analysis. For glioblastoma samples,
initial histological analysis for veriﬁcation of tumor type and WHO classiﬁcation56 was
performed by local experienced neuropathologists on formalin embedded tissue pieces
(frozen tumor tissue samples, 20 μm microtome sectioning and ﬁxed in 4%
formaldehyde buffered in PBS for 30 min). Standard hematoxylin and eosin staining,
and immunohistochemical analyses for GFAP, MAP2 and pan cytokeratin-1 (KL-1)
conﬁrmed tumor types (glioblastoma, WHO grade IV). Brain tissue was frozen and
stored at −80 °C until further analysis.
Multiple sclerosis samples. MS tissue samples and associated clinical and neuro-
pathological data were supplied by the UK Multiple Sclerosis Tissue Bank, sup-
ported by the Multiple Sclerosis Society of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, in
partnership with Imperial College London. The ethical permission was granted by
the Regional Ethics Committee for UK (Research Ethics Committee for Wales). All
samples have been donated with informed consent for use in future research.
Spinal cord tissue was frozen and stored at −80 °C until analysis.
Spinal cord injury samples. Human spinal cord injury samples and related clinical
and neuropathologial information were obtained from the International Spinal
Cord Injury Biobank (ISCIB), which is housed in Vancouver, BC, Canada. Per-
mission for post-mortem spinal cord acquisition and for sharing of biospecimens
was granted by the Clinical Research Ethics Board (CREB) of the University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. All biospecimens were collected from
consented participants or their next-of-kin. Provided formalin-ﬁxed and parafﬁn-
embedded tissue sections were stored at 4 °C until analysis.
Histology and immunohistochemistry. Animals were euthanized by intraperitoneal
injection of an overdose of sodium pentobarbital and transcardially perfused with cold
PBS followed by 4% formaldehyde in PBS. Brains and spinal cords were dissected out
and post-ﬁxed in 4% formaldehyde in PBS overnight at 4 °C. Spinal cords were then
cryoprotected in 30% sucrose and coronal or sagittal cryosections were collected on
alternating slides and stored at −20 °C. Coronal and sagittal brain sections were
obtained using a vibratome (Leica VT1000 S vibrating blade microtome) and stored
free-ﬂoating in PBS supplemented with 0.04% sodium azide at 4 °C.
For human glioblastoma, stroke and MS tissue samples, fresh frozen sections
were prepared with a cryostat (14–20 μm) and post-ﬁxed in PBS-buffered 2%
formaldehyde (wt/vol) for 10 min according to standard procedures. Human
healthy spinal cord and occipital cortex tissues were processed in the same manner.
Formalin-ﬁxed and parafﬁn-embedded coronal spinal cord tissue sections
(5 μm thick) were obtained from spinal cord injury patients. For
immunohistochemistry, spinal cord sections were deparafﬁnized in xylene and
rehydrated in a descending ethanol series. Antigen retrieval was performed in
citraconic acid solution (pH = 7.4; 0.05% citraconic acid) for 20 min in a domestic
steamer57. The sections were allowed to cool down for 20 min before
immunostaining was started.
Sections were incubated with blocking solution (10% normal donkey serum in PBS,
with 0.3% Triton X-100) for 1 h at room temperature, and then incubated at room
temperature overnight in a humidiﬁed chamber with primary antibodies diluted in 10%
normal donkey serum. The following primary antibodies were used to immunostain
mouse tissue: CD31 (1:100, rat, BD Biosciences), GFAP (1:200, guinea pig, Synaptic
Systems; 1:1000, mouse directly conjugated to Cy3, Sigma-Aldrich; 1:1000, chicken,
Millipore), GFP (1:2000, goat directly conjugated to FITC, Abcam; 1:10000, chicken,
Aves Labs; 1:500, sheep, Bio-Rad), PDGFRβ (1:200, rabbit, Abcam; 1:100, rat,
eBioscience; 1:200, goat, R&D Systems), podocalyxin (1:200, goat, R&D Systems),
desmin (1:200, rabbit, Abcam), CD13 (1:500, rat, Abcam), αSMA (1:500, mouse directly
conjugated to Cy3, Sigma-Aldrich; 1:100, rabbit, Abcam), vimentin (1:1000, chicken,
Chemicon; 1:500, rabbit, Abcam), NG2 (1:200, rabbit, Millipore), Ki67 (1:1000, rat,
eBioscience), CD45 (1:500, rabbit, Abcam), CD3 (1:200, rat, Biolegend), von Willebrand
factor (1:200, rabbit, Dako), TFRC (1:200 mouse, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc; 1:200, rat,
Novus Biologicals), ﬁbronectin (1:500, sheep, Bio-Rad), collagen type I (1:100, goat,
Southern Biotech; 1:200, rabbit, Abcam), Aldh1L1 (1:500, rabbit, Abcam), S100β (1:500,
guinea pig, Synaptic Systems) and glutamine synthetase (1:2000, rabbit, Invitrogen). An
antibody against NG2 (1:200, rabbit, Millipore) was used to detect GL261 tumor cells58.
Myelin was labeled by incubating tissue sections for 30 min with FluoroMyelin Red
Fig. 9 GLAST-expressing perivascular cells reside in the human CNS vasculature. Representative images of post-mortem human tissue from the healthy
spinal cord (a) and occipital cortex (e) labeled with antibodies recognizing PDGFRβ and podocalyxin (Pdx). Insets show magniﬁed boxed regions and reveal
PDGFRβ-expressing perivascular cells enveloping the endothelial tube. Example of a pericyte (labeled with an antibody against PDGFRβ) with characteristic
protruding ovoid cell body and processes encircling the endothelial wall of a small caliber blood vessel in the healthy human spinal cord (b). Example of a
pericyte (PDGFRβ+) extending its processes around the endothelial wall of a small caliber blood vessel in the healthy human occipital cortex (f). Human
endothelial cells were labeled with Ulex Europaeus-I (UEA-1) lectin. Arrowheads points at the pericyte soma. Detection of SLC1A3 (GLAST) and PDGFRB
mRNA in the healthy human spinal cord (c, d) and occipital cortex (g, h) by RNAscope in situ hybridization combined with immunoﬂuorescence for the
UEA-1. White arrowheads point at blood vessel-associated cells positive for PDGFRB and SLC1A3 mRNA signals, representing GLAST+PDGFRβ+ perivascular
cells; yellow arrowheads identify blood vessel-associated cells positive for PDGFRB mRNA signals with low/undetectable levels of SLC1A3 mRNA,
representing GLAST−PDGFRβ+ perivascular cells; white arrows point at parenchymal (non-blood vessel-associated) cells positive for SLC1A3 mRNA signals
with low/undetectable levels of PDGFRB mRNA, likely representing GLAST+PDGFRβ+ astrocytes. Cell nuclei are labeled with DAPI. Scale bars: 100 μm (a,
e), 50 μm (c), 20 μm (g, insets in a, e), 10 μm (d, h) and 5 μm (b, f). All images show coronal sections. Images are representative of four independent
individuals.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
19

ﬂuorescent myelin stain (1:500, Invitrogen, F34652). For collagen type I and ﬁbronectin
immunolabeling, heat-induced antigen retrieval was performed in citrate buffer (10 mM
sodium citrate, 0.05% Tween 20, pH 6.0) for 5 min in a domestic steamer. The sections
were allowed to cool down for 20 min before commencing the immunostaining. The
following primary antibodies were used to immunostain human tissue: PDGFRβ (1:100,
goat, R&D Systems), GFAP (1:200, rabbit, Dako; 1:1000, chicken, Millipore), MBP
(1:500, rat, AbD Serotec; 1:1000, mouse, Covance), CD31 (1:100, mouse, Dako),
podocalyxin (1:200, goat, R&D Systems) and von Willebrand factor (1:200, rabbit,
Dako). Ulex Europaeus agglutinin I (UEA-1; 1:200, directly conjugated to FITC or
Rhodamine, Vector Labs) was used to label human endothelial cells. Following primary
antibody incubation and washing, antibody staining was revealed using species-speciﬁc
ﬂuorophore-conjugated (DyLight 405, Alexa Fluor 488, Cy3, Alexa Fluor 647 from
Jackson Immunoresearch) or biotin-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:500, Jackson
Immunoresearch). Biotinylated secondary antibodies were revealed with ﬂuorophore-
conjugated streptavidin (1:500, Alexa Fluor 488 or Cy3 from Jackson Immunoresearch).
EdU was detected with the Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 647 imaging kit (Molecular
Lesion core
a
b
b
PDGFRβ MBP vWF 
c
d
PDGFRβ UEA-1 DAPI 
e
f
MBP vWF 
PDGFRβ
h
Pdx 
PDGFRβ
Glioblastoma multiforme (WHO grade IV)
i
j
Tumor core
*
*
*
PDGFRβ GFAP
PDGFRβ GFAP
PDGFRβ GFAP vWF 
PDGFRβ UEA-1
PDGFRβ
Spinal cord injury: Contusion / Cyst type injury
Multiple sclerosis: Chronic active lesions
Territorial stroke (Arteria cerebri media) 
g
Ischemic core
PDGFRβ GFAP
PDGFRβ
CD31 DAPI 
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5
20
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:5501 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25585-5 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

===== Diotel2020_FrontNeuro_Mammal+Zebrafish+SCI =====
REVIEW
published: 23 September 2020
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.568930
Edited by:
Jose Angel Morales-Garcia,
Complutense University of Madrid,
Spain
Reviewed by:
Jan Kaslin,
Australian Regenerative Medicine
Institute (ARMI), Australia
Caghan Kizil,
Deutsches Zentrum für
Neurodegenerative,
Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft Deutscher
Forschungszentren (HZ), Germany
*Correspondence:
Nicolas Diotel
nicolas.diotel@univ-reunion.fr
Sepand Rastegar
sepand.rastegar@kit.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Neurodegeneration,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Neuroscience
Received: 02 June 2020
Accepted: 19 August 2020
Published: 23 September 2020
Citation:
Diotel N, Lübke L, Strähle U and
Rastegar S (2020) Common
and Distinct Features of Adult
Neurogenesis and Regeneration
in the Telencephalon of Zebraﬁsh
and Mammals.
Front. Neurosci. 14:568930.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.568930
Common and Distinct Features of
Adult Neurogenesis and
Regeneration in the Telencephalon of
Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
Nicolas Diotel1*, Luisa Lübke2, Uwe Strähle2 and Sepand Rastegar2*
1 INSERM, UMR 1188, Diabète athérothrombose Thérapies Réunion Océan Indien (DéTROI), Université de La Réunion,
Saint-Denis, France, 2 Institute of Biological and Chemical Systems-Biological Information Processing (IBCS-BIP), Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany
In contrast to mammals, the adult zebraﬁsh brain shows neurogenic activity in a
multitude of niches present in almost all brain subdivisions. Irrespectively, constitutive
neurogenesis in the adult zebraﬁsh and mouse telencephalon share many similarities
at the cellular and molecular level. However, upon injury during tissue repair, the
situation is entirely different. In zebraﬁsh, inﬂammation caused by traumatic brain injury
or by induced neurodegeneration initiates speciﬁc and distinct neurogenic programs
that, in combination with signaling pathways implicated in constitutive neurogenesis,
quickly, and efﬁciently overcome the loss of neurons. In the mouse brain, injury-
induced inﬂammation promotes gliosis leading to glial scar formation and inhibition
of regeneration. A better understanding of the regenerative mechanisms occurring in
the zebraﬁsh brain could help to develop new therapies to combat the debilitating
consequences of brain injury, stroke, and neurodegeneration. The aim of this review is to
compare the properties of neural progenitors and the signaling pathways, which control
adult neurogenesis and regeneration in the zebraﬁsh and mammalian telencephalon.
Keywords: BMP, notch, inﬂammation, brain lesion, neural stem cell, adult neurogenesis, zebraﬁsh, mouse
INTRODUCTION
Adult neurogenesis is the process by which neural stem cells (NSCs) divide and provide new
neurons which will migrate and diﬀerentiate concomitantly in order to establish and/or integrate
into existing neural networks of the adult nervous system. During almost one century, the dogmatic
view has been held that neurogenesis was restricted to the developmental period and no new
neurons were generated during adulthood (Oppenheim, 2019). Step by step, progress in the analysis
of the encephalon, cell proliferation and in tracing the genesis of newborn cells, has provided
convincing evidence that neurogenesis happens also at post-natal and adult stages (Altman and
Das, 1965; Altman, 1969). Post-natal neurogenesis was observed in the cerebellum of mammals, as
well as in the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricles and in the dentate gyrus (DG) of the
hippocampus (Uzman, 1960; Miale and Sidman, 1961; Altman, 1963, 1969; Altman and Das, 1965).
It is nowadays well-established that adult neurogenesis also occurs in the human brain, although its
functional signiﬁcance is still under debate (Boldrini et al., 2018; Sorrells et al., 2018; Oppenheim,
2019). The discovery of adult neurogenesis opened the prospect to repair damage caused by brain
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
1
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
injuries (i.e., ischemia and trauma) and neurodegenerative
diseases
including
Parkinson’s
and
Alzheimer’s
diseases
in human patients.
In mammals, neuroepithelial cells (NECs) are the ﬁrst
neurogenic cells in the developing nervous system. As the
brain ventricles form, these cells diﬀerentiate into radial glial
cells (RGCs) that have been initially described to support the
migration of newborn neurons and to constitute a heterogeneous
population (Kriegstein and Gotz, 2003; Pinto and Gotz, 2007).
Further studies revealed that RGCs give rise to glial progeny
(oligodendrocytes and ependymal cells) but can also behave as
NSCs and generate almost all neurons of the brain (Noctor et al.,
2002; Malatesta et al., 2003; Spassky et al., 2005; Rowitch and
Kriegstein, 2010). In mouse, at the end of the embryonic period
some of the RGCs transform into astrocytes (Gaiano et al., 2000;
Ventura and Goldman, 2007). The majority of these cells are
non-neurogenic, since only RGC-astrocyte-like cells found in
discrete regions of the telencephalon, mainly the SVZ of the
lateral ventricles and the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the DG of
the hippocampus, conserved their neurogenic properties during
adulthood (Dennis et al., 2016; Fares et al., 2019).
In contrast to the mammalian brain, RGCs and NECs
persist widespread during adulthood in teleost ﬁsh and maintain
their neurogenic properties (Zupanc, 2001; Zupanc and Clint,
2003; Pellegrini et al., 2007; Kaslin et al., 2009, 2017; Ito
et al., 2010; März et al., 2010; Strobl-Mazzulla et al., 2010;
Takeuchi and Okubo, 2013; Lindsey et al., 2018). The presence
of these numerous NSCs throughout the brain supports an
intense neurogenic activity during the entire lifespan (Pellegrini
et al., 2005; Zupanc et al., 2005; Lindsey and Tropepe, 2006;
März et al., 2010; Edelmann et al., 2013). In addition, while
central nervous system (CNS) regeneration is very limited
in mammals, adult zebraﬁsh exhibit a huge capability for
regenerating the brain (Ayari et al., 2010; Diotel et al., 2010a,
2013; März et al., 2011; Baumgart et al., 2012; Kizil et al.,
2012a; Schmidt et al., 2013). These features highlight the prospect
that zebraﬁsh could represent an alternative model for a better
understanding of constitutive and regenerative neurogenesis in
the vertebrate brain.
The aim of this review is to describe the neurogenic and
regenerative features of the adult zebraﬁsh brain and to compare
them with the mouse. We ﬁrst describe the ontogeny, the
anatomy and the proliferative areas within the telencephalon of
zebraﬁsh, considering that this part of the encephalon shares
numerous homologies with mammals. The diﬀerent types of
progenitors within the telencephalon, their type of division and
their lineage will be emphasized. In a second part, we compare the
molecular mechanisms orchestrating constitutive neurogenesis
and regeneration in the telencephalon with a focus on Notch,
BMP, and inﬂammatory signaling pathways.
ONTOGENESIS OF THE ZEBRAFISH
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
The development of the CNS starts at around 6 h post
fertilization (hpf) corresponding to the beginning of gastrulation
(Woo and Fraser, 1995). The main brain structures are initially
heralded by region-speciﬁc expression of neural genes (Bally-Cuif
and Hammerschmidt, 2003; Mueller and Wulliman, 2005). At 24
hpf, the forebrain, the midbrain and the hindbrain have formed
morphologically distinct structures. Later during development,
these embryonic structures will diﬀerentiate and generate the
main structures of the adult brain, including the telencephalon,
the diencephalon and the rhombencephalon. It is also important
to note, that in contrast to mammals, the telencephalon develops
by eversion and not by evagination (Mueller and Wulliman,
2005; Folgueira et al., 2012). This speciﬁc type of development
of the pallium makes the identiﬁcation of homologous regions
shared with the mammalian telencephalon more diﬃcult, notably
concerning the hippocampal neurogenic region. In addition,
instead of having two telencephalic ventricles (the two lateral
ventricles in mammals), there is only one medial ventricle in
teleost ﬁsh (Figure 1).
ANATOMY OF THE ZEBRAFISH
TELENCEPHALON SHOWS
RESEMBLANCE TO THE MOUSE
TELENCEPHALON DESPITE DIFFERENT
MODES OF VENTRICLE FORMATION
In zebraﬁsh, the telencephalon is composed of the olfactory
bulbs, the subpallium (ventral telencephalon) and the pallium
(dorsal telencephalon). The ventral telencephalon is subdivided
into two brain nuclei: the ventral nucleus of the ventral
telencephalon (Vv) and the dorsal nucleus of the ventral
telencephalon (Vd) (Wullimann et al., 1996; Figure 2A). The
dorsal telencephalon is more complex and is composed of
diﬀerent brain nuclei and/or regions including the central
zone (Dc), the dorsomedial zone (Dm), the lateral zone (Dl)
and the posterior zone (Dp) of the dorsal telencephalon
(Wullimann et al., 1996; Figure 2A). These diﬀerent brain
nuclei/regions
occupy
distinct
rostro-caudal
positions.
Interestingly, the telencephalon contains several neurogenic
niches (estimated to 16 according to Byrd and Brunjes,
2001; Adolf et al., 2006; Grandel et al., 2006; Kishimoto
et al., 2011, 2013). Among these, the Vv of the subpallium
is considered to be homologous of the SVZ of the lateral
ventricle of mammals, and the Dl and/or Dp of the pallium
to be the equivalent of the SGZ of the DG (see below for
description of these neurogenic niches) (Broglio et al., 2005;
März et al., 2010; Grandel and Brand, 2013; Ganz et al., 2014).
However, these homologies between ﬁsh and rodents would
beneﬁt from further investigation in order to ascertain such
evolutionary comparisons.
The work from Ganz et al. (2014) aimed at identifying
the expression pattern of conserved genes in the pallium
of adult zebraﬁsh in order to deﬁne pallial subdivisions
and to determine their homologs in tetrapods (Ganz et al.,
2014). They suggested that the Dm corresponds to the
pallial amygdala in mammals, the Dc is the homolog of
the cortex and the Dl (ventral and dorsal parts) could
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
2
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
FIGURE 1 | Schematic representation of evagination and eversion in vertebrates. The top panel illustrates the telencephalic part of the neural tubes that will evolve
differently during development between ray-ﬁnned ﬁsh (actinopterygians) and other vertebrates. In the latter, the neural tube will follow an evagination process of the
telencephalic vesicles (left panel) producing paired telencephalic hemispheres with two internal ventricles (the lateral ventricles in mammals). In contrast, in ray-ﬁnned
ﬁsh (right panel), the neural tube in its dorsal region (pallium) grows and curves laterally. It folds toward the ventral region (subpallium) producing two massive
hemispheres ﬂanking a single ventricular cavity. Such movements will stretch the dorsal roof-plate region of the neural tube and will form the tela choroidea. The red
parts show the different positioning of the territories following the eversion or evagination processes. The red arrows highlight the movements occurring in the neural
tubes. Fp, ﬂoor plate; lp, lateral plate; rp, roof plate; vc, ventricular cavity.
be
the
homolog
of
the
hippocampus.
In
their
work,
Ganz
et
al.
(2014)
did
not
ﬁnd
an
equivalent
of
the
Dp in tetrapods.
In addition, by performing in situ hybridization for 1202
transcription regulators (TRs) in the telencephalon of adult
zebraﬁsh, we previously identiﬁed particular regions displaying
speciﬁc clusters of TR gene expression revealing similarities with
the mammalian brain (Diotel et al., 2015b). Among the 1202
TRs analyzed, 562 exhibited 13 distinct patterns and some of
them were restricted to the neurogenic niches localized along
the telencephalic ventricle. In the same line, neurotransmitters,
their synthesizing enzymes, and speciﬁc markers for GABAergic
neurons in the telencephalon or serotoninergic innervation of the
telencephalon (or serotoninergic neurons in other brain regions
than the telencephalon) are expressed in a very similar way to
what is observed in rodents, suggesting once again homologies
with the mammalian telencephalic regions during development
and adulthood (Kaslin and Panula, 2001; Mueller et al., 2004;
Mueller and Wullimann, 2009; Wullimann, 2009; Parker et al.,
2013). Thus, the zebraﬁsh subpallial regions have been suggested
to be the homologs of the medial and lateral ganglionic eminences
in mouse but further investigation is needed to conﬁrm this
hypothesis (Mueller and Wullimann, 2009).
In summary, the telencephalon of adult zebraﬁsh shares
similarities in its subdomains with those of mouse regarding
the expression of transcription regulators, the types and the
distribution of excitatory and inhibitory neurons, as revealed by
the expression of their respective neurotransmitter synthesizing
enzymes. The homologies between the diﬀerent telencephalic
regions according to the expression of TRs have been highlighted
in the Figures 2A,C. However, the diﬀerent models based on
gene expression require a unifying theory, which may at the end
only be possible to derive by including functional aspects of the
various regions.
PROLIFERATIVE AREAS IN THE ADULT
TELENCEPHALON
The brain of adult teleost ﬁsh displays many proliferative
areas throughout its rostrocaudal extend (Zupanc et al., 2005;
Lindsey and Tropepe, 2006; Pellegrini et al., 2007; Figure 3).
These proliferative sites correspond essentially to neurogenic
niches and are mainly located along the ventricular layers of
the telencephalon, diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus)
and rhombencephalon. For its ease of experimental access, the
zebraﬁsh telencephalon is one of the most studied parts of the
brain regarding neurogenesis (Grandel et al., 2006; Lam et al.,
2009; März et al., 2010).
We will next describe the localization of the diﬀerent
neurogenic niches in zebraﬁsh and mouse (Figure 3). Adolf
et al. (2006) demonstrated the existence of slow and fast cycling
progenitors in the telencephalon of adult zebraﬁsh (Figure 3). In
the ventral telencephalon, fast cycling progenitors were observed
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
3
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
FIGURE 2 | Anatomy of the zebraﬁsh telencephalon and homologies with the
mammal brain. (A) Zebraﬁsh telencephalon indicating the different brain
regions and/or nuclei of the pallium and subpallium in the left hemisphere
according to Wullimann et al. (1996). The Dm (purple), Dl/Dp (yellow), and Dc
(green) have been proposed to be the homologs of the amygdala,
hippocampus and the neocortex in rodents (see corresponding colors in the
bottom scheme C). The right zebraﬁsh telencephalic hemisphere illustrates the
distribution of neural stem/progenitor cells with type 1 (quiescent RGCs), type
2 (proliferative RGCs) and type 3 cells (neuroblasts). (B) Molecular
features/markers of type 1, 2, and 3 cells are indicated below the scheme.
Bold writing corresponds to strong expression of the proteins. (C) Mouse
transversal section through the telencephalon and diencephalon indicating the
corresponding homologies with the zebraﬁsh telencephalon. Am, amygdala;
Dc, central zone of the dorsal telencephalon; Dl, lateral zone of the dorsal
telencephalon; Dm, dorsomedial zone of the dorsal telencephalon; Dp,
posterior zone of the dorsal telencephalon; Hipp, hippocampus; Vv, ventral
nucleus of the ventral telencephalon; Vd, dorsal nucleus of the ventral
telencephalon.
in the ventricular zone of the Vv in a wide band composed
of densely packed proliferating cells (Adolf et al., 2006; Ganz
and Brand, 2016; Figure 3B, middle scheme). They display
interkinetic nuclear migration and do not or only barely express
typical glial markers (Ganz et al., 2010; März et al., 2010). These
fast cycling progenitors were shown to correspond to neuroblasts
migrating tangentially toward the olfactory bulbs through a
FIGURE 3 | Neurogenic niches in the brain of mammals and zebraﬁsh.
(A) Sagittal section of a rodent brain illustrating the main proliferative area
shown by red dots (top scheme). The two black lines correspond to coronal
sections through the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricles (middle
scheme) and the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the dentate gyrus of the
hippocampus (bottom scheme). The red dots correspond to proliferative cells.
(B) Sagittal brain section of a zebraﬁsh brain illustrating the main proliferative
areas shown by red dots (top scheme). The two black lines correspond to
coronal sections through the anterior part of the telencephalon, where the
ventricular zone of the Vv-Vd is suggested to be the equivalent of the SVZ in
mammals (middle scheme), and through the medial part of the telencephalon,
where the Dl/Dp is suggested to be the homolog of the hippocampus in
mammals (bottom scheme). In zebraﬁsh, the red dots correspond to slow
cycling progenitors (mainly RGCs, type 2) and the green ones to fast cycling
progenitors (mainly neuroblasts, type 3). Ce, cerebellum; D, telencephalic
dorsal area; OB, olfactory bulbs; Hyp, hypothalamus.
rostral migratory stream-like (Kishimoto et al., 2011, 2013). More
caudally, these fast cycling progenitors were observed in a thinner
band localized more dorsally (Grandel et al., 2006; März et al.,
2010; Lindsey et al., 2012; Ganz and Brand, 2016; Figure 3B,
bottom scheme). Another small region in the posterior zone
(Dp) of the pallium is also composed of fast cycling progenitors.
In contrast, the dorsal subpallium (Vd), as well as the rest
of the ventricular layer of the dorsal telencephalon are mainly
composed of slow cycling progenitors (Adolf et al., 2006; März
et al., 2010; Figure 3).
In mouse, only two main regions exhibit a signiﬁcant
level of proliferation in the telencephalon: the SVZ of the
lateral ventricles and the SGZ of the DG in the hippocampus.
Numerous cycling cells originate from the SVZ and migrate
tangentially toward the olfactory bulbs forming the rostral
migratory stream (RMS) (Figure 3A; Doetsch et al., 1997). These
migrating cells in proliferation correspond to neuroblasts in
zebraﬁsh. Thus, the SVZ and RMS have their equivalents in the
zebraﬁsh telencephalon with the RMS-like structure composed
of neuroblasts originating from the cluster of fast-cycling densely
packed neural progenitors localized in the zebraﬁsh subpallium
(Vv; Figure 3B, middle scheme, in green) (Adolf et al., 2006; März
et al., 2010; Kishimoto et al., 2011). In the mouse hippocampus,
the SGZ also harbors proliferative cells corresponding to NSCs,
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
4
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
intermediate progenitors and neuroblasts (Kozareva et al., 2019).
These cells will provide new neurons to the hippocampal
formation. The hippocampal NSCs display radial glial like
characteristics and share features with zebraﬁsh quiescent and
proliferative RGCs from the pallium (see below).
In
conclusion,
strong
homologies
exist
between
the
neurogenic niches in zebraﬁsh and the mouse telencephalon:
(1) studies of functional and molecular markers identiﬁed
the zebraﬁsh Dp/Dl as the homolog of the hippocampus in
mouse; (2) the Vv, composed of densely packed fast cycling
progenitors, has been proposed to be the equivalent of the
SVZ/RMS in mouse.
THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF
PROGENITORS IN THE
TELENCEPHALON AND THEIR LINEAGE
The work from März et al. (2010) suggested the existence
of three main types of neurogenic proliferative cells in the
telencephalon of adult zebraﬁsh: type 1, type 2, and type 3
(März et al., 2010; Figures 2A,B). Type 1 and type 2 are NSCs
and correspond to quiescent (qNSCs) and activated proliferative
RGCs (aNSCs), respectively, while type 3 (a and b) corresponds
to further committed progenitors supposed to be neuroblasts.
In zebraﬁsh, type 1 cells are negative for the proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA) and express the whole set of RGC
markers (i.e., S100β, GFAP, BLBP, AroB, and Vimentin), as
well as the progenitor markers Sox2 and Nestin (Figure 2B).
It is nevertheless important to mention that Nestin is not
strongly expressed by RGCs, given that in situ hybridization
experiments and transgenic BAC lines do not recapitulate the
expression pattern shown by a transgenic construct containing
a short promoter sequence (Mahler and Driever, 2007; Kaslin
et al., 2009; Lam et al., 2009). Additionally, sox2 expression
is also detected in neurons and oligodendrocyte progenitor
cells and is therefore not speciﬁc to a certain cell population.
In contrast, type 2 cells display the same set of RGC and
progenitor markers but are positive for PCNA (Figure 2B).
They are consequently proliferative NSCs. Two diﬀerent subsets
of type 3 progenitors have been identiﬁed: type 3a and type
3b. Type 3a do not or only weakly express RGC markers, but
are positive for the progenitor marker Sox2 and the Nestin
short transgene (März et al., 2010). Additionally, they are in a
proliferative state (PCNA-positive) and express PSA-NCAM, a
marker of early neuronal diﬀerentiation. In contrast, type 3b do
not express any of the RGC markers, and are only positive for the
progenitor marker Sox2. However, they are also in a proliferative
state (PCNA-positive) and express PSA-NCAM (März et al.,
2010; Figure 2B). Using GFP-encoding retrovirus and lentivirus
tracing and genetic lineage tracing it was shown that RGCs
can provide diﬀerent types of neurons and conﬁrm a lineage
between type 1, 2, and 3 (Rothenaigner et al., 2011; Lange et al.,
2020; Than-Trong et al., 2020). This and more recent works
revealed that RGCs can go through symmetric gliogenic division,
asymmetric division producing RGCs and neuroblasts (type 3),
and that RGCs can undergo direct conversion into neurons
(Rothenaigner et al., 2011; Barbosa et al., 2015; Figure 4). These
studies demonstrated that RGCs exhibit features of true NSCs
being able to self- renew, in order to maintain a pool of stem cells.
In contrast, type 3 cells mainly perform symmetric neurogenic
divisions (Rothenaigner et al., 2011).
In the adult mouse SVZ, NSCs (B cells) display astrocytic
features and provide transit amplifying cells (C cells). These
cells can generate neuroblasts (A cells). The quiescent B cells
express GFAP and Nestin but are negative for neuroblast markers
such as doublecortin (DCX). The transit amplifying cells (C
cells) weakly express GFAP, and are strongly Nestin- and PCNA-
positive but still negative for neuroblast markers (e.g., DCX). In
sharp contrast, the A cells, corresponding to neuroblasts, do not
express GFAP and Nestin anymore, but are strongly positive for
DCX and PCNA (Cavaliere et al., 2016).
In the adult SGZ of the hippocampus, the quiescent (type
1) and proliferative (type 2) NSCs display radial glial-like
morphology. Type 2 cells give rise to type 3 cells corresponding
to neuroblasts that will provide new neurons. Type 1 cells express
GFAP, Nestin, BLBP and Sox2 while type 2 cells show a decreased
expression of GFAP but are positive for PCNA. Type 3 cells
express further committed markers such as DCX and PSA-
NCAM in addition to being PCNA-positive (Knoth et al., 2010;
Kozareva et al., 2019).
Consequently,
morphological
and
lineage
features
of
progenitors from the dorsal pallium in zebraﬁsh are very similar
to those from the SGZ in the hippocampus of mouse in which
type 1 progenitors (quiescent radial glial-like cells) can enter a
proliferative state (type 2) and give rise to neuroblasts (type 3),
providing new neurons (Knoth et al., 2010; Kozareva et al., 2019).
The SVZ-RMS in mouse also shares characteristics with the
zebraﬁsh-equivalent of the Vv-RMS. Diﬀerences exist, however,
in the way of migration: the neural progenitors migrate along
blood vessels in ﬁsh and not along scaﬀolds formed by glial tubes,
as observed in mouse (Kishimoto et al., 2011).
THE CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR
MORPHOLOGY OF NSCs AND THE
ABSENCE OF ASTROCYTES IN FISH
An interesting point to be highlighted is the nature of adult NSCs
in the brain of zebraﬁsh and mouse; in zebraﬁsh, the bona ﬁde
NSCs are RGCs, in mouse, adult NSCs are either radial-glial
like cells (type 1 cells in the SGZ) or cells exhibiting astrocytic
features (B cells in the SVZ) (Morrens et al., 2012; Dimou and
Gotz, 2014). RGCs are derived from NECs. In both prenatal
mammals and in ﬁsh from embryonic stages to adulthood, RGCs,
and NECs have a similar morphology. They display a small
triangular or ovoid soma localized close to the ventricle, and
extend two cytoplasmic processes: one long process crossing the
brain parenchyme to reach the pial surface, and one short process
toward the ventricular surface. These NSCs also serve as a scaﬀold
for the migration of newborn neurons (Noctor et al., 2002;
Weissman et al., 2003). At the end of the embryonic development
in mouse, RGCs disappear and transform mainly into astrocytes.
In contrast, the brains of adult teleost do not contain astrocytes
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
5
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
FIGURE 4 | Type of divisions of neural stem/progenitor cells and injury-induced proliferation in the telencephalon of adult zebraﬁsh. Left panel: Symmetric gliogenic
division (A) in which one dividing RGC provides two new RGCs. A RGC can also divide asymmetrically (B), self-renew and generate a non-glial progenitor
(neuroblast). Another possible type of division is the symmetric non-gliogenic division (C) in which one RGC provides two non-glial progenitors. Finally, direct
conversion of a RGC into a neuron can also occur (D). The non-glial progenitors can give rise to new neurons through direct conversion (Dc) or indirect conversion
(Ic). Right panel: Injury-induced proliferation following traumatic injury in the brain of adult zebraﬁsh (E). In the intact hemisphere (right part), most RGCs are
quiescent (type 1) and some are proliferating (type 2). There are also a number of non-glial progenitors in the pallium. Five days after stab wound injury (left part),
RGCs actively divide and generate numerous non-glial progenitors (type 3) that will provide new neurons to replace the damaged and dying ones.
but maintain RGCs and NECs during adulthood sustaining the
strong neurogenic activity of ﬁsh (Noctor et al., 2002; Merkle
et al., 2004; Pinto and Gotz, 2007; Kaslin et al., 2009; Than-Trong
and Bally-Cuif, 2015). The adult telencephalic neurogenic activity
is consequently mainly due to the maintenance of (1) RGCs in the
dorsal telencephalon and (2) NECs in the ventral telencephalon.
Both, embryonic mouse RGCs and adult zebraﬁsh RGCs,
express evolutionary conserved markers, such as the intermediate
ﬁlaments GFAP (glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein) and vimentin,
the brain lipid binding protein (blbp), the calcium binding
protein (S100β), the estrogen-synthesizing enzyme Aromatase,
and progenitor markers like Nestin and Sox2 (Pellegrini et al.,
2007; März et al., 2010; Lindsey et al., 2012; Than-Trong and
Bally-Cuif, 2015; Diotel et al., 2016; Figure 2B). In zebraﬁsh,
RGCs express additional markers such as the inhibitor of DNA
binding 1 (id1) and the chemokine receptor cxcr4, both of them
being mainly expressed in type 1 cells and only in a few type 2
cells (Diotel et al., 2010b; Rodriguez Viales et al., 2015). Alike, Id1
and Cxcr4 have been shown to be expressed in RGCs and/or adult
NSCs in mouse (Tran et al., 2007; Nam and Benezra, 2009; Mithal
et al., 2013; Ho et al., 2017). Several her genes, such as her4, the
downstream target genes of Notch signaling, are expressed in the
telencephalic neurogenic niches, especially in RGCs (Chapouton
et al., 2011; Kroehne et al., 2011; Diotel et al., 2015b). Similarly,
the orthologs of the zebraﬁsh her, the Hes genes are expressed in
RGCs in mouse and are involved in NSC fate choice (see Table 1).
Most RGC markers are also synthesized by adult NSCs of the SVZ
and SGZ in mouse, underscoring that zebraﬁsh and mouse adult
NSCs are very similar. In their recent review, Labusch et al. (2020)
also detailed that RGCs from the pallium display strong cellular
and molecular similarities with the adult NSCs of rodents.
An interesting evolutionary aspect to stress is that astrocytes
derived from RGCs in mouse express markers like GFAP,
vimentin, glutamin synthase and S100β, which are also expressed
by zebraﬁsh RGCs (März et al., 2010; Kroehne et al., 2011;
Dimou and Gotz, 2014; Wang et al., 2019). The fact that
the brain, in particular the telencephalon, of zebraﬁsh is
devoid of astrocytes, raises the question of which cells adopted
their astrocytic functions [i.e., in blood brain barrier (BBB)
establishment, neurotransmitter uptake, ionic regulation, and
neurosteroidogenesis] (Jurisch-Yaksi et al., 2020). More and more
data in ﬁsh point to the general idea that zebraﬁsh RGCs fulﬁll
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
6
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
TABLE 1 | Summary of key molecules involved in adult neurogenesis and regeneration.
Pathways
Molecule
Role in zebraﬁsh adult neurogenesis
References
Role in mouse/mammalian adult
neurogenesis
References
Constitutive neurogenesis
Notch
Notch1
Notch1b ortholog, expressed in activated
progenitors, function: maintains progenitor
state
Alunni et al., 2013
Expressed in activated NSCs of the SVZ,
function: proliferation
Basak et al., 2012
Notch3
Expressed in quiescent and activated
RGCs, function: controls proliferation in
interaction with Hey1 and quiescence in
interaction with Her4
Alunni et al.,
2013; Than-Trong
et al., 2018
Expressed in quiescent NSCs in the SEZ,
function: maintenance of quiescent NSCs
Kawai et al., 2017
Hes1
Her6 ortholog, expressed in qRGCs of the
VZ
Chapouton et al.,
2011
Function: repression of proneural genes,
maintenance of NSCs
Boareto et al., 2017
Hey1
Expressed in all progenitor cells in adult
pallium, function: interaction with Notch3 to
drive proliferation
Than-Trong et al.,
2018
Not analyzed in mouse
–
Her4
Expressed in RGCs, function: interaction
with Notch3 to drive quiescence
Alunni et al., 2013
Hes5 ortholog, expressed in RGCs, function:
represses NSC differentiation
Kageyama et al.,
2007b
Ascl1
Ascl1a ortholog, expressed in activated
NSCs
Than-Trong et al.,
2018
Proneural gene, function: constant
expression leads to differentiation of NPCs to
neuroblasts, oscilating expression leads to
maintenance of proliferative state
Imayoshi et al., 2013
BMP
BMP
Function: control of id1 expression in RGCs
through BRE
Zhang et al.,
2020
Signaling active in NSCs, function: balances
quiescence and proliferation
Mira et al., 2010
Noggin
No data reported in adult neurogenesis
–
Expressed by ependymal cells close to the
SVZ, function: antagonist of BMP
Lim et al., 2000
BMP
speciﬁc
Smads
Mediators of BMP pathway, function:
regulation of id1 expression in RGCs
Zhang et al.,
2020
Active in stem/progenitor cells, function:
mediators of the canonical BMP pathway
Mira et al., 2010
Smad4
Co-Smad, function: together with BMP
speciﬁc Smads regulation of id1 expression
Zhang et al.,
2020
Function: deletion of Smad4 leads to
blockage of the BMP pathway and enhanced
neurogenesis
Mira et al., 2010
Id1
Expressed in qNSCs, function: promotes
NSC quiescence
Rodriguez Viales
et al., 2015
Expressed in B1- type neural stem cells,
function: stem cell self- renewal
Nam and Benezra,
2009
Reactive neurogenesis
BMP
BMP
Delayed activation of BMP/Id1 after injury to
promote quiescence and avoid depletion of
stem cell pool
Rodriguez Viales
et al., 2015
Upregulation of BMP and downstream
effector Id3 in SVZ upon injury, function:
interaction of Id3 and E47 leads to
differentiation of NSPCs into astrocytes
Bohrer et al., 2015
Notch
Notch1
Upregulated in NSPCs, function:
injury-induced proliferation
Kishimoto et al.,
2012
Induced in response to injury in SVZ, function:
increases astrogenic response of NSCs
Tatsumi et al., 2010;
Benner et al., 2013
Inﬂammation
Gata3
Injury-induced increase in expression in
NSCs, function: promotes proliferation and
differentiation into neurons
Kizil et al., 2012b
Gata3 is unable to induce neurogenesis in 3D
cultures of human astrocytes
Celikkaya et al., 2019
LtC4
Function: together with receptor CysLt1,
activation of gata3 in injured telencephalon
Kyritsis et al.,
2012
Not analyzed in mouse
–
Amyloid beta
induced
Alzheimer’s
Model
(inﬂammation)
IL4
Function: interaction with STAT6
(downstream effector) to promote RGC
proliferation and development into neurons
Bhattarai et al.,
2016
Function: in mouse no neurogenesis
observed in astroglia upon induction of type 1
IL4 signaling
Human astroglia in 3D culture form neurons
upon induction of type 2 IL4 signaling
Mashkaryan et al.,
2020
Papadimitriou et al.,
2018
BDNF
Function: required for proliferation and
neurogenesis of NSCs
Bhattarai et al.,
2020
Function: In injured rat brain BDNF promotes
recruitment, neuronal differentiation and
survival of progenitor cells
Henry et al., 2007
the functions of astrocytes. For instance, in zebraﬁsh, adult RGC
endfeet wrap the blood vessels (Diotel et al., 2010b, 2018), arguing
for a role of RGCs in BBB physiology, as the mechanism is
comparable to astrocytic endfeet wrapping around endothelial
cells in mammals. RGCs also seem to express a whole set of
steroidogenic enzymes, in a way similar to what is known in
mammals (Diotel et al., 2011, 2018; Pellegrini et al., 2016; Weger
et al., 2018). In addition, the main water channel of the brain,
aquaporin-4 (AQP4), is expressed by astrocytes in mammals and
by RGCs in zebraﬁsh (King et al., 2004; Grupp et al., 2010),
but their cellular distribution diﬀers. To better understand other
evolutionary conserved aspects between zebraﬁsh and mammals,
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
7
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
such as ionic regulation and neurotransmitter uptake, further
studies are necessary. It is also important to note that aromatase,
expressed in RGCs during development in mammals and during
both development and adulthood in zebraﬁsh, is not anymore
expressed in astrocytes, except upon brain injury in reactive
astrocytes (Garcia-Segura et al., 1999; Kah et al., 2009; Diotel
et al., 2010a). In contrast, after brain injury in ﬁsh, aromatase
expression is decreased in RGCs and in the injured telencephalon,
while de novo expression seems to occur in cells resembling
neurons (Diotel et al., 2013).
Thus, the diﬀerent types of neural progenitors found in the
main telencephalic neurogenic niches share markers conserved
between zebraﬁsh and mice, during both development and
adulthood, supporting further the importance of zebraﬁsh as an
ideal animal model in understanding vertebrate NSC properties.
Thus, zebraﬁsh RGCs exhibit cellular and molecular similarities
with adult NSCs localized in the mammalian SVZ and SGZ.
However, some diﬀerences exist regarding, for instance, the
morphology of NSCs during adulthood and their mode of
division. Indeed, zebraﬁsh NSCs perform symmetric divisions
and asymmetric divisions (Rothenaigner et al., 2011; Than-
Trong and Bally-Cuif, 2015; Than-Trong et al., 2020). Another
interesting feature is the direct conversion of RGCs into neurons
which seems to represent an important method to generate
neurons in the adult zebraﬁsh brain (Barbosa et al., 2015). This
diﬀers from the behavior of NSCs in adult mouse: Murine NSCs
are characterized by asymmetric divisions and the genesis of
intermediate progenitors (Suh et al., 2007; Costa et al., 2011;
Than-Trong et al., 2018).
HETEROGENEITY IN THE RGC AND
PROGENITOR POPULATION
RGCs do not appear to constitute a homogeneous population.
Although, zebraﬁsh RGCs express a wide set of markers including
Nestin, GFAP, BLBP, Cyp19a1b (Aromatase B), S100β, vimentin,
and glutamin synthase (Pellegrini et al., 2007; Lam et al., 2009;
Diotel et al., 2010a, 2016; März et al., 2010; Kroehne et al.,
2011), these markers are not 100% co-expressed in all RGCs
(Figure 2). For instance, despite the fact that a wide proportion
of RGCs co-express Aromatase B and BLBP, some of them
either express Aromatase B or BLBP throughout the brain,
while BLBP expression is associated with a higher proliferative
state of RGCs (Diotel et al., 2016). Additionally, the chemokine
receptor cxcr4 appears to be co-expressed with Aromatase B
and BLBP, but some RGCs express these markers diﬀerentially,
which suggests regionalization, as in the periventricular pretectal
nucleus and along the lateral and posterior hypothalamic recess
(Diotel et al., 2010b, 2016). Indeed, in these regions, some parts
are only Aromatase B-positive, or BLBP-positive or co-express
both markers. The same was observed for Cxcr4. These data
suggest the existence of heterogeneity between RGCs throughout
the brain but also within the telencephalon (Figure 2). In
addition, a recent review documents the heterogeneity within the
neural progenitor population in zebraﬁsh with some progenitors
expressing genes involved in astroglial functions and others
expressing typical ependymal markers (Jurisch-Yaksi et al., 2020).
Also, among pallial RGCs, some seem to be deeply quiescent
and others appear to constitute a self-renewing reservoir (Than-
Trong et al., 2020). This also supports the idea of heterogeneity
within the RGC population.
In a diﬀerent way, these diﬀerences in gene expression are
underscored by an unbiased analysis of transcription regulators
(TRs) expression in the telencephalon of adult zebraﬁsh (Diotel
et al., 2015b). Our comprehensive, genome-wide expression
mapping of TRs in the telencephalon of adult zebraﬁsh showed
that certain TRs display a restricted expression pattern in
neurogenic niches localized along the telencephalic ventricle
(Diotel et al., 2015b). For instance, the SRY-box containing gene
4a (sox4a) is detected in the ventricular and periventricular layer
of the RMS, the POU class 3 homeobox 3b (pou3f3b) gene is
strongly expressed in the RMS and also weakly in the ventricular
zone, while the Forkhead box J1a (foxj1a) gene is speciﬁcally
expressed in the RMS. In addition, TRs such as doublesex and
mab-3 related transcription factor like family a2 (dmrta2) are
expressed speciﬁcally in the ventricular zone but not in the
RMS. These results suggest the existence of speciﬁc programs
controlling NSC activity with distinct neurogenic outcomes. The
hierarchal clustering of genes expressed in speciﬁc regions of
the VZ clearly shows that the VZ neurogenic region is not
homogeneous between the medial part and the lateral part of
the VZ. Interestingly, such diﬀerences in expression can as
well be found in a comparative approach in mammals. For
instance, in the rodent brain, FoxJ1 expressing cells produce
neuroblasts and are implied in postnatal neurogenesis (Jacquet
et al., 2011; Devaraju et al., 2013; Muthusamy et al., 2014).
Additionally, Pou3f3 modulates neurogenesis in the ventricular
zone in mouse (Dominguez et al., 2013). Consequently, TR
gene expression in the telencephalic neurogenic niches of
adult zebraﬁsh could share similarities with their homologous
regions in the telencephalon of rodents, as described above
for the TRs Foxj1 and Pou3f3. Furthermore, it appears that
the ventricular zone of the telencephalon exhibits diﬀerent
subdomains considering TR gene expression. This argues in
favor of distinct neurogenic and/or gliogenic regions within the
pallial ventricular zone (Diotel et al., 2015b). Studies performed
in rodents also suggest the existence of diﬀerent neurogenic
domains within the adult SVZ correlated with the expression
of diﬀerent subsets of TRs and linked to diﬀerent neurogenic
properties (Merkle et al., 2007, 2014; Rushing and Ihrie, 2016).
In summary, these observations argue in favor of diﬀerent
subpopulations of RGCs along the telencephalic ventricular
zone. Until now, the signiﬁcance of such diﬀerences is not well
understood but could be explained by diﬀerential neurogenic
versus gliogenic properties: proliferation rate, quiescence, varying
regenerative properties, as well as the genesis of diverse types
of neurons. Such heterogeneity in RGCs was also observed
during development in mammals (Pinto and Gotz, 2007).
Furthermore, recent data demonstrated that adult NSCs from
the SVZ and SGZ in rodents do not constitute a homogeneous
population, based on morphological and functional criteria
(Gebara et al., 2016; Obernier and Alvarez-Buylla, 2019).
Consequently, NSCs in the brain of both adult mammals and
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
8
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
ﬁsh retain functional similarities and display heterogeneity in
gene expression. However, the functional signiﬁcance of this
heterogeneity is not yet understood.
RGCs SUSTAIN THE STRONG
REGENERATIVE CAPACITY OF THE
ZEBRAFISH TELENCEPHALON
In addition to displaying a strong constitutive neurogenic
activity, zebraﬁsh is also an interesting model for studying
regenerative neurogenesis and the behavior of NSCs upon injury
due to its high regenerative capability (Alunni and Bally-Cuif,
2016). Directly after mechanical injury of the telencephalon, cell
death is observed as early as 4 hpl (hours post lesion) within
the damaged hemisphere and starts to reach normal levels from
1 to 3 dpl (days post lesion), according to the type of lesion
inﬂicted (Kroehne et al., 2011; Kyritsis et al., 2012). It also leads
to a signiﬁcant brain oedema at 1 dpl (Kroehne et al., 2011).
Shortly after brain injury, microglia cells and peripheral immune
cells, close to the damaged regions, are activated and recruited.
By using a transgenic ﬁsh line [Tg(ApoE-GFP)] and performing
immunohistochemistry (L-plastin and 4C4 antibodies), these
cells were shown to be recruited starting from 6 hpl on, peaking
between 1 and 3 dpl before returning to basal levels at around 7
dpl (Kroehne et al., 2011; März et al., 2011; Baumgart et al., 2012;
Kyritsis et al., 2012). Oligodendrocytes and oligodendrocyte
precursor cells (OPCs) also accumulate in the injured region from
1 to 14 dpl (März et al., 2011). Interestingly, Olig2-positive cells
do not increase their proliferation rate following brain injury,
which is in contrast to the mammalian situation (März et al.,
2011; Baumgart et al., 2012).
In addition, ventricular proliferation occurs after injury to
the telencephalon, but appears to be primarily restricted to the
damaged hemisphere (Kroehne et al., 2011; März et al., 2011).
From 1 to 3 dpl, most proliferative cells are found in the
brain parenchyme. Still, from 48 hpl, proliferation starts to be
upregulated along the ventricular layer the neurogenic niche
(März et al., 2011; Kishimoto et al., 2012; Diotel et al., 2013).
Comparing control and injured hemispheres, periventricular
proliferation peaks between 6 and 8 dpl and slowly returns
to basal levels around 15 dpl to 35 dpl (März et al., 2011;
Kishimoto et al., 2012; Diotel et al., 2013). These reactive
proliferating cells, localized along the telencephalic ventricle,
are reported to be RGCs, expressing their typical markers such
as S100β, BLBP, GFAP, and vimentin (Kroehne et al., 2011;
März et al., 2011; Baumgart et al., 2012; Kizil et al., 2012b;
Diotel et al., 2013). They give rise to newborn neurons (HuC/D-
positive) persisting more than 3 months and expressing mature
neuronal and dendritic markers like microtubule-associated
protein 2a/b, the synaptic vesicle marker 2 and metabotropic
glutamate receptor 2 (MAP2a/b, SV2, and mGlu2, respectively),
proving their functional maturation more than 2 to 3 months
after brain injury (Kroehne et al., 2011; Baumgart et al., 2012).
As for constitutive neurogenesis, lineage-tracing experiments
and immunohistochemistry studies have established that newly
generated neurons are also generated by RGCs and by type
3 progenitors through diﬀerent mechanisms (direct conversion
of RGCs into neurons, asymmetric division and symmetric
non-gliogenic division, Figures 4B–D; Kroehne et al., 2011;
Baumgart et al., 2012; Barbosa et al., 2015). In addition, a
shift in the mode of division of NSCs has been suggested
between intact and injured conditions (symmetric gliogenic
division versus symmetric non-gliogenic divisions, Figures 4A,C;
Barbosa et al., 2015). Interestingly, after brain injury NSCs mainly
performed symmetric divisions giving rise to new neurons, which
little by little depletes the NSC pool. This type of division
is barely observed in the intact telencephalon (Barbosa et al.,
2015; Figure 4E).
MODULATORS OF NEUROGENESIS IN
THE ADULT TELENCEPHALON
In contrast to embryonic NSCs, which are highly proliferative and
diﬀerentiate relatively quickly in order to aid the development
of the nervous system, the majority of adult NSCs are found in
a quiescent state with slow population dynamics (Rothenaigner
et al., 2011; Barbosa et al., 2015; Dray et al., 2015). Any
alteration of the balance between proliferation and resting
stem cells can have drastic consequences and leads to severe
neurological disorders. An uncontrolled increase in proliferation
of NSCs will lead to premature neurogenesis and consequently
to an early depletion of the NSC pool and/or brain tumor
formation. In contrast, reduced proliferation will result in a
decreased production and supply of new neurons, necessary for
brain homeostasis and regeneration (Edelmann et al., 2013).
Therefore, understanding the molecular cues controlling adult
NSC behavior under regular physiological and pathological
conditions is of great importance.
In zebraﬁsh and mouse many signaling pathways, such as
Fgf, Shh, Wnt, Insulin, Steroids, BDNF, Notch, and BMP, are
involved in adult neurogenesis and control cell quiescence,
proliferation and diﬀerentiation (Kizil et al., 2012b; Diotel
et al., 2013; Urban and Guillemot, 2014; Choe et al., 2015;
Horgusluoglu et al., 2017). With respect to recent discoveries,
we will ﬁrst review and compare the role of Notch and BMP
signaling pathways in neurogenesis in the germinal zone of
the adult telencephalon in zebraﬁsh and mouse. In the second
part, we will describe and compare the molecular pathways
involved in regenerative neurogenesis in the telencephalon of
adult zebraﬁsh and mouse.
NOTCH SIGNALING
The role of the Notch signaling pathway was extensively studied
in embryonic neurogenesis where this signaling pathway controls
binary cell fate decision by interaction between cellular neighbors
(Shin et al., 2007; Kageyama et al., 2008; Cau and Blader,
2009). The Notch signaling pathway is activated by interactions
between the Notch receptors and their transmembrane ligands
Delta and Jagged (Andersson et al., 2011). Following several
cleavage steps, the product, named Notch extracellular truncation
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
9
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
(NEXT), is cleaved by a multi-protein complex, called G-
Secretase. This cleavage results in the formation of the Notch
intracellular domain (NICD) (Artavanis-Tsakonas et al., 1995;
van Tetering and Vooijs, 2011), which will translocate to the
nucleus to form a complex with the Notch signaling mediator
Rbpj (Artavanis-Tsakonas et al., 1999). Finally, this complex
activates the expression of downstream genes like members of
the hairy/enhancer of split transcription factor family. The most
notable member of this family is the mammalian Hes genes
and its zebraﬁsh homolog her (Ohtsuka et al., 1999; Takke
and Campos-Ortega, 1999; Takke et al., 1999; Yeo et al., 2007;
Figure 5). Hes/her genes belong to the basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) family of transcription factors (Davis and Turner, 2001).
The basic domain is necessary for binding to their target DNA
sequence, while the HLH region forms homo- and heterodimers
with other HLH proteins, such as proneural and inhibitor
of diﬀerentiation (Id) proteins. Hes/Her proteins suppress
transcription by binding as dimers to the DNA regulatory
sequences of bHLH proneural genes, such as Achaete-scute like
(Ascl), to inhibit their transcriptional expression (Figure 5).
BHLH proneural genes are transcriptional activators, which
induce the neurogenic fate in the absence of Hes/Her proteins
(Bertrand et al., 2002; Fischer and Gessler, 2007; Kageyama
et al., 2007a,b; Castro et al., 2011; Imayoshi and Kageyama,
2014b,a). Additionally, during neurogenesis and somitogenesis
where the mechanism of Notch signaling in regulating active
and quiescent stem cells is very similar (Sueda and Kageyama,
2020), dimers formed by Hes/Her proteins can inhibit their own
expression via a negative feedback regulatory loop (Figure 5;
Lewis, 2003; Harima et al., 2014). The negative auto-regulation of
Hes/her genes in combination with the short half-live of Hes/her
proteins is responsible for the cyclic expression (oscillation) of
Hes/Her transcription factors (Hirata et al., 2002; Shimojo et al.,
2008; Oates et al., 2012; Imayoshi et al., 2013). In mouse (not
described in zebraﬁsh), the oscillatory behavior of Hes genes
results in oscillation of Ascl1 during embryonic neurogenesis
(Imayoshi et al., 2013). The level and the type of expression
(constant or oscillating) of Ascl1 determine the behavior of
neural progenitor cells. Constant and high expression of Asc11
is necessary for the commitment of neural progenitor cells to
neuronal fate, while its oscillation is indispensable for keeping
neural progenitor cells in a proliferative state (Imayoshi et al.,
2013; Figure 6).
As already mentioned, bHLH transcription factors interact
with the HLH Id protein family through their HLH domain.
Because Id proteins lack the basic DNA binding domain (Benezra
et al., 1990; Roschger and Cabrele, 2017), heterodimers formed
between bHLH and HLH proteins cannot bind or bind with
less eﬃciency to DNA (Massari and Murre, 2000), therefore they
behave as dominant negative molecules and inhibit the activity of
bHLH transcription factors. For instance, interaction of Id1 with
Hes1, one of the key downstream genes of Notch signaling during
FIGURE 5 | Notch signaling pathway in zebraﬁsh and mouse. Upon interaction between the Notch receptor and its ligands Jagged/Delta, and through several
subsequent cleavage steps the NICD is released and translocates to the nucleus. In the nucleus, the NICD, together with Rbpj, activates the expression of the
downstream genes Hes (mouse) and her (zebraﬁsh). The Hes/Her proteins bind as homodimers to the promoter of proneural genes to inhibit neuronal fate.
Additionally, the dimer can bind to its own promoter, resulting in a negative auto-regulation. bHLH, basic helix-loop-helix; Her, human epidermal growth factor
receptor; Hes, Hairy/enhancer of split; NEXT, Notch extracellular truncation; NICD, Notch intracellular domain; Rbpj, Recombining binding protein suppressor of
hairless.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
10
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
FIGURE 6 | Differential expression of Hes1 and Ascl1 controls NSC fate. When BMP and Notch signaling are active, the negative autoregulation of Hes1 is
repressed and its expression is constantly high, leading to quiescent NSCs. The negative autoregulatory effect of Hes1 is high when BMP signaling is not active,
causing Hes1 and Ascl1 to oscillate. Through this oscillation the NSCs are activated and proliferating. In the case of inactive Notch signaling, the repression of Hes1
on Ascl1 is abolished and the NSCs develop into neuroblasts. Ascl; achaete-scute like.
mouse neurogenesis, inhibits the auto-regulated repression of its
own promoter and leads to a persistent expression of Hes1 (Bai
et al., 2007). As a consequence of a high and stable expression of
the Hes proteins, the expression of Ascl1 is constantly repressed.
The signiﬁcance and importance of this mechanism, namely
keeping the NSCs in quiescence during adult neurogenesis, will
be developed and discussed further in the coming sections.
ROLE OF NOTCH SIGNALING DURING
NSC HOMEOSTASIS IN THE ADULT
TELENCEPHALON
In zebraﬁsh, a possible role of Notch signaling in adult
neurogenesis was ﬁrst suggested due to the expression of notch
receptors and her genes in neural progenitors of the adult
telencephalon. notch1a/b and notch3 and their downstream
transcriptional repressor eﬀectors her4, her6 and her15 are
present in RGCs of the adult zebraﬁsh pallium (Chapouton
et al., 2010, 2011; Ganz et al., 2010; de Oliveira-Carlos et al.,
2013). notch3 is expressed in both quiescent and activated
RGCs, while in contrast, notch1b is only expressed in activated
proliferating progenitor cells (Alunni et al., 2013; Than-Trong
et al., 2018). Genetic approaches, gain- and loss-of-function
studies, pharmacological inhibition of Notch and RGC fate
tracing suggest that Notch3 signaling promotes both quiescence
and the proliferation of RGCs, while Notch1b is necessary to
keep the progenitor cells in an undiﬀerentiated proliferative
state (Chapouton et al., 2010; Alunni et al., 2013; Than-Trong
et al., 2018). Notch3 drives quiescence or proliferation of the
progenitor cells via two distinct bHLH downstream mediators,
Her4 and Hey1, respectively (Than-Trong et al., 2018). The
canonical Notch pathway, mediated by Notch3 and its eﬀector
Her4 (the zebraﬁsh ortholog of Hes5 in mouse; see Table 1),
leads to the transcriptional repression of proneural genes and
consequently to the establishment of quiescent NSCs (Alunni
et al., 2013; Kawai et al., 2017). Not much is known why
Notch3 in some progenitor cells uses Her, and in others Hey
as a mediator of distinct outcomes (quiescence, proliferation,
respectively). Additionally, it would be interesting to understand
how the expression of Hey is regulated and what are its
downstream targets.
The pattern of expression and the function of Notch1 and
Notch3 is well conserved between mouse and zebraﬁsh during
constitutive adult neurogenesis: (1) Mouse Notch3 is expressed
in qNSC and in aNSCs; (2) Knockdown of Notch3 increases
the division of NSCs and therefore leads to a reduction of
qNSCs; (3) Notch1 is preferentially expressed in aNSCs of the
SVZ; and (4) Notch1 deletion in mouse SVZ and SGZ impairs
proliferation of NSCs (Ables et al., 2010; Basak et al., 2012;
Kawai et al., 2017). However, further investigation is needed to
conﬁrm this molecular similarity. In a recent paper, Sueda et al.
(2019) showed in mouse that the dual role of Notch signaling in
promoting, on the one hand quiescence and on the other hand
proliferation of progenitor cells, relies on the concentration of
the bHLH transcription factor Hes1 and whether its expression
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
11
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
is constant or oscillating (Sueda et al., 2019). They elegantly
demonstrated that in qNSCs the expression of Hes1 is kept
constantly at a high level (no oscillation), probably because of
the inhibition of its own periodical repression by a regulatory
feedback loop, involving members of the Id family (Boareto
et al., 2017; Harris and Guillemot, 2019; Sueda and Kageyama,
2020). In these cells, the expression of the proneural gene
Asc11 is constantly and fully repressed and therefore cells are
maintained in quiescence (Figure 6). In cells, where the Hes auto-
regulatory repression is not inhibited, Hes1 and Ascl1 oscillate
and the oscillation of Ascl1 promotes activation of NSCs and
their proliferation (Figure 6). Finally, in cells without Notch/Hes
signaling the expression of Ascl1 is not periodically repressed
and is maintained at a constant level, which causes these cells
to diﬀerentiate into neuroblasts (Figure 6). Thus, in mouse a
quiescent stem cell pool is maintained by the interaction of
Id, Hes, and Ascl1. It is possible that the same mechanisms
exist in zebraﬁsh, since key players are also expressed in the
ventricular zone of the telencephalon in adult zebraﬁsh (Notch,
Id, Ascl1, and Her). This hypothesis is supported by the work of
Rodriguez Viales et al. (2015) which showed that Id1 keeps NSCs
in quiescence during constitutive and regenerative neurogenesis
(Rodriguez Viales et al., 2015). In agreement, recombinant
zebraﬁsh Id1 preferentially interacts with Her4, 6, and 9 proteins.
Notch involvement was shown already in quiescent but also
proliferating progenitor cells via a Notch3/Her and Notch3/Hey-
axis, respectively (Than-Trong et al., 2018). Still the question
remains, whether an Id-Her-Ascl pathway would work in parallel
or in addition to the Notch/Her and Notch/Hey pathways in
zebraﬁsh. To decipher the role of Notch in controlling the
behavior of NSCs further investigation is needed, focusing on a
possible oscillatory expression of one or several of the zebraﬁsh
Her and Ascl proteins.
BONE MORPHOGENETIC PROTEIN
SIGNALING PATHWAY
Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are members of the
transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) family (Miyazono et al.,
2010). BMP family members are secreted signaling molecules that
act in a dose-dependent fashion to regulate many developmental
and adult homeostatic processes (Wang et al., 2014; Bier and
De Robertis, 2015). Secreted BMP proteins form homo- or
heterodimers, which are activated after proteolytic cleavage
by a serine protease (Cui et al., 1998). A balance between
active BMPs and their secreted antagonist molecules, such as
Noggin, Chordin, and Follistatin in part establishes the local
concentration and availability of BMP proteins. Mature BMP
dimers bind to a heterotetrameric complex of transmembrane
type I and type II serine/threonine receptors. This binding
triggers a cascade of protein phosphorylations, which eventually
lead to the phosphorylation of BMP-subfamily-speciﬁc Smad
proteins (Smad1/5/8) and their association forming a complex
with the Co-Smad Smad4, which is a common downstream
mediator of all TGFß subfamily members. The resulting
heteromeric Smad complex translocates to the nucleus, where
it interacts with cell/tissue speciﬁc cofactors and binds to the
regulatory sequences of downstream target genes to regulate their
transcriptional expression (Shi and Massague, 2003; Figure 7).
FIGURE 7 | BMP signaling pathway in mouse and zebraﬁsh. BMP proteins bind as dimers to a transmembrane receptor complex, formed by BMPR-I and BMPR-II.
Through this binding, which can be blocked by extracellular inhibitors like Noggin, a phosphorylation cascade is initiated leading to the phosphorylation of the
Smad1/5/8 proteins. The activated Smad1/5/8 forms a complex with Smad4 which interacts in the nucleus with speciﬁc co-factors to bind to the regulatory
sequences of downstream genes, such as id1. BMP, bone morphogenetic protein; BMPR, BMP receptor; id1, inhibitor of DNA binding 1.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
Inhibitor of diﬀerentiation (id) genes are among the best
characterized direct BMP target genes (Hollnagel et al., 1999).
Most id genes contain an evolutionary conserved BMP-
responsive element (BRE) including characteristic Smad and
Smad-cofactor binding motifs (Korchynskyi and ten Dijke, 2002;
Lopez-Rovira et al., 2002; Karaulanov et al., 2004; Nakahiro et al.,
2010; Javier et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2020).
In zebraﬁsh, the Id HLH protein family of transcriptional
regulators contains ﬁve members, whereas in mouse there are
only four (Ling et al., 2014; Diotel et al., 2015a). The Id
HLH proteins behave as repressor molecules by forming hetero-
dimeric protein complexes with bHLH transcription factors
which, as a consequence, cannot or only weakly bind to their
targeted DNA binding sites (Benezra et al., 1990; Ishii et al.,
2012). Id proteins have overlapping and distinct functions during
development and body homeostasis. They control the cellular
state, fate and migration of diﬀerent cell types (Ling et al., 2014).
THE BMP SIGNALING PATHWAY AND
ITS ROLE IN ADULT NEUROGENESIS
The involvement of BMP signaling in neurogenesis of adult
zebraﬁsh was mainly demonstrated through the investigation
of the regulation and function of its downstream target gene
id1. Zebraﬁsh id genes are expressed in the adult zebraﬁsh
brain in an overlapping manner (Diotel et al., 2015a). However,
only id1 expression is restricted to the ventricular zone of
the telencephalon where its expression is mainly found in
quiescent RGCs. Over-expression of id1 leads to quiescence of
NSCs, while morpholino-mediated id1 knockdown increases the
number of proliferating RGCs and favors neurogenesis. These
gain- and loss-of-function studies demonstrate the importance
of Id1 in maintaining the balance between dividing and resting
NSCs by promoting RGC quiescence (Rodriguez Viales et al.,
2015). Furthermore, an evolutionarily conserved cis-regulatory
module (CRM) of id1 was identiﬁed which mediates speciﬁc
expression of id1 in RGCs. Investigation of this CRM by
systematic deletion mapping, mutations of the binding sites
for BMP pathway members like Smad transcription factors, as
well as pharmacological inhibition of Smad phosphorylation and
transcriptome analysis, suggest a crucial role for BMP signaling
in controlling id1 expression in RGCs and their quiescence in the
zebraﬁsh adult brain (Zhang et al., 2020).
A very similar function of the id1 gene in controlling adult
NSC quiescence is described in the mouse SVZ, where this gene is
highly expressed in the quiescent B1 cells (adult NSCs) to control
their self-renewal capacity (Nam and Benezra, 2009). The role of
BMP signaling in mouse, in terms of NSCs and neurogenesis is
complex and subject to discussion. In the mouse adult SGZ, the
antagonistic interplay between BMP and its inhibitor Noggin, as
well as the diﬀerential expression of the BMP receptor Ia were
shown to be necessary for the maintenance of the quiescent state
of the adult NSCs (Lim et al., 2000; Mira et al., 2010; Bond
et al., 2014). Although, in mouse SVZ, in vitro and in vivo data
have shown that BMP signaling inhibits neurogenesis (Lim et al.,
2000; Choe et al., 2015), another work in which Smad4 was
conditionally inactivated contradicted these ﬁndings and argued
for a role of BMP signaling in neurogenesis rather than keeping
the stem cells quiescent (Colak et al., 2008). To reconciliate
these contradictory ﬁndings, Choe et al. (2015) proposed that
in the SVZ, BMPs work very early when the fate of the adult
NSCs is being established. According to this model, there is a
very subtle diﬀerence in BMP concentration that might decide
which cell fate the stem cell progenies will adopt. In the SVz,
a local BMP gradient is established by the BMP antagonist
Noggin, released by the ependymal cells of the telencephalic
ventricle. Thereby, NSCs close to the ventricular zone will be
exposed to a lower concentration of BMP while cells further away
will be in contact with a higher concentration of BMP. As a
consequence, cells which receive high BMP signaling will express
a high level of the BMP target gene id1 and will transform into
quiescent NSCs (type B). In contrast, when NSCs are exposed
to a lower level of BMP signaling, they will also express lower
levels of id1 and become activated to later either diﬀerentiate
into astrocytes, neuroblasts or oligodendrocytes (Choe et al.,
2015). In this second phase of cell diﬀerentiation the presence or
absence of BMP is again crucial to determine the ﬁnal cell fate
(Choe et al., 2015).
The mechanism by which id1 promotes adult neural stem
cell quiescence in zebraﬁsh and mouse can be explained through
the interaction of id1 with members of the Hes/Her protein
family (Figure 8). Indeed, GST pull-down experiments showed
that Id1 proteins interact with Her4.1, Her4.5, Her6, and Her9
proteins in vitro (Rodriguez Viales et al., 2015). Id1 can form a
dominant negative complex with Hes and Her, which behaves
like an antagonist of the Hes/Her dimer complexes and prevents
binding of the dimer to its target DNA. For instance, interaction
of Id1 with Hes in mouse interferes with the Hes mediated
negative auto-regulation of its own promoter, leading to a
high and constant expression of Hes in NSCs and therefore to
quiescence of the NSCs (Bai et al., 2007; Sueda and Kageyama,
2020; Figures 6, 8), suggesting an interaction of the BMP and
Notch pathways in the mouse telencephalon. Such a functional
FIGURE 8 | BMP and Notch signaling in quiescent RGCs/NSCs. Notch
signaling activates gene transcription of Hes in mouse and its zebraﬁsh
ortholog her. The Hes/Her proteins form a homodimer which can bind to its
own promoter and therefore block its own transcription in a negative feedback
loop. BMP signaling activates the transcription of its downstream effector id1.
The Id1 protein forms a complex with Hes/Her which inhibits the negative
regulatory feedback loop of Hes/Her. BRE, BMP responsive element.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
13
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
synergy between Id1 and Her (Hes) proteins has not been
demonstrated in the zebraﬁsh yet. However, BMP and Notch
signaling eﬀectors and targets are expressed in a similar pattern
in adult NSCs in both species. Furthermore, the observed
phenotypes in gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments
of the BMP and Notch signaling mediators (Id1, Hes, and Her)
are very similar in both species (Rodriguez Viales et al., 2015;
Boareto et al., 2017; Sueda and Kageyama, 2020). Therefore, it is
tempting to speculate that in zebraﬁsh, like in mouse, BMP and
Notch signaling are crucial in controlling adult neural stem cell
behavior. Many aspects of the molecular mechanisms controlling
adult neurogenesis appear to be conserved between mouse and
zebraﬁsh (Table 1).
MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF ADULT
ZEBRAFISH TELENCEPHALON
REGENERATION
Several traumatic brain injury and neurodegenerative disease
models have been developed in adult zebraﬁsh. Among them,
telencephalic stab wound injuries (Kroehne et al., 2011; März
et al., 2011; Baumgart et al., 2012; Kishimoto et al., 2012; Schmidt
et al., 2014) and Alzheimer’s disease models (Bhattarai et al., 2016,
2020; Cosacak et al., 2019) are certainly the best understood ones
at the cellular and molecular level.
In the stab injury paradigm, the adult zebraﬁsh telencephalon
is damaged by pushing a needle either through the skull into
the medial region of the telencephalon (März et al., 2011;
Kishimoto et al., 2012; Schmidt et al., 2014) or through the
nostrils to reach the parenchyme of the telencephalon (Kroehne
et al., 2011; Baumgart et al., 2012). With these methods only
one telencephalic hemisphere is injured while the contralateral
hemisphere is kept intact and can serve as a control. In the past
the stab wound injury, combined with transcriptomic techniques
and RNA in situ hybridization, identiﬁed several hundred
genes with a potential role in zebraﬁsh adult neurogenesis and
regeneration (Kizil et al., 2012b; Rodriguez Viales et al., 2015).
Upon
telencephalic
injury
the
expression
of
gata3,
a
zinc ﬁnger transcription factor is increased in RGCs and
promotes their proliferation and diﬀerentiation into neurons
(Kizil et al., 2012b). Consistently, inhibition of Gata3 activity
via morpholino injection into the brain ventricle leads to
a decrease in injury-induced proliferation of RGCs and to
blunted neurogenesis (Kizil et al., 2012b). This injury-mediated
induction of Gata3 and subsequent neurogenesis was shown
to be dependent on inﬂammation. In agreement with this
ﬁnding, cerebroventricular microinjection of Zymosan A, an
inﬂammatory compound from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, results
in (1) an increased expression of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines
tnfa (tumor necrosis factor-α), il1ß (interleukin 1ß) and il8
(interleukin 8) in the injured hemisphere; (2) an increased
proliferation of S100ß-positive RGCs; (3) induction of gata3
expression at the ventricular zone and (4) a higher number
of newborn HuC/D-positive neurons generated 21 days post
injection (dpi) (Kyritsis et al., 2012). Additionally, it was
shown that in response to inﬂammation the leukotriene C4
(LTC4) and its receptor CysLT1 were able to trigger the
activation of Gata3 in the injured telencephalon (Kyritsis
et al., 2012). These ﬁndings show that brain inﬂammation,
including the leukotriene signaling pathway is suﬃcient to
initiate regenerative mechanisms for reactive neurogenesis in the
zebraﬁsh telencephalon (Kyritsis et al., 2012).
The expression of the transcriptional regulator id1 is also up-
regulated in NSCs after injury (Rodriguez Viales et al., 2015).
However, in contrast to gata3, the induction of id1 expression
does not depend on inﬂammatory signals (Rodriguez Viales et al.,
2015) but on the BMP signaling pathway, which is necessary
to drive quiescence of NSCs (Zhang et al., 2020). Functional
analysis of id1 under regenerative conditions, suggested that Id1
counteracts injury-induced neurogenesis by promoting stem cell
quiescence, and thereby maintaining the neural stem cell pool by
avoiding its exhaustion (Rodriguez Viales et al., 2015).
After traumatic lesion, the expression of Notch receptors
and some of their downstream mediators are increased in
NSCs (Kishimoto et al., 2012; Rodriguez Viales et al., 2015).
The regulation of the Notch pathway, as well as the exact
role of Notch signaling during injury-induced neurogenesis are
not well understood and are subject of discussion. Because
notch1 expression is increased in proliferating progenitors after
telencephalic lesion, and inhibition of the Notch pathway in
injured animals leads to a reduction in the number of neural
progenitor cells (NPCs), Kishimoto et al. (2012) suggested
that Notch1 signaling is crucial for injury-induced proliferation
and neurogenesis in the zebraﬁsh telencephalon. However, no
direct evidence for a particular function of Notch signaling in
neurogenesis was provided. From what is known about the role
of Notch1 during constitutive neurogenesis [Notch 1 controls
progenitor proliferation in constitutive neurogenesis (Alunni
et al., 2013)], it is possible that the reduction in the number
of NPCs observed by Kishimoto et al. (2012) is simply due
to a reduction in proliferation upon Notch inhibition. Still, it
cannot be excluded that BMP and Notch signaling pathways
are induced simultaneously and interact with each other to
promote progenitor quiescence using the same mechanism as in
constitutive neurogenesis (Sueda et al., 2019).
In
summary,
a
lesion
of
the
zebraﬁsh
telencephalon
leads to an acute inﬂammatory response and injury-induced
neuroinﬂammation in zebraﬁsh acts as a positive neurogenic
signal,
which
activates
Gata3-mediated
neurogenesis.
The
activation of the BMP/Id1 signaling pathway is delayed compared
to gata3. In this manner, BMP/Id1 counteracts the neurogenic
program initiated by Gata3, through promoting neural stem
cell quiescence, therefore avoiding excessive production of new
neurons, which subsequently would deplete the stem cell pool.
In the zebraﬁsh telencephalon, regeneration is mediated by
the activation and combination of speciﬁc injury-dependent
(inﬂammatory) pathways and constitutive neurogenic pathways
(BMP/Notch). Thus, the regenerative program occurring in the
telencephalon of adult zebraﬁsh after injury involves several
signaling and molecular pathways, acting together in a complex
way. These signals and regenerative programs would allow the
genesis of new neurons, their migration, diﬀerentiation and
integration within the damaged telencephalic area.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
14
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
RESPONSES TO TRAUMATIC BRAIN
INJURY IN MOUSE
Although, the early phases in posttraumatic mouse and
zebraﬁsh models of injury-induced signaling pathways are
very similar, their functions seem to be aimed at totally
opposite directions. In mouse, the role of inﬂammation in
NSC activity is subject to debate. It can have both a positive
and a negative eﬀect on these cells which is context and
time dependent (Kizil et al., 2015). It can have an inhibitory
eﬀect on neurogenesis and brain regeneration through the
inhibition of NSC proliferation (Ekdahl et al., 2003; Monje
et al., 2003; Iosif et al., 2006), while simultaneously activating
the proliferation of quiescent glial cell populations such as
astrocytes and microglia (Buﬀo et al., 2010). However, the
pro-inﬂammatory cytokines and chemokines released during
brain injury in mammals can also favor neurogenesis causing
diﬀerent eﬀects on NSC proliferation, neuronal diﬀerentiation,
migration and survival (Carpentier and Palmer, 2009; Whitney
et al., 2009; Covacu and Brundin, 2017). An increase in
the number of glial cells impacts glia-neuron and glia-glia
interactions and consequently leads to axonal degeneration and
neuronal death (Bal-Price and Brown, 2001). Astrocytes are
critical actors in the post-traumatic response and are involved
in diﬀerent response mechanisms, among them the formation
of a glial scar. Furthermore, they secrete diﬀerent cytokines
or proteoglycans, which promote neurotoxicity and inhibit
axon regeneration, respectively (Yiu and He, 2006; Rao et al.,
2012; Anderson et al., 2016; Burda et al., 2016). However,
the formation of the glial scar can also be beneﬁcial as its
inhibition worsens CNS damage (Anderson et al., 2016). In
addition, neuroinﬂammation in mammals is a long- lasting
process and often the acute phase is followed by a chronic
phase which can foster many neurodegenerative diseases, such
as Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s (Amor et al., 2010; Glushakova
et al., 2014; Kinney et al., 2018). The role of inﬂammation is
consequently complex in the CNS of mammals and is spatio-
temporally dependent on the regenerative processes and the
types of damage (ischemia, trauma, and neurodegenerative
diseases, etc.).
Interestingly, BMP and Notch signaling are also induced after
injury in mouse, but in contrast to zebraﬁsh they induce glial
cell fate (Bohrer et al., 2015; Pous et al., 2020). Accordingly,
in the injured mouse brain, the progeny of SVZ NSCs will
not migrate to the OB to diﬀerentiate into neurons, but
instead these cells are recruited to the injury site where they
diﬀerentiate into glia and participate in the formation of a
glial scar, which will subsequently repress neural regeneration
(Goings et al., 2004; Wang et al., 2018). It was shown in
mouse that upon traumatic brain injury and consequent vascular
rupture, the coagulation factor Fibrinogen is released into
the SVZ where it activates BMP signaling and increases the
expression of its direct downstream mediator Id3 (Pous et al.,
2020). Injury-induced up-regulation of Id3 by BMP2 in the
SVZ promotes astrogenesis over neurogenesis by positively
regulating the expression of astrocyte speciﬁc genes such as
GFAP, GLAST, and Aldh1l1. The transcriptional regulator Id3
forms heterodimers with the bHLH transcription factor E47
and thereby inhibits the binding of E47 to the regulatory
sequence of astrocyte speciﬁc genes like GFAP. Through this
mechanism, E47 mediated repression of astrocyte speciﬁc genes is
abolished and the NSCs preferentially diﬀerentiate into astrocytes
(Bohrer et al., 2015).
Likewise,
injury-induced
Notch
expression
promotes
astrogenesis in the adult mouse SVZ (Tatsumi et al., 2010;
Benner et al., 2013). Here, activation of the Notch pathway in the
injured brain was shown to be up-regulated by thrombospondin
4 (Thbs4), a secreted homopentameric glycoprotein produced
by a sub-population of SVZ astrocytes that binds to the Notch1
receptor (Adams and Lawler, 2011; Benner et al., 2013).
In summary, although traumatic brain injury in the mouse
model activates a combination of injury-induced inﬂammation
molecules and signaling pathways, implicated in constitutive
neurogenesis, such as BMP and Notch which is similar to adult
zebraﬁsh, their activation in mammals favors astrogenesis over
neurogenesis. Understanding why in diﬀerent vertebrate species,
molecular pathways that are initiated after brain injury have
diﬀerent functions and opposite outputs on neurogenesis and
regeneration, will be a key step to selectively activate the necessary
regenerative program at the right time to promote regeneration
without scar formation.
NEURAL REGENERATION IN
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE MODEL IN
ZEBRAFISH
Alzheimer’s disease is a neurodegenerative disorder in which
neurons are progressively dismounted and die. Neural death
and synaptic impairment are partially due to deposition
and accumulation of Amyloid beta (Aβ) peptides around
and in neurons (Hardy and Higgins, 1992; Gouras et al.,
2000; Bayer and Wirths, 2010). Furthermore, neural death
is generally accompanied by a reduction in neurogenesis,
which progressively results in impaired memory, thinking, and
confusion (Moreno-Jimenez et al., 2019).
To investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in
zebraﬁsh brain regeneration and NSC plasticity after loss
of neurons, Kizil and colleagues established an induced
Alzheimer’s disease model by injection of cell- penetrating
Amyloid-β42 (Aβ42) into the ventricle of the adult zebraﬁsh
telencephalon (Bhattarai et al., 2016). Interestingly, in its
early phase Aβ42 injection and subsequent aggregation in
neurons led to a neurodegenerative phenotype, similar to
what is observed in human Alzheimer’s patients. The injected
ﬁsh showed Aβ42 deposition and accumulation, cell death,
inﬂammation, synaptic degeneration and learning impairment.
In a later phase, Aβ42 injected ﬁsh exhibited increased
NSC proliferation and neurogenesis. Transcriptome analysis
of the injected ﬁsh revealed an up-regulation of the cytokine
interleukin-4 (IL4) and an increase in the phosphorylation of
its downstream eﬀector- STAT6, suggesting that in the zebraﬁsh
model of induced Alzheimer’s pathology, the IL4/STAT6
regeneration program is necessary for RGC proliferation
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
15
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
and their subsequent diﬀerentiation into functional neurons
(Bhattarai et al., 2016). Further investigation using a single cell
sequencing approach demonstrated that IL4/STAT6-mediated
neuroregeneration involves inhibition of the anti-proliferative
eﬀect by serotonin. The latter is an inhibitor of Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF), which promotes NSC proliferation
and diﬀerentiation (Bhattarai et al., 2020).
These ﬁndings, together with earlier results regarding the
role of LTC4/Gata3 in brain regeneration after traumatic injury,
indicate that the zebraﬁsh responds to diﬀerent types of brain
damage with diﬀerent neuroregenerative mechanisms.
However, none of these regenerative programs in zebraﬁsh
have been identiﬁed in mammals, so far. No up-regulation of
Gata3 after injury could be observed in the rodent SVZ (Yoshiya
et al., 2003; Chang et al., 2016) or in primary human astrocytes
in 3D culture (Celikkaya et al., 2019). Accordingly, in the DG
of the mouse Alzheimer’s disease model, the expression of the
interleukin-4 receptor (IL4R) could not be induced in astrocytes
(Mashkaryan et al., 2020).
It thus remains to be seen whether these are genuine
diﬀerences that could account for the limitations of the
mammalian brain to repair neurodegenerative lesions of the
CNS eﬀectively.
Interestingly, when human astroglia cells expressing IL4R in
culture were activated by the ligand IL4, they showed active
Type 2 IL4 signaling and enhanced proliferation, neurogenesis
and neuronal network formation under Alzheimer’s disease
conditions, which is reminiscent of the zebraﬁsh Alzheimer’s
model (Papadimitriou et al., 2018). However, other data show
that neurogenesis during regeneration in mammals cannot
simply be induced by exogenous activation of zebraﬁsh
regenerative programs. For example, over-expression of Gata3,
the immediate early player in the traumatic injury response
in zebraﬁsh, increases the neurogenic potential of primary
human astrocytes in 3D culture without leading to neurogenesis
(Celikkaya et al., 2019).
The diﬀerence between zebraﬁsh and mammals, with respect
to the regenerative ability might be explained by (1) the incapacity
of the mammalian nervous system to activate programs which
lead to the coordinated proliferation of NSCs in response to
traumatic and neurodegenerative damage of the CNS, (2) the
diﬀerence in transcriptional and signaling networks in NSCs
between zebraﬁsh and mammals, (3) the diﬀerence in the nature
of prospective NSCs in these distinct models.
CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
Recent progress demonstrated many similarities at the cellular
and molecular level between mice and zebraﬁsh regarding adult
neurogenesis. Both species employ the same signaling systems
(Notch, BMP) and related downstream mediators (Id1, Hes/Her)
to control the proliferation and diﬀerentiation of adult NSCs
(Table 1). The activity of the individual pathways but possibly
also their synergy appears to determine quiescence, proliferation
and diﬀerentiation of RGCs in both mammals and zebraﬁsh.
Strong activity, coupled with direct interaction between BMP and
Notch downstream mediators, Id and Hes/Her proteins, promote
quiescence. Reduction in activity strength or absence of one or
both signals leads to NSC proliferation or neural diﬀerentiation.
A major diﬀerence appears to be the scale at which adult
neurogenesis occurs in the two organisms. In the adult zebraﬁsh
brain, almost all sub-domains of the brain are competent to
generate new neurons, while the neurogenic potential is largely
restricted to two domains in the mouse forebrain (SVZ and
SGZ). Furthermore, in zebraﬁsh, the higher proliferative capacity
is correlated with the presence of RGCs during adult stages.
These cells span, with their long processes, the entire distance
through the telencephalic parenchyme from the ventricular to
the pial surface, similar to the RGCs present in the nascent
mouse telencephalon in prenatal stages. Adult zebraﬁsh RGCs,
as well as the NSCs in the adult mouse brain are related to
astroglia and express highly similar astroglial markers. In the
mouse, the prenatal RGCs are transformed largely into astrocytes,
a cell type that is not present in the zebraﬁsh brain. Taken
together, it appears that the adult zebraﬁsh telencephalon with
its less complex structure has retained embryonic structural and
functional features permitting neuronal production at large scale
in the mature brain. In mammals, RGCs have evolved into novel
cellular components (astrocytes) having thereby lost their ability
to generate neurons. The NSCs in the remaining stem cell niches
of the murine telencephalon retained the astroglial characteristics
of the RGCs but have lost their parenchyme-spanning features,
possibly as an adaption to the structurally much more complex
brain of mammals.
Another major diﬀerence between mammals and zebraﬁsh
is the response to brain tissue damage and concomitantly the
ability to repair damaged nervous tissue. Although in zebraﬁsh,
NSCs rapidly increase their production of new neurons in
response to both traumatic and neurodegenerative nervous tissue
damage, the predominantly newly produced cell type in the
damaged mammalian brain is astrocytes. Furthermore, while
in zebraﬁsh newborn neurons are able to integrate eﬃciently
into the damaged tissue without scaring, in mammals scar
formation prevents functional restoration of the nervous tissue.
Thus, the overproduction of astrocytes in response to injury and
the resulting gliosis with permanent scaring are crucial cellular
diﬀerences between zebraﬁsh and mammals.
Interestingly, distinct pathways trigger tissue repair in
response to traumatic injury and neurodegeneration in zebraﬁsh,
suggesting parallel pathways to deal with diﬀerent types of
tissue damage. Traumatic brain injury relies on the LTC4/Gata3
program, while the induced neurodegenerative Alzheimer’s
disease depends on the IL4/STAT6 route. These pathways appear
to serve as triggers for increased neurogenesis which utilizes
mechanisms from constitutive neurogenesis (BMP and Notch) to
manage and maintain stem cell pools. In contrast to zebraﬁsh, the
inﬂammatory signals in mammals lead to activation of astrocytes
and ultimately gliosis. Furthermore, the IL4/STAT6 pathway has
so far not been successfully used in vivo in mammalian systems
to trigger tissue regeneration (Mashkaryan et al., 2020). For
therapies, it is thus essential to ﬁnd ways to reprogram astrocytes
to behave like their ancestral RGCs, in order to produce mainly
neurons that integrate into the functional neural circuit.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
16
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
In
conclusion,
zebraﬁsh
and
mouse
constitutive
and
regenerative
neurogenesis
display
some
common
features
considering the type and the nature of NSCs as well as
the signaling pathways controlling their activity. A better
understanding of the molecular cues and mechanisms sustaining
the strong neurogenic capability of NSCs in zebraﬁsh would help
to develop new therapies to combat the debilitating consequences
of brain damage.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
SR and ND conceived the idea of this review. SR, ND, US and
LL wrote the manuscript together. All authors contributed to the
article and approved the submitted version.
FUNDING
We are grateful for support by the EU IP ZF-Health (Grant
number: FP7-242048), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(GRK2039), the Programme BioInterfaces in Technology and
Medicine of the Helmholtz Foundation, and the European
Union’s Horizon 3952020 Research and Innovation Programme
under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No.
643062 (ZENCODE-ITN).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Volker Middel for discussion and proofreading
of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
Ables, J. L., Decarolis, N. A., Johnson, M. A., Rivera, P. D., Gao, Z., Cooper,
D. C., et al. (2010). Notch1 is required for maintenance of the reservoir of adult
hippocampal stem cells. J. Neurosci. 30, 10484–10492. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.
4721-09.2010
Adams, J. C., and Lawler, J. (2011). The thrombospondins. Cold Spring Harb.
Perspect. Biol. 3:a009712.
Adolf, B., Chapouton, P., Lam, C. S., Topp, S., Tannhauser, B., Strahle, U., et al.
(2006). Conserved and acquired features of adult neurogenesis in the zebraﬁsh
telencephalon. Dev. Biol. 295, 278–293. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.023
Altman, J. (1963). Autoradiographic investigation of cell proliferation in the brains
of rats and cats. Anat. Rec. 145, 573–591. doi: 10.1002/ar.1091450409
Altman, J. (1969). Autoradiographic and histological studies of postnatal
neurogenesis. IV. Cell proliferation and migration in the anterior forebrain,
with special reference to persisting neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb. J. Comp.
Neurol. 137, 433–457. doi: 10.1002/cne.901370404
Altman, J., and Das, G. D. (1965). Autoradiographic and histological evidence of
postnatal hippocampal neurogenesis in rats. J. Comp. Neurol. 124, 319–335.
doi: 10.1002/cne.901240303
Alunni, A., and Bally-Cuif, L. (2016). A comparative view of regenerative
neurogenesis in vertebrates. Development 143, 741–753.
doi: 10.1242/dev.
122796
Alunni, A., Krecsmarik, M., Bosco, A., Galant, S., Pan, L., Moens, C. B., et al. (2013).
Notch3 signaling gates cell cycle entry and limits neural stem cell ampliﬁcation
in the adult pallium. Development 140, 3335–3347. doi: 10.1242/dev.095018
Amor, S., Puentes, F., Baker, D., and van der Valk, P. (2010). Inﬂammation in
neurodegenerative diseases. Immunology 129, 154–169.
Anderson, M. A., Burda, J. E., Ren, Y., Ao, Y., O’Shea, T. M., Kawaguchi, R., et al.
(2016). Astrocyte scar formation aids central nervous system axon regeneration.
Nature 532, 195–200. doi: 10.1038/nature17623
Andersson, E. R., Sandberg, R., and Lendahl, U. (2011). Notch signaling: simplicity
in design, versatility in function. Development 138, 3593–3612. doi: 10.1242/
dev.063610
Artavanis-Tsakonas, S., Matsuno, K., and Fortini, M. E. (1995). Notch signaling.
Science 268, 225–232.
Artavanis-Tsakonas, S., Rand, M. D., and Lake, R. J. (1999). Notch signaling:
cell fate control and signal integration in development. Science 284, 770–776.
doi: 10.1126/science.284.5415.770
Ayari, B., El Hachimi, K. H., Yanicostas, C., Landoulsi, A., and Soussi-Yanicostas,
N. (2010). Prokineticin 2 expression is associated with neural repair of injured
adult zebraﬁsh telencephalon. J. Neurotrauma 27, 959–972. doi: 10.1089/neu.
2009.0972
Bai, G., Sheng, N., Xie, Z., Bian, W., Yokota, Y., Benezra, R., et al. (2007).
Id sustains Hes1 expression to inhibit precocious neurogenesis by releasing
negative autoregulation of Hes1. Dev. Cell 13, 283–297. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.
2007.05.014
Bally-Cuif, L., and Hammerschmidt, M. (2003). Induction and patterning of
neuronal development, and its connection to cell cycle control. Curr. Opin.
Neurobiol. 13, 16–25. doi: 10.1016/s0959-4388(03)00015-1
Bal-Price, A., and Brown, G. C. (2001). Inﬂammatory neurodegeneration mediated
by nitric oxide from activated glia-inhibiting neuronal respiration, causing
glutamate release and excitotoxicity. J. Neurosci. 21, 6480–6491. doi: 10.1523/
jneurosci.21-17-06480.2001
Barbosa, J. S., Sanchez-Gonzalez, R., Di Giaimo, R., Baumgart, E. V., Theis, F. J.,
Gotz, M., et al. (2015). Neurodevelopment. Live imaging of adult neural stem
cell behavior in the intact and injured zebraﬁsh brain. Science 348, 789–793.
doi: 10.1126/science.aaa2729
Basak, O., Giachino, C., Fiorini, E., Macdonald, H. R., and Taylor, V. (2012).
Neurogenic subventricular zone stem/progenitor cells are Notch1-dependent
in their active but not quiescent state. J. Neurosci. 32, 5654–5666. doi: 10.1523/
jneurosci.0455-12.2012
Baumgart, E. V., Barbosa, J. S., Bally-Cuif, L., Gotz, M., and Ninkovic, J. (2012).
Stab wound injury of the zebraﬁsh telencephalon: a model for comparative
analysis of reactive gliosis. Glia 60, 343–357. doi: 10.1002/glia.22269
Bayer, T. A., and Wirths, O. (2010). Intracellular accumulation of amyloid-Beta
- a predictor for synaptic dysfunction and neuron loss in Alzheimer’s disease.
Front. Aging Neurosci. 2:8. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2010.00008
Benezra, R., Davis, R. L., Lockshon, D., Turner, D. L., and Weintraub, H. (1990).
The protein Id: a negative regulator of helix-loop-helix DNA binding proteins.
Cell 61, 49–59. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(90)90214-y
Benner, E. J., Luciano, D., Jo, R., Abdi, K., Paez-Gonzalez, P., Sheng, H., et al. (2013).
Protective astrogenesis from the SVZ niche after injury is controlled by Notch
modulator Thbs4. Nature 497, 369–373. doi: 10.1038/nature12069
Bertrand, N., Castro, D. S., and Guillemot, F. (2002). Proneural genes and the
speciﬁcation of neural cell types. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 517–530. doi: 10.1038/
nrn874
Bhattarai, P., Cosacak, M. I., Mashkaryan, V., Demir, S., Popova, S. D.,
Govindarajan, N., et al. (2020). Neuron-glia interaction through Serotonin-
BDNF-NGFR axis enables regenerative neurogenesis in Alzheimer’s model
of adult zebraﬁsh brain. PLoS Biol. 18:e3000585. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.
3000585
Bhattarai, P., Thomas, A. K., Cosacak, M. I., Papadimitriou, C., Mashkaryan,
V., Froc, C., et al. (2016). IL4/STAT6 signaling activates neural stem cell
proliferation and neurogenesis upon Amyloid-beta42 aggregation in adult
Zebraﬁsh Brain. Cell Rep. 17, 941–948. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.09.075
Bier, E., and De Robertis, E. M. (2015). Embryo development. BMP gradients:
a paradigm for morphogen-mediated developmental patterning. Science
348:aaa5838. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa5838
Boareto, M., Iber, D., and Taylor, V. (2017). Diﬀerential interactions between Notch
and ID factors control neurogenesis by modulating Hes factor autoregulation.
Development 144, 3465–3474. doi: 10.1242/dev.152520
Bohrer, C., Pfurr, S., Mammadzada, K., Schildge, S., Plappert, L., Hils, M., et al.
(2015). The balance of Id3 and E47 determines neural stem/precursor cell
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
17
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
diﬀerentiation into astrocytes. Embo J. 34, 2804–2819.
doi: 10.15252/embj.
201591118
Boldrini, M., Fulmore, C. A., Tartt, A. N., Simeon, L. R., Pavlova, I., Poposka, V.,
et al. (2018). Human hippocampal neurogenesis persists throughout aging. Cell
Stem Cell 22, 589–599.e5.
Bond, A. M., Peng, C. Y., Meyers, E. A., McGuire, T., Ewaleifoh, O., and
Kessler, J. A. (2014). BMP signaling regulates the tempo of adult hippocampal
progenitor maturation at multiple stages of the lineage. Stem Cells 32, 2201–
2214. doi: 10.1002/stem.1688
Broglio, C., Gomez, A., Duran, E., Ocana, F. M., Jimenez-Moya, F., Rodriguez,
F., et al. (2005). Hallmarks of a common forebrain vertebrate plan: specialized
pallial areas for spatial, temporal and emotional memory in actinopterygian
ﬁsh. Brain Res. Bull. 66, 277–281. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2005.03.021
Buﬀo, A., Rolando, C., and Ceruti, S. (2010). Astrocytes in the damaged brain:
molecular and cellular insights into their reactive response and healing
potential. Biochem. Pharmacol. 79, 77–89. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.09.014
Burda, J. E., Bernstein, A. M., and Sofroniew, M. V. (2016). Astrocyte roles
in traumatic brain injury. Exp. Neurol. 275(Pt 3), 305–315.
doi: 10.1016/j.
expneurol.2015.03.020
Byrd, C. A., and Brunjes, P. C. (2001). Neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb of adult
zebraﬁsh. Neuroscience 105, 793–801. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(01)00215-9
Carpentier, P. A., and Palmer, T. D. (2009). Immune inﬂuence on adult neural stem
cell regulation and function. Neuron 64, 79–92. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.
08.038
Castro, D. S., Martynoga, B., Parras, C., Ramesh, V., Pacary, E., Johnston, C.,
et al. (2011). A novel function of the proneural factor Ascl1 in progenitor
proliferation identiﬁed by genome-wide characterization of its targets. Genes
Dev. 25, 930–945. doi: 10.1101/gad.627811
Cau, E., and Blader, P. (2009). Notch activity in the nervous system: to switch or
not switch? Neural Dev. 4:36. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-4-36
Cavaliere, F., Benito-Munoz, M., and Matute, C. (2016). Organotypic cultures
as a model to study adult neurogenesis in CNS disorders. Stem Cells Int.
2016:3540568.
Celikkaya, H., Cosacak, M. I., Papadimitriou, C., Popova, S., Bhattarai, P.,
Biswas, S. N., et al. (2019). GATA3 promotes the neural progenitor state but
not neurogenesis in 3D traumatic injury model of primary human cortical
astrocytes. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 13:23. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00023
Chang, E. H., Adorjan, I., Mundim, M. V., Sun, B., Dizon, M. L., and Szele,
F. G. (2016). Traumatic brain injury activation of the adult subventricular zone
neurogenic niche. Front. Neurosci. 10:332. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00332
Chapouton, P., Skupien, P., Hesl, B., Coolen, M., Moore, J. C., Madelaine, R.,
et al. (2010). Notch activity levels control the balance between quiescence and
recruitment of adult neural stem cells. J. Neurosci. 30, 7961–7974. doi: 10.1523/
jneurosci.6170-09.2010
Chapouton, P., Webb, K. J., Stigloher, C., Alunni, A., Adolf, B., Hesl, B., et al.
(2011). Expression of hairy/enhancer of split genes in neural progenitors and
neurogenesis domains of the adult zebraﬁsh brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 519,
1748–1769. doi: 10.1002/cne.22599
Choe, Y., Pleasure, S. J., and Mira, H. (2015). Control of adult neurogenesis by
short-range morphogenic-signaling molecules. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.
8:a018887. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a018887
Colak, D., Mori, T., Brill, M. S., Pfeifer, A., Falk, S., Deng, C., et al. (2008). Adult
neurogenesis requires Smad4-mediated bone morphogenic protein signaling in
stem cells. J. Neurosci. 28, 434–446. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.4374-07.2008
Cosacak, M. I., Bhattarai, P., Reinhardt, S., Petzold, A., Dahl, A., Zhang, Y., et al.
(2019). Single-cell transcriptomics analyses of neural stem cell heterogeneity
and contextual plasticity in a zebraﬁsh brain model of amyloid toxicity. Cell
Rep. 27, 1307–1318.e3.
Costa, M. R., Ortega, F., Brill, M. S., Beckervordersandforth, R., Petrone, C.,
Schroeder, T., et al. (2011). Continuous live imaging of adult neural stem cell
division and lineage progression in vitro. Development 138, 1057–1068. doi:
10.1242/dev.061663
Covacu, R., and Brundin, L. (2017). Eﬀects of neuroinﬂammation on neural stem
cells. Neuroscientist 23, 27–39. doi: 10.1177/1073858415616559
Cui, Y., Jean, F., Thomas, G., and Christian, J. L. (1998). BMP-4 is proteolytically
activated by furin and/or PC6 during vertebrate embryonic development. Embo
J. 17, 4735–4743. doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.16.4735
Davis, R. L., and Turner, D. L. (2001). Vertebrate hairy and enhancer of split
related proteins: transcriptional repressors regulating cellular diﬀerentiation
and embryonic patterning. Oncogene 20, 8342–8357.
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.
1205094
de Oliveira-Carlos, V., Ganz, J., Hans, S., Kaslin, J., and Brand, M. (2013). Notch
receptor expression in neurogenic regions of the adult zebraﬁsh brain. PLoS One
8:e73384. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073384
Dennis, C. V., Suh, L. S., Rodriguez, M. L., Kril, J. J., and Sutherland, G. T.
(2016). Human adult neurogenesis across the ages: an immunohistochemical
study. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 42, 621–638.
doi: 10.1111/nan.
12337
Devaraju, K., Barnabe-Heider, F., Kokaia, Z., and Lindvall, O. (2013). FoxJ1-
expressing cells contribute to neurogenesis in forebrain of adult rats: evidence
from in vivo electroporation combined with piggyBac transposon. Exp. Cell Res.
319, 2790–2800. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.08.028
Dimou, L., and Gotz, M. (2014). Glial cells as progenitors and stem cells: new
roles in the healthy and diseased brain. Physiol. Rev. 94, 709–737. doi: 10.1152/
physrev.00036.2013
Diotel, N., Beil, T., Strahle, U., and Rastegar, S. (2015a). Diﬀerential expression of id
genes and their potential regulator znf238 in zebraﬁsh adult neural progenitor
cells and neurons suggests distinct functions in adult neurogenesis. Gene Expr.
Patterns 19, 1–13. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2015.05.004
Diotel, N., Rodriguez Viales, R., Armant, O., Marz, M., Ferg, M., Rastegar, S., et al.
(2015b). Comprehensive expression map of transcription regulators in the adult
zebraﬁsh telencephalon reveals distinct neurogenic niches. J. Comp. Neurol.
523, 1202–1221. doi: 10.1002/cne.23733
Diotel, N., Charlier, T. D., Lefebvre d’Hellencourt, C., Couret, D., Trudeau, V. L.,
Nicolau, J. C., et al. (2018). Steroid transport, local synthesis, and signaling
within the brain: roles in neurogenesis, neuroprotection, and sexual behaviors.
Front. Neurosci. 12:84. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00084
Diotel, N., Do Rego, J. L., Anglade, I., Vaillant, C., Pellegrini, E., Gueguen, M. M.,
et al. (2011). Activity and expression of steroidogenic enzymes in the brain
of adult zebraﬁsh. Eur. J. Neurosci. 34, 45–56. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.
07731.x
Diotel, N., Le Page, Y., Mouriec, K., Tong, S. K., Pellegrini, E., Vaillant, C., et al.
(2010a). Aromatase in the brain of teleost ﬁsh: expression, regulation and
putative functions. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 31:172–192. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.
2010.01.003
Diotel, N., Vaillant, C., Gueguen, M. M., Mironov, S., Anglade, I., Servili, A., et al.
(2010b). Cxcr4 and Cxcl12 expression in radial glial cells of the brain of adult
zebraﬁsh. J. Comp. Neurol. 518, 4855–4876. doi: 10.1002/cne.22492
Diotel, N., Vaillant, C., Gabbero, C., Mironov, S., Fostier, A., Gueguen, M. M., et al.
(2013). Eﬀects of estradiol in adult neurogenesis and brain repair in zebraﬁsh.
Horm. Behav. 63, 193–207. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.04.003
Diotel, N., Vaillant, C., Kah, O., and Pellegrini, E. (2016). Mapping of brain lipid
binding protein (Blbp) in the brain of adult zebraﬁsh, co-expression with
aromatase B and links with proliferation. Gene Expr. Patterns 20, 42–54. doi:
10.1016/j.gep.2015.11.003
Doetsch, F., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (1997). Cellular
composition and three-dimensional organization of the subventricular
germinal zone in the adult mammalian brain. J. Neurosci. 17, 5046–5061. doi:
10.1523/jneurosci.17-13-05046.1997
Dominguez, M. H., Ayoub, A. E., and Rakic, P. (2013). POU-III transcription
factors (Brn1, Brn2, and Oct6) inﬂuence neurogenesis, molecular identity, and
migratory destination of upper-layer cells of the cerebral cortex. Cereb. Cortex
23, 2632–2643. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs252
Dray, N., Bedu, S., Vuillemin, N., Alunni, A., Coolen, M., Krecsmarik, M., et al.
(2015). Large-scale live imaging of adult neural stem cells in their endogenous
niche. Development 142, 3592–3600. doi: 10.1242/dev.123018
Edelmann, K., Glashauser, L., Sprungala, S., Hesl, B., Fritschle, M., Ninkovic, J.,
et al. (2013). Increased radial glia quiescence, decreased reactivation upon
injury and unaltered neuroblast behavior underlie decreased neurogenesis in
the aging zebraﬁsh telencephalon. J. Comp. Neurol. 521, 3099–3115. doi: 10.
1002/cne.23347
Ekdahl, C. T., Claasen, J. H., Bonde, S., Kokaia, Z., and Lindvall, O. (2003).
Inﬂammation is detrimental for neurogenesis in adult brain. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 100, 13632–13637.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
18
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
Fares, J., Bou Diab, Z., Nabha, S., and Fares, Y. (2019). Neurogenesis in the adult
hippocampus: history, regulation, and prospective roles. Int. J. Neurosci. 129,
598–611. doi: 10.1080/00207454.2018.1545771
Fischer, A., and Gessler, M. (2007). Delta-Notch–and then? Protein interactions
and proposed modes of repression by Hes and Hey bHLH factors. Nucleic Acids
Res. 35, 4583–4596. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm477
Folgueira, M., Bayley, P., Navratilova, P., Becker, T. S., Wilson, S. W., and Clarke,
J. D. (2012). Morphogenesis underlying the development of the everted teleost
telencephalon. Neural Dev. 7:32. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-7-32
Gaiano, N., Nye, J. S., and Fishell, G. (2000). Radial glial identity is promoted by
Notch1 signaling in the murine forebrain. Neuron 26, 395–404. doi: 10.1016/
s0896-6273(00)81172-1
Ganz, J., and Brand, M. (2016). Adult neurogenesis in ﬁsh. Cold Spring Harb.
Perspect. Biol. 8:a019018.
Ganz, J., Kaslin, J., Hochmann, S., Freudenreich, D., and Brand, M. (2010).
Heterogeneity and Fgf dependence of adult neural progenitors in the zebraﬁsh
telencephalon. Glia 58, 1345–1363. doi: 10.1002/glia.21012
Ganz, J., Kroehne, V., Freudenreich, D., Machate, A., Geﬀarth, M., Braasch, I., et al.
(2014). Subdivisions of the adult zebraﬁsh pallium based on molecular marker
analysis. F1000Res 3:308. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.5595.1
Garcia-Segura, L. M., Wozniak, A., Azcoitia, I., Rodriguez, J. R., Hutchison, R. E.,
and Hutchison, J. B. (1999). Aromatase expression by astrocytes after brain
injury: implications for local estrogen formation in brain repair. Neuroscience
89, 567–578. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(98)00340-6
Gebara, E., Bonaguidi, M. A., Beckervordersandforth, R., Sultan, S., Udry, F.,
Gijs, P. J., et al. (2016). Heterogeneity of radial glia-like cells in the adult
hippocampus. Stem Cells 34, 997–1010. doi: 10.1002/stem.2266
Glushakova, O. Y., Johnson, D., and Hayes, R. L. (2014). Delayed increases
in microvascular pathology after experimental traumatic brain injury are
associated with prolonged inﬂammation, blood-brain barrier disruption, and
progressive white matter damage. J. Neurotrauma 31, 1180–1193. doi: 10.1089/
neu.2013.3080
Goings, G. E., Sahni, V., and Szele, F. G. (2004). Migration patterns of
subventricular zone cells in adult mice change after cerebral cortex injury. Brain
Res. 996, 213–226. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2003.10.034
Gouras, G. K., Tsai, J., Naslund, J., Vincent, B., Edgar, M., Checler, F., et al.
(2000). Intraneuronal Abeta42 accumulation in human brain. Am. J. Pathol.
156, 15–20.
Grandel, H., and Brand, M. (2013). Comparative aspects of adult neural stem cell
activity in vertebrates. Dev. Genes Evol. 223, 131–147. doi: 10.1007/s00427-012-
0425-5
Grandel, H., Kaslin, J., Ganz, J., Wenzel, I., and Brand, M. (2006). Neural stem cells
and neurogenesis in the adult zebraﬁsh brain: origin, proliferation dynamics,
migration and cell fate. Dev. Biol. 295, 263–277.
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.
03.040
Grupp, L., Wolburg, H., and Mack, A. F. (2010). Astroglial structures in the
zebraﬁsh brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 518, 4277–4287. doi: 10.1002/cne.22481
Hardy, J. A., and Higgins, G. A. (1992). Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade
hypothesis. Science 256, 184–185.
Harima, Y., Imayoshi, I., Shimojo, H., Kobayashi, T., and Kageyama, R. (2014).
The roles and mechanism of ultradian oscillatory expression of the mouse Hes
genes. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 34, 85–90. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.04.038
Harris, L., and Guillemot, F. (2019). HES1, two programs: promoting the
quiescence and proliferation of adult neural stem cells. Genes Dev. 33, 479–481.
doi: 10.1101/gad.325761.119
Henry, R. A., Hughes, S. M., and Connor, B. (2007). AAV-mediated delivery
of BDNF augments neurogenesis in the normal and quinolinic acid-lesioned
adult rat brain. Eur. J. Neurosci. 25, 3513–3525. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2007.
05625.x
Hirata, H., Yoshiura, S., Ohtsuka, T., Bessho, Y., Harada, T., Yoshikawa, K., et al.
(2002). Oscillatory expression of the bHLH factor Hes1 regulated by a negative
feedback loop. Science 298, 840–843. doi: 10.1126/science.1074560
Ho, S. Y., Ling, T. Y., Lin, H. Y., Liou, J. T., Liu, F. C., Chen, I. C., et al.
(2017). SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling maintains stemness signature in mouse neural
stem/progenitor cells. Stem Cells Int. 2017, 2493752.
Hollnagel, A., Oehlmann, V., Heymer, J., Ruther, U., and Nordheim, A. (1999). Id
genes are direct targets of bone morphogenetic protein induction in embryonic
stem cells. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 19838–19845. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.28.19838
Horgusluoglu, E., Nudelman, K., Nho, K., and Saykin, A. J. (2017). Adult
neurogenesis and neurodegenerative diseases: a systems biology perspective.
Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 174, 93–112. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.
32429
Imayoshi, I., Isomura, A., Harima, Y., Kawaguchi, K., Kori, H., Miyachi, H.,
et al. (2013). Oscillatory control of factors determining multipotency and fate
in mouse neural progenitors. Science 342, 1203–1208. doi: 10.1126/science.
1242366
Imayoshi, I., and Kageyama, R. (2014a). bHLH factors in self-renewal,
multipotency, and fate choice of neural progenitor cells. Neuron 82, 9–23.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.03.018
Imayoshi, I., and Kageyama, R. (2014b). Oscillatory control of bHLH factors in
neural progenitors. Trends Neurosci. 37, 531–538.
doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2014.
07.006
Iosif, R. E., Ekdahl, C. T., Ahlenius, H., Pronk, C. J., Bonde, S., Kokaia, Z., et al.
(2006). Tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 is a negative regulator of progenitor
proliferation in adult hippocampal neurogenesis. J. Neurosci. 26, 9703–9712.
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.2723-06.2006
Ishii, R., Isogaya, K., Seto, A., Koinuma, D., Watanabe, Y., Arisaka, F., et al. (2012).
Structure of a dominant-negative helix-loop-helix transcriptional regulator
suggests mechanisms of autoinhibition. Embo J. 31, 2541–2552. doi: 10.1038/
emboj.2012.77
Ito, Y., Tanaka, H., Okamoto, H., and Ohshima, T. (2010). Characterization of
neural stem cells and their progeny in the adult zebraﬁsh optic tectum. Dev.
Biol. 342, 26–38. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.03.008
Jacquet, B. V., Muthusamy, N., Sommerville, L. J., Xiao, G., Liang, H., Zhang,
Y., et al. (2011). Speciﬁcation of a Foxj1-dependent lineage in the forebrain
is required for embryonic-to-postnatal transition of neurogenesis in the
olfactory bulb. J. Neurosci. 31, 9368–9382.
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.0171-11.
2011
Javier, A. L., Doan, L. T., Luong, M., Reyes de Mochel, N. S., Sun, A., Monuki, E. S.,
et al. (2012). Bmp indicator mice reveal dynamic regulation of transcriptional
response. PLoS One 7:e42566. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042566
Jurisch-Yaksi, N., Yaksi, E., and Kizil, C. (2020). Radial glia in the zebraﬁsh brain:
functional, structural, and physiological comparison with the mammalian glia.
Glia doi: 10.1002/glia.23849 [Epub ahead of print].
Kageyama, R., Masamizu, Y., and Niwa, Y. (2007a). Oscillator mechanism of Notch
pathway in the segmentation clock. Dev. Dyn. 236, 1403–1409. doi: 10.1002/
dvdy.21114
Kageyama, R., Ohtsuka, T., and Kobayashi, T. (2007b). The Hes gene family:
repressors and oscillators that orchestrate embryogenesis. Development 134,
1243–1251. doi: 10.1242/dev.000786
Kageyama, R., Ohtsuka, T., Shimojo, H., and Imayoshi, I. (2008). Dynamic Notch
signaling in neural progenitor cells and a revised view of lateral inhibition. Nat.
Neurosci. 11, 1247–1251. doi: 10.1038/nn.2208
Kah, O., Pellegrini, E., Mouriec, K., Diotel, N., Anglade, I., Vaillant, C., et al. (2009).
[Oestrogens and neurogenesis: new functions for an old hormone. Lessons from
the zebraﬁsh]. J. Soc. Biol. 203, 29–38.
Karaulanov, E., Knochel, W., and Niehrs, C. (2004). Transcriptional regulation
of BMP4 synexpression in transgenic Xenopus. Embo J. 23, 844–856.
doi:
10.1038/sj.emboj.7600101
Kaslin, J., Ganz, J., Geﬀarth, M., Grandel, H., Hans, S., and Brand, M. (2009). Stem
cells in the adult zebraﬁsh cerebellum: initiation and maintenance of a novel
stem cell niche. J. Neurosci. 29, 6142–6153. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.0072-09.
2009
Kaslin, J., Kroehne, V., Ganz, J., Hans, S., and Brand, M. (2017). Distinct
roles of neuroepithelial-like and radial glia-like progenitor cells in cerebellar
regeneration. Development 144, 1462–1471. doi: 10.1242/dev.144907
Kaslin, J., and Panula, P. (2001). Comparative anatomy of the histaminergic
and other aminergic systems in zebraﬁsh Danio rerio. J. Comp. Neurol. 440,
342–377. doi: 10.1002/cne.1390
Kawai, H., Kawaguchi, D., Kuebrich, B. D., Kitamoto, T., Yamaguchi, M., Gotoh,
Y., et al. (2017). Area-speciﬁc regulation of quiescent neural stem cells by
Notch3 in the adult mouse subependymal zone. J. Neurosci. 37, 11867–11880.
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.0001-17.2017
King, L. S., Kozono, D., and Agre, P. (2004). From structure to disease: the evolving
tale of aquaporin biology. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 5, 687–698. doi: 10.1038/
nrm1469
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
19
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

Diotel et al.
Adult Neurogenesis and Regeneration in Zebraﬁsh and Mammals
Kinney, J. W., Bemiller, S. M., Murtishaw, A. S., Leisgang, A. M., Salazar, A. M.,
and Lamb, B. T. (2018). Inﬂammation as a central mechanism in Alzheimer’s
disease. Alzheimers Dement. 4, 575–590.
Kishimoto, N., Alfaro-Cervello, C., Shimizu, K., Asakawa, K., Urasaki, A., Nonaka,
S., et al. (2011). Migration of neuronal precursors from the telencephalic
ventricular zone into the olfactory bulb in adult zebraﬁsh. J. Comp. Neurol. 519,
3549–3565. doi: 10.1002/cne.22722
Kishimoto, N., Asakawa, K., Madelaine, R., Blader, P., Kawakami, K., and
Sawamoto, K. (2013). Interhemispheric asymmetry of olfactory input-
dependent neuronal speciﬁcation in the adult brain. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 884–888.
doi: 10.1038/nn.3409
Kishimoto, N., Shimizu, K., and Sawamoto, K. (2012). Neuronal regeneration in
a zebraﬁsh model of adult brain injury. Dis. Model. Mech. 5, 200–209. doi:
10.1242/dmm.007336
Kizil, C., Kaslin, J., Kroehne, V., and Brand, M. (2012a). Adult neurogenesis and
brain regeneration in zebraﬁsh. Dev. Neurobiol. 72, 429–461. doi: 10.1002/
dneu.20918
Kizil, C., Kyritsis, N., Dudczig, S., Kroehne, V., Freudenreich, D., Kaslin, J.,
et al. (2012b). Regenerative neurogenesis from neural progenitor cells requires
injury-induced expression of Gata3. Dev. Cell 23, 1230–1237. doi: 10.1016/j.
devcel.2012.10.014
Kizil, C., Kyritsis, N., and Brand, M. (2015). Eﬀects of inﬂammation on stem cells:
together they strive? Embo Rep. 16, 416–426. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439702
Knoth, R., Singec, I., Ditter, M., Pantazis, G., Capetian, P., Meyer, R. P., et al. (2010).
Murine features of neurogenesis in the human hippocampus across the lifespan
from 0 to 100 years. PLoS One 5:e8809. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008809
Korchynskyi, O., and ten Dijke, P. (2002). Identiﬁcation and functional
characterization of distinct critically important bone morphogenetic protein-
speciﬁc response elements in the Id1 promoter. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 4883–4891.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.m111023200
Kozareva, D. A., Cryan, J. F., and Nolan, Y. M. (2019). Born this way: hippocampal
neurogenesis across the lifespan. Aging Cell 18:e13007.
Kriegstein, A. R., and Gotz, M. (2003). Radial glia diversity: a matter of cell fate.
Glia 43, 37–43. doi: 10.1002/glia.10250
Kroehne, V., Freudenreich, D., Hans, S., Kaslin, J., and Brand, M. (2011).
Regeneration of the adult zebraﬁsh brain from neurogenic radial glia-type
progenitors. Development 138, 4831–4841. doi: 10.1242/dev.072587
Kyritsis, N., Kizil, C., Zocher, S., Kroehne, V., Kaslin, J., Freudenreich, D., et al.
(2012). Acute inﬂammation initiates the regenerative response in the adult
zebraﬁsh brain. Science 338, 1353–1356. doi: 10.1126/science.1228773
Labusch, M., Mancini, L., Morizet, D., and Bally-Cuif, L. (2020). Conserved and
divergent features of adult neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh. Front. Cell Dev. Biol.
8:525. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.00525
Lam, C. S., Marz, M., and Strahle, U. (2009). gfap and nestin reporter lines reveal
characteristics of neural progenitors in the adult zebraﬁsh brain. Dev. Dyn. 238,
475–486. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21853
Lange, C., Rost, F., Machate, A., Reinhardt, S., Lesche, M., Weber, A., et al. (2020).
Single cell sequencing of radial glia progeny reveals the diversity of newborn
neurons in the adult zebraﬁsh brain. Development 147:dev185595. doi: 10.1242/
dev.185595
Lewis, J. (2003). Autoinhibition with transcriptional delay: a simple mechanism for
the zebraﬁsh somitogenesis oscillator. Curr. Biol. 13, 1398–1408. doi: 10.1016/
s0960-9822(03)00534-7
Lim, D. A., Tramontin, A. D., Trevejo, J. M., Herrera, D. G., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M.,
and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2000). Noggin antagonizes BMP signaling to create a
niche for adult neurogenesis. Neuron 28, 713–726. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)
00148-3
Lindsey, B. W., Darabie, A., and Tropepe, V. (2012). The cellular composition
of neurogenic periventricular zones in the adult zebraﬁsh forebrain. J. Comp.
Neurol. 520, 2275–2316. doi: 10.1002/cne.23065
Lindsey, B. W., Hall, Z. J., Heuze, A., Joly, J. S., Tropepe, V., and Kaslin, J. (2018).
The role of neuro-epithelial-like and radial-glial stem and progenitor cells in
development, plasticity, and repair. Prog. Neurobiol. 170, 99–114. doi: 10.1016/
j.pneurobio.2018.06.004
Lindsey, B. W., and Tropepe, V. (2006). A comparative framework for
understanding the biological principles of adult neurogenesis. Prog. Neurobiol.
80, 281–307. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2006.11.007
Ling, F., Kang, B., and Sun, X. H. (2014). Id proteins: small molecules, mighty
regulators. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 110, 189–216.
Lopez-Rovira, T., Chalaux, E., Massague, J., Rosa, J. L., and Ventura, F. (2002).
Direct binding of Smad1 and Smad4 to two distinct motifs mediates bone
morphogenetic protein-speciﬁc transcriptional activation of Id1 gene. J. Biol.
Chem. 277, 3176–3185. doi: 10.1074/jbc.m106826200
Mahler, J., and Driever, W. (2007). Expression of the zebraﬁsh intermediate
neuroﬁlament Nestin in the developing nervous system and in neural
proliferation zones at postembryonic stages. BMC Dev. Biol. 7:89. doi: 10.1186/
1471-213X-7-89
Malatesta, P., Hack, M. A., Hartfuss, E., Kettenmann, H., Klinkert, W., Kirchhoﬀ,
F., et al. (2003). Neuronal or glial progeny: regional diﬀerences in radial glia
fate. Neuron 37, 751–764.
März, M., Chapouton, P., Diotel, N., Vaillant, C., Hesl, B., Takamiya, M., et al.
(2010). Heterogeneity in progenitor cell subtypes in the ventricular zone of the
zebraﬁsh adult telencephalon. Glia 58, 870–888.
März, M., Schmidt, R., Rastegar, S., and Strahle, U. (2011). Regenerative response
following stab injury in the adult zebraﬁsh telencephalon. Dev. Dyn. 240,
2221–2231. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22710
Mashkaryan, V., Siddiqui, T., Popova, S., Cosacak, M. I., Bhattarai, P., Brandt, K.,
et al. (2020). Type 1 Interleukin-4 signaling obliterates mouse astroglia in vivo
but not in vitro. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 8:114. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.00114
Massari, M. E., and Murre, C. (2000). Helix-loop-helix proteins: regulators of
transcription in eucaryotic organisms. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 429–440. doi: 10.
1128/mcb.20.2.429-440.2000
Merkle, F. T., Fuentealba, L. C., Sanders, T. A., Magno, L., Kessaris, N., and
Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2014). Adult neural stem cells in distinct microdomains
generate previously unknown interneuron types. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 207–214.
doi: 10.1038/nn.3610
Merkle, F. T., Mirzadeh, Z., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2007). Mosaic organization of
neural stem cells in the adult brain. Science 317, 381–384. doi: 10.1126/science.
1144914
Merkle, F. T., Tramontin, A. D., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M., and Alvarez-Buylla, A.
(2004). Radial glia give rise to adult neural stem cells in the subventricular zone.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 17528–17532. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0407893101
Miale, I. L., and Sidman, R. L. (1961). An autoradiographic analysis of histogenesis
in the mouse cerebellum. Exp. Neurol. 4, 277–296. doi: 10.1016/0014-4886(61)
90055-3
Mira, H., Andreu, Z., Suh, H., Lie, D. C., Jessberger, S., Consiglio, A., et al. (2010).
Signaling through BMPR-IA regulates quiescence and long-term activity of
neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus. Cell Stem Cell 7, 78–89.
Mithal, D. S., Ren, D., and Miller, R. J. (2013). CXCR4 signaling regulates radial
glial morphology and cell fate during embryonic spinal cord development. Glia
61, 1288–1305. doi: 10.1002/glia.22515
Miyazono, K., Kamiya, Y., and Morikawa, M. (2010). Bone morphogenetic protein
receptors and signal transduction. J. Biochem. 147, 35–51.
doi: 10.1093/jb/
mvp148
Monje, M. L., Toda, H., and Palmer, T. D. (2003). Inﬂammatory blockade restores
adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Science 302, 1760–1765. doi: 10.1126/science.
1088417
Moreno-Jimenez, E. P., Flor-Garcia, M., Terreros-Roncal, J., Rabano, A., Caﬁni, F.,
Pallas-Bazarra, N., et al. (2019). Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is abundant in
neurologically healthy subjects and drops sharply in patients with Alzheimer’s
disease. Nat. Med. 25, 554–560. doi: 10.1038/s41591-019-0375-9
Morrens, J., Van Den Broeck, W., and Kempermann, G. (2012). Glial cells in adult
neurogenesis. Glia 60, 159–174. doi: 10.1002/glia.21247
Mueller, M., and Wulliman, T. (2005). Atlas of Early Zebraﬁsh Brain Development:
A Tool for Molecular Neurogenetics. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Mueller, T., Vernier, P., and Wullimann, M. F. (2004). The adult central nervous
cholinergic system of a neurogenetic model animal, the zebraﬁsh Danio rerio.
Brain Res. 1011, 156–169. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.02.073
Mueller, T., and Wullimann, M. F. (2009). An evolutionary interpretation of
teleostean forebrain anatomy. Brain Behav. Evol. 74, 30–42.
doi: 10.1159/
000229011
Muthusamy, N., Vijayakumar, A., Cheng, G. Jr., and Ghashghaei, H. T. (2014).
A knock-in Foxj1(CreERT2::GFP) mouse for recombination in epithelial cells
with motile cilia. Genesis 52, 350–358. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22753
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
20
September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568930

===== Drager2022_NatNeuro_iPSCMicroglia+CRISPR =====
Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01131-4
1Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 2Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, 
San Francisco, CA, USA. 3UC Berkeley-UCSF Graduate Program in Bioengineering, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 
4Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 5Medical Scientist Training Program, University 
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 6Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA. 
7Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 8Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 9Center for Alzheimer’s and Related Dementias, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. 10Laboratory 
of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. 11Data Tecnica International, LLC, Glen Echo, MD, USA. 
12Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 13Eli and 
Edythe Broad CIRM Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research at USC, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 14Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School 
of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 15National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. 16Helen and Robert Appel Alzheimer’s Disease Research Institute, Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, 
New York, NY, USA. 17Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 18These authors 
contributed equally: Sydney M. Sattler, Cindy Tzu-Ling Huang. ✉e-mail: lig2033@med.cornell.edu; martin.kampmann@ucsf.edu
M
icroglia have a central role in brain development and 
homeostasis as well as in the pathogenesis of many brain 
disorders1. Over the last decade, human genetics have 
pointed to a central role for microglia in brain diseases such as 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD)2, where specific disease-associated genetic 
variants likely act in microglia, redefining them as potential drivers 
of AD. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the 
role of microglia in disease and to target them therapeutically, it is 
necessary to bridge the gap between disease-associated genetic vari-
ants and changes in microglial function.
A major challenge is that microglia adopt a large number of dis-
tinct functional states in health and disease, which are actively being 
mapped on the molecular level in mice and humans3–9. However, 
we do not systematically understand how these distinct microglial 
states contribute to brain function and disease, or the molecular 
mechanisms regulating these states.
A promising approach to tackle these questions is enabled by 
CRISPR-based functional genomics in differentiated human cell 
types10. Pooled CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) and CRISPR acti-
vation (CRISPRa) screens enable scalable modeling of changes in 
gene expression and genetic screens to uncover regulatory mecha-
nisms. When combined with induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) 
technology, they enable the investigation of cell-type-specific biol-
ogy in human cells, including those derived from patients10. We 
recently provided a proof of principle for this strategy by estab-
lishing CRISPRi and CRISPRa platforms for genetic screens in 
iPSC-derived neurons11,12. However, such screens have not previ-
ously been implemented in iPSC-derived microglia due to chal-
lenges inherent in available differentiation protocols. Pooled 
CRISPR screens rely on lentiviral transduction to introduce libraries 
of single guide RNAs (sgRNAs), but mature microglia are difficult 
to transduce with lentivirus. This problem could be overcome by 
introducing sgRNAs at the iPSC stage. However, most existing pro-
tocols are lengthy and aim to recapitulate human microglia ontog-
eny13–19, resulting in population bottlenecks during differentiation, 
which can skew the representation of the sgRNA library.
To overcome these challenges, we developed a different approach 
for the generation of iPSC-derived microglia by generating a human 
iPSC line inducibly expressing six transcription factors that enable 
the generation of microglia-like cells in a rapid and efficient 8-day 
protocol. These induced-transcription factor microglia-like cells 
(iTF-Microglia) resemble other iPSC-derived microglia13–19 in 
their expression profiles, response to inflammatory stimuli, phago-
cytic capabilities and capacity to be cocultured with iPSC-derived 
A CRISPRi/a platform in human iPSC-derived 
microglia uncovers regulators of disease states
Nina M. Dräger1, Sydney M. Sattler1,18, Cindy Tzu-Ling Huang2,18, Olivia M. Teter1,3, Kun Leng1,4,5, 
Sayed Hadi Hashemi6, Jason Hong1, Giovanni Aviles1, Claire D. Clelland   2,7, Lihong Zhan2, 
Joe C. Udeochu2, Lay Kodama   2,5,8, Andrew B. Singleton9,10, Mike A. Nalls9,10,11, Justin Ichida12,13,14, 
Michael E. Ward   15, Faraz Faghri   6,9,10,11, Li Gan   2,16 ✉ and Martin Kampmann   1,17 ✉
Microglia are emerging as key drivers of neurological diseases. However, we lack a systematic understanding of the underlying 
mechanisms. Here, we present a screening platform to systematically elucidate functional consequences of genetic perturba-
tions in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived microglia. We developed an efficient 8-day protocol for the generation of 
microglia-like cells based on the inducible expression of six transcription factors. We established inducible CRISPR interference 
and activation in this system and conducted three screens targeting the ‘druggable genome’. These screens uncovered genes 
controlling microglia survival, activation and phagocytosis, including neurodegeneration-associated genes. A screen with 
single-cell RNA sequencing as the readout revealed that these microglia adopt a spectrum of states mirroring those observed in 
human brains and identified regulators of these states. A disease-associated state characterized by osteopontin (SPP1) expres-
sion was selectively depleted by colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF1R) inhibition. Thus, our platform can systematically uncover 
regulators of microglial states, enabling their functional characterization and therapeutic targeting.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1149

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
neurons. By integrating inducible CRISPRi/a machinery into this 
cell line, we developed a genetic screening system that enables robust 
knockdown and overexpression of endogenous genes in human 
microglia. Using this platform, we conducted pooled CRISPRi 
and CRISPRa screens for modifiers of survival, phagocytosis and 
inflammatory activation, which uncovered microglia-specific 
genes controlling these phenotypes. A screen with single-cell RNA 
sequencing (scRNA-seq) as the readout revealed that these microg-
lia adopt a spectrum of states mirroring those observed in human 
brains, and pinpointed regulators of specific states, which can 
enable the functional characterization and therapeutic targeting of 
these states.
Results
Rapid and scalable production of microglia-like cells. We set out 
to create a fast, robust and scalable differentiation protocol to dif-
ferentiate iPSCs to microglia-like cells for use in CRISPR screens. To 
this end, we developed a strategy based on direct cell fate conversion 
by overexpression of transcription factors. Based on transcriptomic 
and developmental data20–22, we selected six transcription factors 
highly expressed in human microglia: Hematopoietic Transcription 
Factor PU.1, MAF BZIP Transcription Factor B (MAFB), CCAAT 
Enhancer Binding Protein Alpha (CEBPα), CCAAT Enhancer 
Binding Protein Beta (CEBPβ), Interferon Regulatory Factor 5 
(IRF5) and Interferon Regulatory Factor 8 (IRF8). We engineered an 
iPSC line with two integrated cassettes for the doxycycline-inducible 
expression of three transcription factors each in the Citrate Lyase 
Beta Like (CLYBL) and Adeno-Associated Virus Integration Site 1 
(AAVS1) safe-harbor loci (Fig. 1a).
We established a simple three-step protocol to differenti-
ate these iPSCs into microglia-like cells, which we will refer to as 
iTF-Microglia, in only 8 days (Fig. 1b). After doxycycline induction 
of transcription factor expression on day 0, medium was supple-
mented with cytokines granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating 
factor (GM-CSF) and interleukin-34 (IL-34) on day 2 to promote 
differentiation and survival. On day 4, the medium was additionally 
supplemented with the cytokines macrophage colony-stimulating 
factor (M-CSF) and transforming growth factor β (TGF-β). 
iTF-Microglia reached a fully ramified morphology on day 8 and 
maintained excellent viability for at least another 8 days (Fig. 1b). 
We generally have continued doxycycline supplementation beyond 
day 8; however, this is not necessary for survival (Extended Data 
Fig. 1a,b). We confirmed robust inducible expression of the trans-
genic transcription factors (Fig. 1c).
The canonical microglia markers GPR34 and IBA1 were 
expressed in the iTF-Microglia at day 8 of differentiation (Fig. 1d). 
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) confirmed downregulation of iPSC 
markers and induction of microglia markers in iTF-Microglia at day 
9 and day 15 (Fig. 1e and Supplementary Table 1). Some markers, 
such as P2RY12, CSF1R, CYBB and CD14, slightly increased their 
expression from day 9 to day 15, indicating further incremental 
maturation from day 9 to day 15. While the transcriptomic signa-
ture of our microglia was distinct from primary human microglia, 
it was comparable to that of several other iPSC-derived microglia 
protocols (Fig. 1f and Extended Data Fig. 1c).
In conclusion, our results indicate robust expression of microg-
lia markers in iTF-Microglia. Importantly, our differentiation 
strategy is compatible with large-scale pooled sgRNA screens, 
whereas classical protocols create population bottlenecks (Extended 
Data Fig. 1d).
Functional characterization of iTF-Microglia. Next, we asked 
whether iTF-Microglia recapitulated cellular functions of human 
microglia. iTF-Microglia robustly phagocytosed fluorescent beads 
(Extended Data Fig. 2a) and rat synaptosomes (Fig. 2a,b and 
Extended Data Fig. 2b). As expected, phagocytosis could be attenu-
ated by the actin polymerization inhibitor Cytochalasin D, since 
phagocytosis depends on actin dynamics (Fig. 2a,b and Extended 
Data Fig. 2c).
To test the inflammatory response of iTF-Microglia to 
bacterial-derived lipopolysaccharide (LPS), we stimulated them 
with LPS for 24 h. LPS-stimulated iTF-Microglia were less ramified, 
and instead displayed the ameboid morphology characteristic of 
activated microglia (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 2d). RNA-seq 
revealed that LPS treatment induced immune response genes 
such as C3, CXCL10, IL32 and SAA1, and members of the NF-κB 
pathway, whereas it decreased expression of TREM2; markers of 
homeostatic microglia, such as P2RY13; and members of the TGF-β 
signaling pathway, such as SLC40A1 (Fig. 2d and Supplementary 
Table 2). Transcriptomic changes in response to LPS were substan-
tially overlapping with those observed in iPSC-derived microglia we 
generated following an alternative, previously published18 protocol 
(Extended Data Fig. 2e and Supplementary Table 2).
To examine cytokine secretion of iTF-Microglia, we mea-
sured the abundance of 36 cytokines secreted in standard culture 
conditions or following LPS stimulation. Control buffer-treated 
iTF-Microglia secreted most cytokines at low levels, but higher lev-
els of CCL2 and CXCL1, suggesting the presence of activated cells 
under control conditions (Fig. 2e), consistent with previous reports 
suggesting that even primary microglia become partially activated 
when cultured23. When stimulated with LPS, levels of most secreted 
cytokines increased, most prominently IL-6 with a 14-fold increase 
and IL-8 and CXCL10, both increased over fourfold (Fig. 2e).
We were able to coculture iTF-Microglia with iPSC-derived glu-
tamatergic neurons (iNeurons) in medium optimized for survival 
and functionality of both cell types (Methods). Remarkably, cocul-
tured iTF-Microglia displayed a pronounced ramified morphol-
ogy (Fig. 2f). In conclusion, we show that iTF-Microglia effectively 
Fig. 1 | Rapid differentiation of iPSCs into microglia-like cells (iTF-Microglia) by transcription factor induction. a, Strategy for stable integration 
of six transcription factors in AAVS1 and CLYBL loci by TALEN-mediated integration: The doxycycline-inducible reverse transcriptional activator 
(rtTA3G) is driven by the constitutive CAG promoter. Human MAFB, CEBPα and IRF8 are driven by the tet response element (TRE3G) in the AAVS1 
locus. Human PU.1, CEBPβ and IRF5 are driven by TRE3G in the CLYBL locus. All transcription factors are separated from each other via T2A ribosome 
skipping sequences. b, Overview of the differentiation process for generating iTF-Microglia. Top, timeline with media, cytokines and doxycycline (Dox); 
bottom, representative phase-contrast images of cells on the indicated days. Scale bar, 100 μm. c, Expression of six inducible transcription factors 
during iTF-Microglia differentiation. Transcript abundance (transcripts per million, TPM) of MAFB, CEBPα, IRF8 cassette and the PU.1, CEBPβ, IRF5 
cassette at day 0, day 9 and day 15 of differentiation. Mean ± s.d., n = 3 biological replicates, P values from two-tailed Student’s t-test. d, Representative 
immunofluorescence micrographs of iTF-Microglia on day 8 of differentiation stained for microglia markers GPR34 and IBA1. Nuclei were labeled 
by Hoechst 33342. Scale bar, 100 μm. e, Expression of iPSC and microglia marker genes in iPSCs and derived iTF-Microglia on day 9 and day 15 of 
differentiation. The heatmap displays normalized and gene-centered TPM counts for selected genes (rows) for three biological replicates of timepoints 
(columns). iTF-Microglia express microglia homeostatic markers and activation markers, while losing their expression of iPSC markers. Asterisks highlight 
microglia-selective markers. f, Principal component analysis (PCA) on the expression of microglia marker genes of iTF-Microglia, human adult ex vivo 
microglia60, fetal and adult microglia13, human myeloid cells20, other iPSC-microglia (iMG) / iPSC-microglia-like cells (iMGL)13,18,61 and iPSCs (this study and 
ref. 61). Each dot reflects an independent biological sample. Colors represent the different cell types.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1150

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
TALEN cut site
AAVS1 5′
AAVS1 3′
T2A
NEO
MAFB
CEBPα
IRF8
A
2
T
rtTA3G
CAG
Exon 1
Exon 2
TALEN cut site
Exon 2
Exon 3
AAVS1 locus
CLYBL locus
Inducible
MAFB, CEBBPα, IRF8
Inducible
PU.1, CEBPβ, IRF5
A
2
T
TRE3G
CLYBL 5′
CLYBL 3′
A
2
T
NEO
PU.1
CEBPβ
IRF5
A
2
T
rtTA3G
CAG
A
2
T
TRE3G
Differentiation
Maintenance
Stem flex
Essential 8
Advanced DMEM / F12
Media
Supplements
Cytokines
Dox
Dox + ROCKi
IL-34 + GM-CSF + M-CSF + TGF-β
IL-34 + GM-CSF
A2M
AXL
C1QA
C3
CCL2
CCR5
CD14
CD163
CD40
CD74
CD86
CLEC7A
CSF1
CSF1R
CST3
CX3CR1
CYBB
ENTPD1
FCGR1A
FCGR1B
FCGR2A
FCGR3A
GAS6
GPR34
HEXB *
IL10RA
IL10RB
IL21R
LPL
MERTK
OLFML3
P2RY12
P2RY13
PROS1
PTPRC
SELPLG *
SIGLEC1
SIRPA
SPP1
TGFB1
TGFBR1
TGFBR2
TLR2
TLR4
TMEM119 *
TREM2
DDX11
DNMT3B
FGFR1
FOXD3
FOXH1
FZD7
NANOG
NODAL
SOX2
a
Day 0
Day 2
Day 4
Day 8
Day 15
b
c
iPSC markers
e
iPSCs
Day 9
Day 15
MG markers
homeostasis and
activation
IBA1/Hoechst
GPR34/Hoechst
–5
0
5
Relative
transcript
levels
iTF-iPSC day 0
iTF-microglia day 9
iTF-microglia day 15
d
iTF-Microglia
MAFB, CEBBPα,
IRF8 cassette
Transcript abundance
(TPM)
PU.1, CEBPβ,
IRF5 cassette
0.1
1
10
100
1,000
P = 9.9 × 10–8
P = 1.5 × 10–5
f
P = 0.0001
P = 0.0002
PC-1: 59% variance
–10
0
10
20
30
8
4
0
–4
–8
–12
PC-2: 12% variance
Primary human microglia (Guttikonda et al.60)
Human brain myeloid cells (Zhang et al.20)
In-house iMG (Brownjohn et al.18)
N1/N2 iMGL (Chen et al.61)
iTF-Microglia Day 8
iTF-Microglia Day 15
iTF-iPSCs
N2-hiPSCs (Chen et al.61)
iMGL (Abud et al.13)
Adult microglia (Abud et al.13)
Fetal microglia (Abud et al.13)
iMG (Brownjohn et al.18)
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1151

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
b
d
e
f
F-actin
Hoechst
Control
LPS
Synaptosome
phagocytosis (a.u.)
0.5
Synaptosome
addition (h)
c
CCL1
CCL2
CCL5
CXCL1
CXCL10
ICAM-1
IL-1β
IL-1rα
IL-6
IL-8
Serpin E1
TNF-α
*GM-CSF
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
Cytokine array signal (integrated density)
PBS control
LPS
LPS treatment versus control
Coculture
iTF-Microglia/iNeuron/Hoechst
P = 2 × 10–6
P = 2 × 10–5
P = 8 × 10–6
P = 1 × 10–5
P = 7 × 10–6
P = 9 × 10–7
P = 8 × 10–6
P = 2 × 10–7
P = 0.01
P = 0.01
P = 0.0003
P = 2 × 10–10
P = 8 × 10–7
P = 0.004
P = 0.002
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
CytoD
+
+
+
–
–
–
1.5
2.5
NS
log2 fold change
log2 mean expression
0
5
10
15
20
–10
0
5
15
–5
10
Immune response
ERK signaling
NF-κB signaling
TGF-β regulation
Phagosome
SAA1
IL32
CXCL8
ACOD1
MT2A
CXCL10
TREM2
SLC40A1
F13A1
PI3
S100A8
LPL
CHI3L2
C3
CHI3L1
P2RY13
NFKB2
ITGB5
NCF1
a
12 h
CytoD
0 h
dimethylsulfoxide
Brightfield
pHrodo-synaptosomes
Fig. 2 | Functional characterization of iTF-Microglia. a, Phagocytosis of pHrodo-Red-labeled rat brain-derived synaptosomes by iTF-Microglia. 
Representative images at 0 h and 12 h after synaptosome addition are shown. Treatment with 5 μM actin polymerization inhibitor Cytochalasin D 
decreases phagocytosis. Scale bar, 100 μm. b, Phagocytosis of pHrodo-labeled rat brain-derived synaptosomes with or without Cytochalasin D treatment 
was quantified by flow cytometry at 0.5 h, 1.5 h and 2.5 h after synaptosome addition (mean ± s.d., n = 3 biological replicates; P values from two-tailed 
Student’s t-test). c, Morphological changes of iTF-Microglia after LPS treatment are visualized by fluorescence microscopy. Samples were treated for 
24 h with 100 ng ml−1 LPS or buffer control and fixed samples were stained with Alexa Fluor 488-phalloidin for F-actin (green) and with Hoechst 33342 
for nuclei (blue). Scale bar, 100 μm. d, Transcriptomic changes caused by 50 ng ml−1 LPS treatment in day 15 iTF-Microglia (n = 3 biological replicates). 
DEGs (Padj < 0.05, two-tailed Student’s t-test) are labeled in black (increase). Other colors label genes associated with specific pathways that are 
discussed in the main text. e, Cytokines secreted by iTF-Microglia. Analysis of cytokine array signal (integrated density of dot blots) from supernatants 
of cultures treated with LPS or buffer control (mean ± s.d., n = 6 biological replicates; P values from two-tailed Student’s t-test). *GM-CSF is a component 
of the culture medium. f, Coculture with iPSC-derived excitatory neurons promotes ramified morphology of iTF-Microglia. Representative fluorescence 
micrographs at low and high magnification of day 9 iTF-Microglia after 24 h in coculture. iTF- Microglia express membrane-localized Lck-mNeonGreen 
(green). Neurons are stained for the pre-synaptic marker synaptophysin (magenta). Nuclei are stained with Hoechst 33342 (blue). Scale bars, 100 µm. 
AU, arbitrary units; NS, not significant.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1152

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
a
b
d
c
Constitutive CRISPRi
 NTC
TFRC
TFRC cell surface protein
relative to NTC
 NTC TFRC
Day 4
Day 8
Day 15
 NTC
TFRC
Inducible CRISPRi
Day 4
Day 8
Day 15
TMP
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
NTC
TFRC
NTC
TFRC
NTC
TFRC
e
Inducible CRISPRi
CLYBL 5′
CLYBL 3′
dCas9-BFP-KRAB
CAG
ecDHFR
ecDHFR
Inducible CRISPRa
CLYBL 5′
CLYBL 3′
dCas9
CAG
ecDHFR
4xVP45-P65-HSF1
A
2
T
EGFP
NTC
sgRNA
TFRC
sgRNA
TFRC
TFRC, F-actin, Hoechst
sgRNA
Constitutive CRISPRi
CLYBL 5′
CLYBL 3′
A
2
T
NEO
dCas9-BFP-KRAB
cHS4
CAG
cHS4
iTF-Microglia
sgRNA 
transduction
+ Dox for differentiation
+ TMP for inducible CRISPRi/a
iPSCs 
Day 0
Day 4
Day 8
Day 15
TFRC cell surface protein
relative to NTC
NTC sgRNA
TFRC sgRNA
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
P = 1.8 × 10–5
P = 2.1 × 10–7 P = 9.8 × 10–5
P = 1.0 × 10–6
P = 3.1 × 10–7
P = 2.2 × 10–7
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Day 8
Inducible CRISPRa
TMP
–
+
–
+
NTC
CXCR4
NTC sgRNA
CXCR4 sgRNA
sgRNA
CXCR4 cell surface protein
relative to NTC
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
P = 0.0001
Fig. 3 | Gene knockdown and overexpression by CRISPRi and CRISPRa in iTF-Microglia. a, Strategies for constitutive and inducible CRISPRi/CRISPRa in 
iTF-Microglia. Top, for constitutive CRISPRi, a dCas9-BFP-KRAB construct (catalytically dead Cas9 (dCas9) fused to BFP and the KRAB transcriptional 
repressor domain) is expressed from the constitutive CAG promotor integrated into the CLYBL safe-harbor locus. Middle, for inducible CRISPRi, 
dCas9-BFP-KRAB is tagged with ecDHFR degrons. Bottom, for inducible CRISPRa, CAG promotor-driven ecDHFR-dCas9-VPH was stably integrated into 
the CLYBL locus. VPH, activator domains containing 4× repeats of VP48, P65 and HSF1. Addition of TMP stabilizes the inducible CRISPRi/a machineries. 
b,c, Functional validation of constitutive (b) or inducible (c) CRISPRi activity via flow cytometry of TFRC surface protein level stained iTF-Microglia 
expressing a TFRC-targeting sgRNA or an NTC sgRNA at different days of differentiation (mean ± s.d., n = 3 biological replicates; P values from 
two-tailed Student’s t-test). c, TMP was added to induce CRISPRi activity where indicated. d, Functional validation of inducible CRISPRi activity via TFRC 
immunofluorescence (IF) microscopy on day 8. Top row, NTC sgRNA. Bottom row, sgRNA targeting TFRC. TFRC, red; F-actin, green; nuclei, blue. Scale bar, 
100 μm. e, Functional validation of inducible CRISPRa activity via flow cytometry of CXCR4 surface protein level staining in iTF-Microglia expressing  
CXCR4 sgRNA or NTC sgRNA (mean ± s.d., n = 3 biological replicates; P values from two-tailed Student’s t-test). TMP was added to induce CRISPRa 
activity where indicated.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1153

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
phagocytose synaptosomes, respond to LPS and can be cocultured 
with iPSC-derived neurons.
Gene perturbation by CRISPRi and CRISPRa in iTF-Microglia. 
Next, we established CRISPRi and CRISPRa in iTF-Microglia 
to enable robust knockdown and overexpression of endogenous 
genes, as well as large-scale loss- and gain-of-function genetic 
screens. Following the strategy we previously established in 
human iPSC-derived neurons11,12, we stably integrated constitutive 
CRISPRi machinery, inducible CRISPRi machinery or inducible 
CRISPRa machinery into safe-harbor loci of iPSCs also engineered 
with the inducible microglial transcription factors (Fig. 3a). In the 
constitutive CRISPRi line, the expression cassette contains a CAG 
promotor-driven dCas9-BFP-KRAB. In the inducible CRISPRi 
cassette, this CRISPRi machinery is flanked on both the N and 
the C termini with dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) degrons. In 
the absence of the small molecule trimethoprim (TMP), DHFR 
degrons cause proteasomal degradation of fused proteins. Addition 
of TMP stabilizes the degron-tagged CRISPRi machinery. The 
inducible CRISPRa machinery consists of a DHFR-dCas9-VPH 
construct, which is similarly stabilized in the presence of TMP. 
Inducible CRISPRi/a systems enable flexible timing of the onset of 
gene perturbation in cells already expressing sgRNAs. This feature 
is particularly important for experiments in microglia: it enables 
lentiviral delivery of sgRNAs to occur in iPSCs, which are much 
more amenable to lentiviral infection than microglia, without pre-
maturely affecting genes that may be relevant for differentiation. 
We confirmed a normal karyotype for the resulting monoclonal cell 
lines (Extended Data Fig. 3).
To validate CRISPRi activity, we transduced iPSCs with a len-
tiviral construct expressing an sgRNA targeting the transferrin 
receptor gene (TFRC) or a nontargeting control (NTC) sgRNA. In 
cells expressing the constitutive CRISPRi machinery, knockdown of 
TFRC was robust in iPSCs and iTF-Microglia both on the protein 
level (Fig. 3b and Extended Data Fig. 4a) and on the messenger RNA 
level (Extended Data Fig. 4c,e). In cells expressing the inducible 
CRISPRi machinery, TFRC knockdown was completely dependent 
on the presence of TMP, and effective on the mRNA and protein 
levels, albeit with reduced knockdown compared with the constitu-
tive CRISPRi system (Fig. 3c,d and Extended Data Fig. 4b,d,f). For 
additional target genes we tested, we found examples of excellent 
knockdown (around 80%) with both the constitutive and the induc-
ible systems for INPP5D (Extended Data Fig. 4g,h), but also an 
example of a gene (PICALM) that was effectively knocked down by 
90% with the constitutive CRISPRi (Extended Data Fig. 4i), but not 
by inducible CRISPRi (Extended Data Fig. 4j). Despite these limita-
tions of our current inducible CRISPRi system, we decided to use it 
for the studies presented in this study, since it enabled us to induce 
CRISPRi knockdown only upon differentiation, rather than in the 
iPSC state, thus reducing the likelihood of recovering phenotypes 
due to effects in iPSCs or on differentiation itself.
Next, we validated the functionality of the inducible CRISPRa 
machinery by testing the induction of the endogenous gene CXCR4. 
We observed a robust and tightly inducible increase of CXCR4 lev-
els in iPSCs and iTF-Microglia on the mRNA level (Extended Data 
Fig. 4l,m) and the protein level (Fig. 3e and Extended Data Fig. 4k).
CRISPRi screen for microglial survival and proliferation. Our 
first application of the inducible CRISPRi iTF-Microglia platform 
was to identify modifiers of microglia survival and proliferation in 
a pooled genetic screen (Fig. 4a). First, we transduced the iPSCs 
with our next-generation lentiviral CRISPRi sgRNA library target-
ing the ‘druggable genome’24. This library consists of sgRNAs target-
ing 2,325 genes encoding kinases, phosphatases and other classes 
of druggable proteins, with five sgRNAs per gene and 500 NTC 
sgRNAs. After library transduction, iPSCs were differentiated into 
iTF-Microglia by addition of doxycyline and TMP was added to 
induce CRISPRi activity. iTF-Microglia were collected before dif-
ferentiation (day 0) and on day 15 post-induction. Frequencies of 
cells expressing each sgRNA were determined by next-generation 
sequencing to uncover genes for which sgRNAs showed significant 
changes in frequency, indicating a survival or proliferation pheno-
type (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 3).
We compared the results from the iTF-Microglia survival 
screen with our previously published11 CRISPRi survival screens in 
iPSC-derived neurons (Fig. 4b) and iPSCs (Extended Data Fig. 5a). 
We found that genes affecting microglial survival, neuronal survival 
and iPSC survival were largely distinct. Knockdown of cholesterol 
biogenesis enzymes and V-ATPase subunits drastically reduced 
neuronal but not microglial survival (Fig. 4b). Conversely, knock-
down of members of the colony stimulating factor (CSF) receptor 
family (CSF1R, CSF2RB, CSF2RA) strongly reduced the survival 
of microglia but not neurons (Fig. 4b) or iPSCs (Extended Data 
Fig. 5a), consistent with the role of CSF receptors in the develop-
ment and survival of microglia and macrophages25–28. We validated 
CSF1R essentiality in a time-course experiment (Fig. 4c). The 
toxicity of CSF1R knockdown became pronounced only in differ-
entiated iTF-Microglia (from day 8 onwards), consistent with the 
microglia-specific role of CSF1R.
Interestingly, the knockdown of several genes, including CDK8 
and TGFBR2, increased abundance of iTF-Microglia in our screen 
(Fig. 4b). However, we found that CDK8 and TGFBR2 knockdown 
resulted in decreased levels of the microglia marker IBA1 (Extended 
Data Fig. 5b,c), suggesting disrupted microglial differentiation. 
Indeed, inhibition of TGF-β signaling has been shown to compen-
sate for loss of Oct4 pluripotency signaling29 and microglia have been 
shown to be absent in TGF-β1-deficient mice30. CDK8 expression 
has been shown to correlate with stem cell pluripotency31, and hence 
loss of CDK8 expression could cause iPSCs to differentiate into a 
nonmicroglial state. This disruption of microglial differentiation 
was not specific to our iTF-Microglia differentiation protocol, since 
knockdown of CDK8 also decreased IBA1 levels in iPSC-derived 
microglia we generated using a non-transcription-factor-based dif-
ferentiation protocol18 (Extended Data Fig. 5d,e).
Induction of CDK8 and TGFBR2 knockdown on day 8 in fully 
differentiated iTF-Microglia did not result in proliferation, and 
in the case of TGFBR2 knockdown even resulted in a very slight 
decrease in survival (Extended Data Fig. 5f). By contrast, knock-
down of CSF1R in day 8 iTF-Microglia reproduced the phenotype 
observed in the initial screen (Extended Data Fig. 5f).
CRISPRi screen for modifiers of microglial activation. In a sec-
ond screen, we aimed to identify modifiers of inflammatory acti-
vation of microglia. For this screen, we chose cell-surface levels 
of cluster of differentiation 38 (CD38) as a readout for microglial 
activation. CD38, also known as cyclic ADP ribose hydrolase, 
is induced by LPS treatment in primary microglia32 and in our 
iTF-Microglia (Extended Data Figs. 2e and 5g). CD38 plays several 
roles in microglial activation, including in the secretion of proin-
flammatory cytokines33 and in activation-mediated cell death32. 
Altogether, these data suggest that CD38 is both a marker and an 
important effector for the activation of microglia and is therefore a 
suitable marker for a screen for inflammation modifiers.
The screen for modifiers of microglial activation was con-
ducted as shown in Fig. 4d. Briefly, iPSCs expressing the induc-
ible CRISPRi machinery were transduced with the pooled sgRNA 
library described above. The cells were then differentiated into 
iTF-Microglia, stained for cell-surface CD38 using a fluorescently 
tagged antibody and subjected to fluorescence-activated cell sorting 
(FACS) into CD38low and CD38high populations. Frequencies of cells 
expressing each sgRNA were quantified in these populations using 
next-generation sequencing.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1154

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
a
b
iPSCs
Microglia
differentiation and
maintenace
Transduce with
sgRNA library
iTF-Microglia
Day 15
NGS to obtain
sgRNA
frequencies
Genes controlling survival and
proliferation in microglia
iPSCs
Day 0
+ TMP for CRISPRi
+ Dox for differentiation
c
iPSCs
Microglia
differentiation
Transduce with
sgRNA library
iTF-Microglia
Day 8
+ TMP for CRISPRi
+ Dox for differentiation
FACS sort
based on
fluorescence
High
CD38
Low
CD38
NGS to obtain
sgRNA
frequencies
Genes controlling
microglia
activation
Anti-CD38
antibody
CD38
Low
30%
High
30%
st
n
u
o
C
d
e
f
 Gene score
Microglia survival (day 15 versus day 0)
Toxic
Beneficial
0
2.5
5.0
–2.5
–5.0
–10
–5
0
CDK8
TGFBR2
MTHFD2
TRIM24
PLA2G1B
SOD1
ARPC2
HMGCS1
HMGCR
CSF1R
CSF2RB
CSF2RA
TUBB
PLK1
ATP6V1C1
ATP6V1A
ACTR2
ARPC3
AARS
RIOK2
DDX39B
ATP6V1B2
Neuron survival (day 14 versus day 0)
Gene score
Toxic
Beneficial
CSF receptors
Cholesterol
Biogenesis
V-ATPases
Cytoskeleton
Cell cycle
Days of differentiation
Normalized cell count
CSF1R i1
CSF1R i2
NTC 1
NTC 2
Knockdown
phenotype
High CD38
Low CD38
–2
0
2
0
1
2
3
CDK8
SPTLC2
IFNAR2
CDK12 MED1
STK40
NDUFA8
NDUFS5 ATP1A1
TGFBR2
ZMYND8
MAP2K6
FDR = 0.1
High-CD38 hits
Low-CD38 hits
Significance (–log10P)
 iPSCs
Day 0
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
CD38 cell surface level (a.u.)
NTC
MED1
i1
i2
i1
i2
sgRNA 
CDK12
i1
i2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
1
2
3
4
sgRNA
P = 0.0003
P = 0.002
P = 0.003
P = 3 × 10–21
P = 3 × 10–17
P = 3 × 10–15
P = 0.003
Fig. 4 | Identification of modifiers of survival and inflammation by CRISPRi screens. a, Strategy. b, Comparison of Gene Scores from CRISPRi survival 
screens in iTF-Microglia (this study) versus iPSC-derived neurons11. Each dot represents a gene; genes are color-coded by pathways. c, Validation of the 
phenotype of CSF1R knockdown. iTF-Microglia transduced with CSF1R-targeting or NTC sgRNAs were imaged on different days after differentiation, and 
live cells were quantified based on staining with Hoechst 33342. Data are shown as mean ± s.d., n = 3 wells per group; 7 fields were imaged for each well; 
P values from two-tailed Student’s t-test. d, Strategy for a CRISPRi screen to identify modifiers of the expression of CD38, a marker of reactive microglia. 
iPSCs expressing the inducible CRISPRi construct were transduced with the druggable genome sgRNA library. On day 0, doxycyline and cytokines were 
added to induce microglial differentiation, and TMP was added to induce CRISPRi activity. On day 8, iTF-Microglia were stained for cell-surface levels of 
CD38 and sorted by FACS into populations with low (bottom 30%) and high (top 30%) CD38 levels. Frequencies of iTF-Microglia expressing a given sgRNA 
were determined in each population by next-generation sequencing (NGS). e, Volcano plot indicating knockdown phenotype and statistical significance 
(two-sided Mann–Whitney U-test) for genes targeted in the CD38 level screen. Dashed line indicates the cut-off for hit genes (false discovery rate 
(FDR) = 0.1). Hit genes are shown in blue (knockdown decreases CD38 level) or red (knockdown increases CD38 level), nonhit genes are shown in orange 
and ‘quasi-genes’ generated from random samples of NTC sgRNAs are shown in gray. Hits of interest are labeled. f, Validation of the phenotype of MED1 
and CDK12 knockdown. CD38 cell-surface levels measured by flow cytometry of day 8 iTF-Microglia targeting MED1, CDK12 compared with NTC sgRNA. 
Means ± s.d., n = 3 biological replicates; P values from two-tailed Student’s t-test. i1, i2 refer to independent CRISPRi sgRNAs targeting the indicated genes.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1155

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
This CRISPRi screen identified several genes regulating 
cell-surface levels of CD38 (Supplementary Table 3). Knockdown 
of two transcriptional regulators, CDK12 and MED1, significantly 
increased CD38 surface levels in the screen (Fig. 4e) and in vali-
dation experiments (Fig. 4f). CDK12 is known to be involved not 
only in cell cycle progression but also in TNF34 and noncanoni-
cal NF-κB35 signaling. While these previous reports may suggest 
a proinflammatory role of CDK12, our findings suggest that the 
role of CDK12 may be more nuanced or context-dependent, and 
we designated it for further investigation (see below). Another class 
of hits whose knockdown increased CD38 levels were members of 
the mitochondrial Complex I (NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase), 
NDUFA8 and NDUFS5 (Fig. 4e). Knockdown of components of 
this complex have previously been shown to promote an inflamma-
tory state in macrophages36, validating our findings.
Taken together, our large-scale CRISPRi screens in iTF-Microglia 
uncovered microglia-specific survival modifiers and modula-
tors of inflammatory activation, demonstrating the ability of the 
iTF-Microglia screening platform to identify microglia-specific 
biology.
Modifiers of synaptosome phagocytosis by microglia. Microglial 
phagocytosis is central to brain homeostasis from development 
through aging37. Dysfunctional or dysregulated phagocytosis has 
been implicated in neurodegenerative and psychiatric diseases38–41. 
To uncover regulators of microglial phagocytosis, we conducted 
parallel CRISPRi and CRISPRa screens in iTF-Microglia trans-
duced with sgRNA libraries targeting the ‘druggable genome’. After 
1.5 h of incubation with pHrodo-Red-labeled synaptosomes iso-
lated from rat brains, iTF-Microglia were sorted via FACS based 
on the pHrodo-Red fluorescence signal (Fig. 5a), and screens were 
analyzed as described for the CD38 FACS-based screen.
There was little overlap between CRISPRi and CRISPRa hits 
(Extended Data Fig. 6a and Supplementary Table 3), confirming our 
previous findings from screens in diverse biological contexts that 
overexpression and knockdown screens can provide complemen-
tary insights12,42,43. A prominent exception was the actin-binding 
protein PFN1, coding mutations in which cause amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS)44. PFN1 had opposing phenotypes on synaptosome 
phagocytosis upon CRISPRi repression and CRISPRa induction 
(Fig. 5b). Unexpectedly, knockdown of CSF1R increased phagocy-
tosis (Fig. 5b), even though, as we had previously found (Fig. 4b), its 
knockdown decreased iTF-Microglia survival. Another remarkable 
hit was the AD risk factor INPP5D, knockdown of which slightly 
increased phagocytosis. Overexpression of CD209, a C-type lectin 
receptor present on the surface of macrophages and dendritic cells, 
greatly increased synaptosome phagocytosis (Fig. 5b). We validated 
these phenotypes from the primary CRISPRi screen individually in 
iTF-Microglia (Extended Data Fig. 6b) and in iPSC-derived microg-
lia generated an alternative protocol18 (Extended Data Fig. 6c).
We further investigated the CRISPRa hits PFN1 and CD209. We 
validated upregulation of both genes by quantitative PCR (qPCR) 
(Extended Data Fig. 6e). Pattern-recognition receptor CD209 has 
previously been shown to regulate phagocytic capacity in macro-
phages45. To investigate substrate specificity of CD209, we moni-
tored phagocytosis of two different substrates, pHrodo-Red-labeled 
synaptosomes and yellow-green (YG)-fluorescently labeled beads, 
either alone or in combination (Fig. 5c). Overexpression of CD209 
increased phagocytosis of synaptosomes, but had a much smaller 
effect on bead phagocytosis (Fig. 5c), suggesting substrate specific-
ity. However, when challenging iTF-Microglia with a mixture of 
beads and synaptosomes, bead phagocytosis was robustly increased, 
suggesting that synaptosomes might stimulate general phagocytosis 
via CD209.
PFN1 overexpression increased levels of F-actin in iTF-Microglia 
(Fig. 5d), consistent with previous finding that moderate overex-
pression of PFN1 induces long stress fiber-like actin cables46. This 
process could disturb orchestrated actin polymerization at the 
membrane and thus decrease phagocytosis. In addition to direct 
effects on the actin cytoskeleton, PFN1 knockdown has also been 
reported to result in anti-inflammatory changes47. Indeed, we 
observed transcriptional changes in immune-related genes and AD 
risk genes upon PFN1 overexpression in iTF-Microglia (Fig. 5e and 
Supplementary Table 4).
In conclusion, our complementary CRISPRi and CRISPRa 
screens identified known as well as novel phagocytosis modulators 
in microglia, which were validated in iPSC-derived microglia gen-
erated using an alternative protocol.
Distinct transcriptional states of iTF-Microglia. Several genes had 
CRISPRi phenotypes in more than one of the large-scale screens that 
we conducted (Extended Data Fig. 6f and Supplementary Table 3). 
We therefore hypothesized that some hit genes were not dedicated 
factors required for specific microglial processes, but rather regula-
tors of distinct functional states. To test this hypothesis and gain 
more detailed insights into the mechanisms by which genes affect 
microglial functions, we selected 39 hit genes of interest, most of 
which had phenotypes in more than one of the large-scale primary 
screens (Extended Data Fig. 6f and Supplementary Table 3), for char-
acterization in a CRISPR droplet sequencing (CROP-seq) screen, 
which couples CRISPRi perturbation to scRNA-seq. We introduced 
an sgRNA library targeting these genes (Supplementary Table 5) 
into iPSCs, induced iTF-Microglia differentiation and CRISPRi 
activity, and performed scRNA-seq of 58,302 iTF-Microglia on day 
8 (Fig. 6a and Supplementary Table 6).
Unsupervised clustering and Uniform Manifold Approximation 
and Projection (UMAP) dimensional reduction of the single-cell 
transcriptomes uncovered distinct clusters (Fig. 6b). In one clus-
ter, a high proportion of transcripts mapped to mitochondrial 
transcripts, suggesting damaged or dying cells; this cluster was 
Fig. 5 | Identification of modifiers of phagocytosis by CRISPRi and CRISPRa screens. a, Strategy for modifier screen based on the uptake of 
pHrodo-labeled rat synaptosomes. b, Volcano plots summarizing knockdown and overexpression phenotypes and statistical significance (two-sided 
Mann–Whitney U-test) for genes targeted in the pooled phagocytosis screens. Left, CRISPRi screen; right, CRISPRa screen. Dashed lines, Gene Score 
cut-off for hit genes (FDR = 0.1). Hit genes are shown in blue (knockdown decreases phagocytosis) or red (knockdown increases phagocytosis), 
nonhit genes are shown in orange and ‘quasi-genes’ generated from random samples of NTC sgRNAs are shown in gray. Hits of interest are 
labeled. c, Competitive phagocytosis assay to test substrate specificity of CD209 overexpression. Flow cytometry measurement of phagocytosis of 
pHrodo-Red-labeled synaptosomes (left, either synaptosomes alone or together with beads) and green, fluorescent beads (right, either beads alone or 
together with synaptosomes) by iTF-Microglia expressing either NTC sgRNAs or sgRNAs targeting CD209. Values represent mean ± s.d. of n = 3 biological 
replicates. Data were analyzed using two-tailed Student’s t-test. d, Representative fluorescent images demonstrating higher F-actin staining in CRISPRa 
iTF-Microglia at day 8 with PFN1 sgRNAs compared with NTC sgRNAs (left). Scale bar, 50 µm. Right, integrated F-actin intensity per cell of CRISPRa 
iTF-Microglia at day 8 with PFN1 sgRNAs or NTC sgRNAs. Mean ± s.d., n = 5 fields of view from 3 different wells per sgRNA. P values from two-tailed 
Student’s t-test. e, Transcriptomic changes caused by PFN1 overexpression in day 8 iTF-Microglia (n = 3 biological replicates). DEGs (Padj < 0.05, two-tailed 
Student’s t-test) are labeled in black. Other colors label genes associated with specific pathways that are discussed in the main text. *AD risk genes. a1,  
a2 refer to independent CRISPRa sgRNAs targeting the indicated genes.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1156

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
removed from downstream analysis (Extended Data Fig. 7a). Two 
clusters exclusively contained cells expressing sgRNAs target-
ing CDK8 or TGFBR2 (Fig. 6b and Extended Data Fig. 7b). These 
cells expressed high levels of the pluripotency marker SOX2, but 
low levels of the microglia marker CSF1R (Extended Data Fig. 7c). 
Together with our previous experiments showing reduced IBA1 lev-
els for iTF-Microglia targeting CDK8 and TGFBR2 (Extended Data 
Fig. 5b,c), these findings suggested disrupted microglial 
iPSCs
Add pHrodo-Red
synaptosomes
+ Dox for microglia
differentiation
Transduce with
sgRNA library
iTF-Microglia
Day 8
+ TMP for 
CRISPRi/CRISPRa
FACS sort
based on
fluorescence
High
Low
NGS to obtain
sgRNA
frequencies
Genes controlling
phagocytosis
in microglia
a
b
CRISPRi
CRISPRa
Knockdown
Phenotype
Overexpression
Phenotype
0
2
–2
0
2
–2
High
phagocytosis
Low
phagocytosis
Significance (–log10P)
Significance (–log10P)
High
phagocytosis
Low
phagocytosis
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
FDR = 0.1
High phagocytosis hits
Low phagocytosis hits
CD209
PFN1
1
–1
CDK12
CSF1R
INPP5D
PFN2
PFN1
10
5
0
–5
–10
0
5
10
15
20
HLA-DQA1*
FCGBP*
CCR6
HLA-DRB1*
HLA-DRA*
CASS4*
P2RY13
NLRP3
ITGB2
SPP1 LCP1
PFN1
FN1
CD36
MX1
IFI27
SPARCL1
LRRN1*
Extracellular matrix reorganization
Type I interferon response
Endocytosis
Activation in immune response
Actin filament organization
MHC receptor II
* AD risk gene
log2 fold change
log2 mean expression
e
d
NTC
a1
a2
sgRNA 
PFN1
a1
a2
0
100
200
300
Integrated F-actin intensity
per nucleus
F-actin
NTC a1
PFN1 a1
sgRNA 
CD209 a1
CD209 a1 
NTC a1 
NTC a1 
0
10
20
30
sgRNA 
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
% microglia with bead (s)
Synaptosome phagocytosis
(a.u.)
Synaptosomes
Beads
+
+
–
–
+
+
+
+
CD209 a1
CD209 a1
NTC a1
NTC a1
P = 0.0009
P = 4 × 10–5
P = 4 × 10–29
P = 0.0001
P = 0.008
c
ACTB
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1157

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
differentiation. We removed those clusters from further analysis 
and retained the remaining cluster, which was characterized by high 
levels of CSF1R expression (Extended Data Fig. 7c). Importantly, 
92.4% of cells expressing NTC sgRNAs were part of the cluster with 
high levels of CSF1R expression, confirming the high efficiency of 
our microglial differentiation protocol for unperturbed cells.
Unsupervised clustering and UMAP dimensional reduction of 
the remaining 19,834 iTF-Microglia revealed nine transcription-
ally distinct clusters (Fig. 6c and Extended Data Fig. 7d). Microglia 
heterogeneity in response to different environmental conditions in 
the brain has been extensively studied48, but we were surprised to 
observe a wealth of distinct transcriptional states in the cultured 
iTF-Microglia. Importantly, NTC sgRNAs are represented in cells 
in every cluster (Extended Data Fig. 7d), suggesting the observed 
heterogeneity is an innate quality of the iTF-Microglia.
Principal component analysis identified two major biological 
axes broadly defining these states. The first principal component 
(PC1) corresponded to a polarized axis of inflammatory activation: 
starting from a central homeostatic state (cluster 6), one direction 
was defined by interferon-induced gene expression, whereas the 
other direction was defined by induction of chemokines (Fig. 6d 
and Extended Data Fig. 7e). The second principal component (PC2) 
captured markers of proliferation, mainly in cluster 7 (Fig. 6e and 
Extended Data Fig. 7f).
To further interpret each transcriptional microglial state, we 
performed differential gene expression analysis across the clusters 
(Supplementary Table 7) and named each cluster according to char-
acteristic transcriptomic signatures (Fig. 6f).
Clusters 1 and 2 are both defined by high expression of 
interferon-induced genes and the complement gene C3. Cluster 1 is 
uniquely defined by high expression of chemokine CXCL10. Subsets 
of microglia characterized by upregulation of interferon response 
genes have been described in mouse models of neurodegeneration4.
Cluster 3 is defined by the high expression of SPP1 (Fig. 6g), which 
encodes osteopontin49. Importantly, SPP1 is upregulated in several 
disease-associated microglial states, including disease-associated 
microglia5 and activated response microglia50 in AD mouse models, 
and late-response microglia in CK-p25 mouse models of neuro-
degeneration4. SPP1-positive microglial states are also enriched in 
patients with multiple sclerosis and mouse models8 and enriched in 
microglia in the aging human brain9. Furthermore, SPP1 is highly 
expressed in glioma-associated microglia in mice and humans, 
where high expression of SPP1 is associated with poor prognosis51. 
Using flow cytometry, we found that SPP1-positive microglia have 
a slightly increased phagocytic activity, whereas CCL13-positive 
microglia have substantially decreased phagocytic activity (Fig. 6h). 
Integration of our iTF-Microglia dataset with a recent scRNA-seq 
dataset containing 16,242 human microglia from control and AD 
patient brains3 showed conservation of the SPP1-positive microg-
lial state (Fig. 6i). The proportion of SPP1-positive microglia was 
substantially increased in patients with AD compared with controls 
(Fig. 6j). Notably, it remains to be determined how the SPP1+ microg-
lial state affects the pathogenesis of different diseases, since SPP1 
has been linked to both proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory 
responses49. This question has been challenging to address since we 
have lacked tools to manipulate the SPP1+ state of microglia.
Cluster 4 is defined by expression of pro-apoptotic p53 signal-
ing genes, and cluster 5 by expression of metallothionines. Cluster 
6 is defined by the absence of interferon response genes or chemo-
kines, and thus we interpreted it as representing more homeostatic 
microglia. Cluster 7 is characterized by the expression of prolif-
eration markers such as TOP2A and MKI67. Clusters 8 and 9 are 
characterized by the expression of high levels of chemokines such as 
CCL2 and CCL3. Cluster 9 is uniquely defined by high expression 
of CCL13 (Fig. 6g). Such chemokine signatures have recently been 
found to be a hallmark of human microglia not observed in mice52.
Taken together, scRNA-seq revealed that many important fea-
tures of microglia diversity observed in human brains and in disease 
states are recapitulated in our iTF-Microglia in vitro model.
CROP-seq uncovers regulators of microglial cell states. We next 
identified the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) caused by 
CRISPRi knockdown of each gene targeted in the CROP-seq screen 
(Extended Data Fig. 8 and Supplementary Table 8). As expected, 
knockdown of functionally related genes resulted in shared DEG sig-
natures. For example, knockdown of CSF1R, CSF2RA and CSF2RB 
resulted in an upregulation of genes encoding the major histocom-
patibility complex as well as CD36, CD74 and CD68 (Extended Data 
Fig. 8 and Supplementary Table 8), which are markers of phagocytic 
microglia and could explain the increased phagocytic capacity we 
observed in response to CSF1R knockdown (Fig. 5b and Extended 
Data Fig. 6b).
Given the surprising heterogeneity of iTF-Microglia, we inves-
tigated if CRISPRi knockdown of specific genes could control 
microglial cell states. Indeed, cells containing sgRNAs target-
ing genes such as CSF1R, CDK12 and MAPK14 were enriched or 
depleted from specific clusters (Fig. 7a), and more generally, knock-
down of many genes specifically affected the frequency of cell states 
(Fig. 7b, Extended Data Fig. 9a and Supplementary Table 9).
Knockdown of CDK12 shifted cells into cluster 9 (CCL13+, che-
mokine) (Fig. 7a–c). To validate this phenotype, we used a flow 
cytometry approach in which secretion of CCL13 was inhibited 
with the transport inhibitor GolgiPlug. CCL13 levels were increased 
over twofold with knockdown of CDK12 (Fig. 7d), confirming our 
screen results. Next, we asked if the shift into cluster 9 might also 
have functional consequences for the iTF-Microglia. We measured 
Fig. 6 | scRNA-seq reveals distinct and disease-related microglia subclusters. a, Strategy for the CROP-seq screen. IPSCs expressing inducible CRISPRi 
machinery were transduced with a pooled library of 81 sgRNAs and CROP-seq vector pMK1334. iPSCs are differentiated to iTF-Microglia and subjected 
to scRNA-seq to obtain single-cell transcriptomes and to identify expressed sgRNAs. b, UMAP of the 28,905 cells in the post-quality control CROP-seq 
dataset. Cells are colored by sgRNA (CDK8, red; TGFBR2, orange) and cells with a high percentage of mitochondrial transcripts (blue). Microglia are 
labeled in green. Each dot represents a cell. c, UMAP depicting the 9 different clusters within the 19,834 microglia. Each dot represents a cell. The cells 
are color-coded based on their cluster membership. d,e, Ridge plots depicting iTF-Microglia clusters along PC1 (d) and PC2 (e). PC1 spans inflammation 
status (interferon activated–homeostatic–chemokine activated) while PC2 spans proliferation status. f, Heatmap of iTF-Microglia clusters 1–9 and the 
relative expression of the top three DEGs (based on log2 fold differences in expression) of each cluster. g, UMAP of distinct marker expression of CCL13 
(left) and SPP1 (right). CCL13 is a marker for cluster 9 and SPP1 is a marker for cluster 3. Cells are colored by the expression levels of the indicated gene. 
h, Phagocytic activity of iTF-Microglia in different states. Flow cytometry measurement of phagocytosis of pHrodo-Red-labeled synaptosomes (left, 
phagocytosis in CCL13high and CCL13low iTF-Microglia; right, phagocytosis in SPP1high and SPP1low iTF-Microglia). Values represent mean ± s.d. of n = 3 
biological replicates; P values from two-tailed Student’s t-test. i, Integration of single-cell transcriptomes of iTF-Microglia and microglia from post-mortem 
human brains3. In the integrated UMAP, iTF-Microglia (left) with high SPP1 expression and human brain-derived microglia with high SPP1 expression  
(right) form a cluster (dashed outline). j, In brains from patients with AD, a higher fraction of microglia is in the SPP1high cluster compared with control 
brains (data from Olah et al.3; P value from two-sided Fisher’s exact test).
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1158

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
b
–5
0
5
10
–8
–4
0
4
UMAP-1
UMAP-2
–5
0
5
20
0
–20
PC1-embeddings value
–40
–60
Microglia
UMAP-1
Cluster 1:
CXCL10
+
Interferon 
Cluster 3:
SPP1
+
Cluster 4:
P53
Cluster 5:
Metallothionins
Cluster 6:
Homeostatic
Cluster 7:
Proliferative 
Cluster 8:
Chemokine
Cluster 9:
CCL13
+
Chemokine
2
1
0
–1
–2
Interferon
(IFI6, IFIT1)
Chemokine
(CCL13, CCL2)
a
Microglia
differentiation 
Transduce with
sgRNA library
iTF-microglia
Day 8
iPSCs
Day 0
+ TMP for CRISPRi
+ Dox for differentiation
sgRNA identity
Transcriptome
–2.5
0
2.5
5
UMAP-2
c
d
Clusters
CDK8 sgRNA
TGFBR2
 sgRNA
Microglia
Mitochondria-high
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
C3
CXCL10
NURP1
LEFTY2
CDKN1C
FCER1G
LGALS1
SPP1
S100A6
MDM2
CDKN1A
MT1G
CCL17
MT2A
DAB2
SLC40A1
RNASET2
TOP2A
MKI67
CENPF
CCL8
CCL4
CCL4L2
CCL3
CCL2
CCL13
Cluster 2:
Interferon
Relative
expression
5
–5
0
5
UMAP-1
UMAP-2
SPP1
–2.5
0
2.5
5
4
3
2
1
0
5
g
i
–5
0
5
–2.5
0
2.5
UMAP-2
CCL13
UMAP-1
Homeostatic
Clusters
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Clusters
PC2-embeddings value
e
f
25
0
–25
–50
–75
–100
Proliferative
(TOP2A, MKi67)
–4
0
4
UMAP-1
–4
0
4
UMAP-1
–6
0
3
UMAP-2
–6
0
UMAP-2
iTF-Microglia
Human microglia
SPP1
Relative
expression
j
SPP1-
low
SPP1-
high
SPP1-
low
SPP1-
high
Control
Control
AD
AD
95.7
93.6
4.3
6.42
% of microglia in cluster
SPP1-low versus SPP1-high
–3
3
8
–3
6
Relative
expression
25
20
15
10
5
0
Number of microglia in cluster
SPP1-low versus SPP1-high
5,339
7,961
240
546
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
Synaptosome phagocytosis
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
Synaptosome phagocytosis
CCL13
Low
High
SPP1
Low
High
P = 0.0014
P = 1 × 10–6
P = 6 × 10–8
h
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1159

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
a
b
d
g
c
–2.5
0
2.5
UMAP-2
5.0
–5
0
5
UMAP-1
NTC
i1
MAPK14
i1
GolgiPlug
–
+
–
+
–
+
NTC
i1
CSF1R 
i1
CSF1R 
i2
sgRNA 
h
–2
–1
0
1
2
Relative shift
to cluster
GolgiPlug
–
+
–
+
–
+
NTC
i1
CDK12
i2
CDK12
i1
sgRNA 
0
1
2
3
4
CCL13 level
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Synaptosome phagocytosis
CCL13
Low
NTC
i1
NTC
i2
CDK12
i1
CDK12
i2
sgRNA
SPP1-positive cells (%)
0
2
4
6
SPP1-positive cells (%)
i
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Relative number of live cells
Dimethylsulfoxide
1 nM
10 nM
25 nM
50 nM
100 nM
1 µM
CSF1R inhibitor
PLX3397
Low Low
Low
High
High
MAPK14
CSF1R
CDK12
sgRNA
sgRNA distribution
Cluster 9
Cluster 6
Cluster 3
NTC
MAPK14
i1
i1
i2
sgRNA 
i2
7
8
6
5
4
3
2
1
Clusters
Normalized proportion 
NTC
CDK12
i1
i1
i2
sgRNA 
i2
e
f
j
0
10
20
30
40
50
MAPK14
i2
GolgiPlug
–
+
–
+
–
+
sgRNA 
SPP1-positive cells (%)
CSF1R inhibitor
PLX3397
0
2
4
6
8
Dimethylsulfoxide
10 nM
25 nM
50 nM
0
1
2
3
4
5
Cluster 9 - CCL13+
Normalized proportion 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
CSF1R
i1
i2
Cluster 3 - SPP1+
9
LSM6
MAPK14
RIOK2
DDX39B
PLK1
AURKB
AARS
MAP2K6
EPOR
RPS6KB1
NDUFV2
INPP5D
TRAPPC3
CDC25B
NDUFS5
NDUFA8
DBF4
STK40
SPTLC2
TGFBR1
MTHFD2
RPS6KB2
PKM
NTC
ZMYND8
PFN2
PPMID
CSNK2A1
RPS6KA6
TRIM24
IFNAR2
DCPS
ATP1A1
CSF1R
CSF2RB
CSF2RA
MED1
CDK12
k
l
Dimethylsulfoxide
24 h
36 h
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
SPP1-positive cells (%)
MAPK14 inhibitor
Skepinone-L
100 nM
Dimethylsulfoxide
10 nM
25 nM
100 nM
Relative number of live cells
1 µM
MAPK14 inhibitor
Skepinone-L
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
P = 1.4 × 10–6
P = 1.3 × 10–5
P = 9.7 × 10–6
P = 2.9 × 10–5
P = 1.3 × 10–5
P = 0.006 P = 0.0003
P = 0.0002
P = 0.0032
P = 0.0026
P = 0.0002
P = 0.035
P = 0.003
NS
NS
NS
P = 0.0003
Fig. 7 | CROP-seq reveals changes in cluster occupancy induced by gene knockdown. a, UMAP depicts cells with sgRNAs targeting MAPK14 (blue), CSF1R 
(red) and CDK12 (green), which are enriched in clusters 3, 6 and 9, respectively. Insert shows cluster 3. b, Changes in cluster distribution after CRISPRi 
knockdown of targeted genes in iTF-Microglia. Heatmap with hierarchical clustering of 37 target genes and NTC and their distribution in clusters 1–9.  
c, Proportion of cells in cluster 9 (CCL13+) expressing either sgRNAs targeting CDK12 or NTC. d, Validation of increased CCL13 in iTF-Microglia expressing 
sgRNAs targeting CDK12 compared with NTC. CCL13 levels were measured via flow cytometry ±5 h of GolgiPlug treatment. e, Decreased synaptosome 
phagocytosis of iTF-Microglia expressing sgRNAs targeting CDK12 compared with NTC. Phagocytosis is further reduced in the CCL13-high population of 
cells expressing sgRNAs targeting CDK12. Phagocytosis was measured via flow cytometry with additional staining for CCL13. f, Proportion of cells in cluster 
3 (SPP1+) expressing either sgRNAs targeting MAPK14 or CSF1R, or NTC. g,h, Functional validation of altered percentage of SPP1+ cells in iTF-Microglia 
expressing sgRNAs targeting MAPK14 (g) or CSF1R (h) compared with NTC. SPP1 was measured via flow cytometry after treating cells for 5 h with 
GolgiPlug. i, Survival of iTF-Microglia after 24-h treatment with various concentrations of MAPK14 inhibitor Skepinone-L quantified by CellTiter-Glo 
assay. Mean ± s.d. of n = 12 biological replicates, analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). j, Percentage of SPP1-positive cells after 100 nM 
Skepinone-L treatment for 24 h or 36 h. SPP1 was measured via flow cytometry after an additional 5 h of GolgiPlug treatment. k, Survival of iTF-Microglia 
after 24-h treatment with various concentrations of CSF1R inhibitor PLX3397 quantified by CellTiter-Glo assay. Mean ± s.d. of n = 6 biological replicates. 
l, Percentage of SPP1+ cells after 24 h of PLX3397 treatment measured via flow cytometry after an additional 5 h of GolgiPlug treatment. In panels d, e, 
g, h and j, values represent mean ± s.d. of n = 3 biological replicates; in all panels except i, P values are from the two-tailed Student’s t-test. i1, i2 refer to 
independent CRISPRi sgRNAs targeting the indicated genes.
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1160

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
synaptosome phagocytosis in CCL13high cells (representative of the 
cells in cluster 9) and CCL13low cells (representative of other clus-
ters) in CDK12 knockdown iTF-Microglia. As observed already in 
our phagocytosis screen (Fig. 5b), knockdown of CDK12 decreased 
synaptosome phagocytosis, in both the CCL13low and CCL13high 
populations (Fig. 7e). CDK12 knockdown caused transcriptional 
downregulation of phosphatidylserine recognition receptors in both 
CCL13low and CCL13high cells, which may contribute to the decreased 
phagocytic activity (Extended Data Fig. 9b). Phagocytosis was even 
further decreased in the CCL13high population (Fig. 7e), suggesting 
that microglia in the CCL13+ state have lower phagocytic capacity, 
as we showed previously (Fig. 6h). Knockdown of CDK12 also had 
some cluster-specific effects (Extended Data Fig. 9b), highlighting 
the complex effects of gene perturbation in both shifting occupancy 
of cells between defined functional states, and also affecting cellu-
lar pathways in both general and state-specific ways. Interestingly, 
MED1 had very similar knockdown phenotypes to CDK12, and 
both genes encode factors associated with general transcription by 
RNA polymerase II.
We next turned our attention to regulators of the disease-relevant 
SPP1-positive cluster 3. Knockdown of MAPK14 and CSF1R had 
dramatically opposing effects, increasing and decreasing occupancy 
in the SPP1 cluster, respectively (Fig. 7a,b,f). Using GolgiPlug treat-
ment to block secretion of SPP1, we validated these phenotypes by 
flow cytometry: knockdown of MAPK14 increased the population 
of SPP1+ cells more than sixfold (Fig. 7g), whereas CSF1R knock-
down greatly diminished the proportion of SPP1+ cells (Fig. 7h).
Based on these effects of genetic perturbations, we asked if phar-
macological targeting of the same hits would similarly modulate 
the abundance of the SPP1+ state. Indeed, inhibition of MAPK14 
with Skepinone-L increased the fraction of SPP1+ microglia in a 
time-dependent manner at nontoxic concentrations (Fig. 7i,j)
Given that pharmacological inhibition of CSF1R has shown 
beneficial effects in several neurodegenerative mouse models, and 
was observed by us and others to selectively affect subpopulations 
of microglia in mice53–55, we tested if pharmacological inhibition 
of CSF1R would reduce the proportion of SPP1+ microglia. While 
the CSF1R inhibitor PLX3397 showed dose-dependent toxicity in 
iTF-Microglia (Fig. 7k), low concentrations of CSF1R inhibitor that 
were nontoxic to bulk iTF-Microglia selectively depleted SPP1+ 
iTF-Microglia (Fig. 7l). Thus, both pharmacological and genetic 
inhibition of CSF1R can decrease the proportion of SPP1+ cells.
In conclusion, our CROP-seq screen enabled deep character-
ization of the hit genes that our primary screens identified and 
revealed the existence of a wealth of microglial cell states and their 
regulators. To enable the scientific community to further explore 
this large dataset, we implemented additional functionality in the 
CRISPRbrain data commons (https://www.crisprbrain.org/) we 
previously described12. Specifically, interactive three-dimensional 
UMAP representations and heatmaps enable the selective investiga-
tion of cells by expression levels of genes of interest, sgRNA identity 
and cluster membership.
Discussion
In this study, we described a platform for large-scale, multimodal 
CRISPRi/a-based genetic screens in human iPSC-derived microglia. 
We demonstrated the power of this platform in multiple large-scale 
screens. While CRISPR knockout strategies are commonly used 
for loss-of-function screens, the partial knockdown achieved by 
CRISPRi enables a more nuanced characterization of the function 
of essential genes. For example, we uncovered a selective vulner-
ability of microglia in the SPP1+ state to partial knockdown of the 
microglia-essential gene CSF1R. The use of human microglia (as 
opposed to mouse primary microglia) enabled us to recapitulate 
microglia features found in human but not mouse brain, such as 
a state characterized by a chemokine signature52. Notwithstanding, 
there are several areas for future optimization of our iTF-Microglia 
platform, as detailed in the Supplementary Discussion.
Our platform uncovered insights into microglial biology. We 
identified several genes associated with neurodegenerative diseases, 
including PFN1 and INPP5D, as modulators of phagocytosis in 
microglia (Fig. 5), thus pointing to a possible cellular mechanism by 
which variants in these genes contribute to disease (Supplementary 
Discussion).
scRNA-seq revealed that iTF-Microglia adopt a spectrum of 
states, including states mirroring those observed in human brains. 
Our CROP-seq screen identified genes controlling the distribution 
of iTF-Microglia across these states. We demonstrate that knock-
down or pharmacological inhibition of MAPK14 or CSF1R pro-
motes or depletes, respectively, the disease-relevant SPP1 state of 
microglia (Supplementary Discussion). This will make it possible to 
determine the role of SPP1+ microglia in different diseases, where 
they may play either beneficial or detrimental roles, and to manipu-
late this disease-associated microglial state for therapeutic benefit.
We anticipate that the screening platform we describe here can 
be broadly applied to screen for other microglia-related phenotypes, 
and to systematically identify regulators of different microglial 
states. Using iPSCs derived from patients with familial or spo-
radic diseases will enable the identification of potential therapeu-
tic targets that can correct cellular phenotypes10. Introduction of 
microglia into cocultures or brain organoids can provide a screen-
ing platform to investigate their interactions with other brain cell 
types, such as synaptic pruning of neurons. Finally, transplantation 
of iTF-Microglia into postnatal, immune-deficient, humanized 
mice could result in microglia with an in vivo human microglial 
gene signature, including more homeostatic microglia, and enable 
the investigation of factors controlling the interaction of microglia 
with a model for diseased brain environment56–59.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research report-
ing summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary infor-
mation, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of 
author contributions and competing interests; and statements of 
data and code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41593-022-01131-4.
Received: 22 June 2021; Accepted: 24 June 2022;  
Published online: 11 August 2022
References
	1.	 Butovsky, O. & Weiner, H. L. Microglial signatures and their role in health 
and disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 622–635 (2018).
	2.	 Efthymiou, A. G. & Goate, A. M. Late onset Alzheimer’s disease genetics 
implicates microglial pathways in disease risk. Mol. Neurodegener. 12, 43 
(2017).
	3.	 Olah, M. et al. Single cell RNA sequencing of human microglia uncovers a 
subset associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Commun. 11, 6129 (2020).
	4.	 Mathys, H. et al. Temporal tracking of microglia activation in 
neurodegeneration at single-cell resolution. Cell Rep. 21, 366–380 (2017).
	5.	 Keren-Shaul, H. et al. A unique microglia type associated with restricting 
development of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 169, 1276–1290.e17 (2017).
	6.	 Srinivasan, K. et al. Untangling the brain’s neuroinflammatory and 
neurodegenerative transcriptional responses. Nat. Commun. 7, 11295 (2016).
	7.	 Hammond, T. R. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing of microglia throughout 
the mouse lifespan and in the injured brain reveals complex cell-state 
changes. Immunity 50, 253–271.e6 (2019).
	8.	 Masuda, T. et al. Spatial and temporal heterogeneity of mouse and human 
microglia at single-cell resolution. Nature 566, 388–392 (2019).
	9.	 Sankowski, R. et al. Mapping microglia states in the human brain through the 
integration of high-dimensional techniques. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 2098–2110 
(2019).
	10.	Kampmann, M. CRISPR-based functional genomics for neurological disease. 
Nat. Rev. Neurol. 16, 465–480 (2020).
	11.	Tian, R. et al. CRISPR interference-based platform for multimodal genetic 
screens in human iPSC-derived neurons. Neuron 104, 239–255 e212 (2019).
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1161

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
	12.	Tian, R. et al. Genome-wide CRISPRi/a screens in human neurons link 
lysosomal failure to ferroptosis. Nat. Neurosci. 24, 1020–1034 (2021).
	13.	Abud, E. M. et al. iPSC-derived human microglia-like cells to study 
neurological diseases. Neuron 94, 278–293 e279 (2017).
	14.	Douvaras, P. et al. Directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells to 
microglia. Stem Cell Rep. 8, 1516–1524 (2017).
	15.	Muffat, J. et al. Efficient derivation of microglia-like cells from human 
pluripotent stem cells. Nat. Med. 22, 1358–1367 (2016).
	16.	Pandya, H. et al. Differentiation of human and murine induced pluripotent 
stem cells to microglia-like cells. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 753–759 (2017).
	17.	Haenseler, W. et al. A highly efficient human pluripotent stem cell microglia 
model displays a neuronal-co-culture-specific expression profile and 
inflammatory response. Stem Cell Rep. 8, 1727–1742 (2017).
	18.	Brownjohn, P. W. et al. Functional studies of missense TREM2 mutations in 
human stem cell-derived microglia. Stem Cell Rep. 10, 1294–1307 (2018).
	19.	McQuade, A. et al. Development and validation of a simplified method to 
generate human microglia from pluripotent stem cells. Mol. Neurodegener. 13, 
67 (2018).
	20.	Zhang, Y. et al. An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of 
glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci. 34, 
11929–11947 (2014).
	21.	Bennett, M. L. et al. New tools for studying microglia in the mouse and 
human CNS. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, E1738–E1746 (2016).
	22.	Hickman, S. E. et al. The microglial sensome revealed by direct RNA 
sequencing. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1896–1905 (2013).
	23.	Bohlen, C. J. et al. Diverse requirements for microglial survival, specification, 
and function revealed by defined-medium cultures. Neuron 94,  
759–773.e8 (2017).
	24.	Horlbeck, M. A. et al. Compact and highly active next-generation  
libraries for CRISPR-mediated gene repression and activation. eLife 5,  
e19760 (2016).
	25.	Michaelson, M. D. et al. CSF-1 deficiency in mice results in abnormal brain 
development. Development 122, 2661–2672 (1996).
	26.	Kondo, Y. & Duncan, I. D. Selective reduction in microglia density and 
function in the white matter of colony-stimulating factor-1-deficient mice.  
J. Neurosci. Res. 87, 2686–2695 (2009).
	27.	Erblich, B., Zhu, L., Etgen, A. M., Dobrenis, K. & Pollard, J. W. Absence of 
colony stimulation factor-1 receptor results in loss of microglia, disrupted 
brain development and olfactory deficits. PLoS ONE 6, e26317 (2011).
	28.	Chitu, V. et al. Microglial homeostasis requires balanced CSF-1/CSF-2 
receptor signaling. Cell Rep. 30, 3004–3019 e3005 (2020).
	29.	Tan, F., Qian, C., Tang, K., Abd-Allah, S. M. & Jing, N. Inhibition of 
transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) signaling can substitute for Oct4 
protein in reprogramming and maintain pluripotency. J. Biol. Chem. 290, 
4500–4511 (2015).
	30.	Butovsky, O. et al. Identification of a unique TGF-β-dependent molecular and 
functional signature in microglia. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 131–143 (2014).
	31.	Adler, A. S. et al. CDK8 maintains tumor dedifferentiation and embryonic 
stem cell pluripotency. Cancer Res. 72, 2129–2139 (2012).
	32.	Mayo, L. et al. Dual role of CD38 in microglial activation and 
activation-induced cell death. J. Immunol. 181, 92–103 (2008).
	33.	Wang, Y. M. et al. Blocking the CD38/cADPR pathway plays a double-edged 
role in LPS stimulated microglia. Neuroscience 361, 34–42 (2017).
	34.	Tanzer, M. C., Bludau, I., Stafford, C. A., Hornung, V. & Mann, M. 
Phosphoproteome profiling uncovers a key role for CDKs in TNF signaling. 
Nat. Commun. 12, 6053 (2021).
	35.	Henry, K.L. et al. CDK12-mediated transcriptional regulation of noncanonical 
NF-κB components is essential for signaling. Sci. Signal. 11 (2018).
	36.	Jin, Z., Wei, W., Yang, M., Du, Y. & Wan, Y. Mitochondrial complex I activity 
suppresses inflammation and enhances bone resorption by shifting 
macrophage-osteoclast polarization. Cell Metab. 20, 483–498 (2014).
	37.	Salter, M. W. & Stevens, B. Microglia emerge as central players in brain 
disease. Nat. Med. 23, 1018–1027 (2017).
	38.	Floden, A. M. & Combs, C. K. Microglia demonstrate age-dependent 
interaction with amyloid-β fibrils. J. Alzheimers Dis. 25, 279–293 (2011).
	39.	Bliederhaeuser, C. et al. Age-dependent defects of alpha-synuclein  
oligomer uptake in microglia and monocytes. Acta Neuropathol. 131,  
379–391 (2016).
	40.	Hong, S. et al. Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in 
Alzheimer mouse models. Science 352, 712–716 (2016).
	41.	Lui, H. et al. Progranulin deficiency promotes circuit-specific synaptic 
pruning by microglia via complement activation. Cell 165, 921–935 (2016).
	42.	Gilbert, L. A. et al. Genome-scale CRISPR-mediated control of gene 
repression and activation. Cell 159, 647–661 (2014).
	43.	Ramkumar, P. et al. CRISPR-based screens uncover determinants of 
immunotherapy response in multiple myeloma. Blood Adv. 4, 2899–2911 
(2020).
	44.	Wu, C. H. et al. Mutations in the profilin 1 gene cause familial amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis. Nature 488, 499–503 (2012).
	45.	Schulz, D., Severin, Y., Zanotelli, V. R. T. & Bodenmiller, B. In-depth 
characterization of monocyte-derived macrophages using a mass 
cytometry-based phagocytosis assay. Sci. Rep. 9, 1925 (2019).
	46.	Zou, L. et al. Profilin-1 is a negative regulator of mammary carcinoma 
aggressiveness. Br. J. Cancer 97, 1361–1371 (2007).
	47.	Lu, E. et al. Profilin 1 knockdown prevents ischemic brain damage by 
promoting M2 microglial polarization associated with the RhoA/ROCK 
pathway. J. Neurosci. Res. 98, 1198–1212 (2020).
	48.	Masuda, T., Sankowski, R., Staszewski, O. & Prinz, M. Microglia 
heterogeneity in the single-cell era. Cell Rep. 30, 1271–1281 (2020).
	49.	Cappellano, G. et al. The Yin-Yang of osteopontin in nervous system diseases: 
damage versus repair. Neural Regen. Res. 16, 1131–1137 (2021).
	50.	Sala Frigerio, C. et al. The major risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease: age, sex, 
and genes modulate the microglia response to Aβ plaques. Cell Rep. 27, 
1293–1306.e6 (2019).
	51.	Szulzewsky, F. et al. Glioma-associated microglia/macrophages display an 
expression profile different from M1 and M2 polarization and highly express 
Gpnmb and Spp1. PLoS ONE 10, e0116644 (2015).
	52.	Geirsdottir, L. et al. Cross-species single-cell analysis reveals divergence of the 
primate microglia program. Cell 179, 1609–1622.e16 (2019).
	53.	Zhan, L. et al. A MAC2-positive progenitor-like microglial population is 
resistant to CSF1R inhibition in adult mouse brain. eLife 9, e51796 (2020).
	54.	Zhan, L. et al. Proximal recolonization by self-renewing microglia 
re-establishes microglial homeostasis in the adult mouse brain. PLoS Biol. 17, 
e3000134 (2019).
	55.	Johnson, N.R. et al. CSF1R inhibitor levels determine sex-specific phenotype 
of resilient microglia and neurofunctional rescue leading to extended survival 
in tauopathy mice. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.20. 
436288 (2021).
	56.	Hasselmann, J. et al. Development of a chimeric model to study and 
manipulate human microglia in vivo. Neuron 103, 1016–1033 e1010 (2019).
	57.	Mancuso, R. et al. Stem-cell-derived human microglia transplanted in mouse 
brain to study human disease. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 2111–2116 (2019).
	58.	Svoboda, D. S. et al. Human iPSC-derived microglia assume a primary 
microglia-like state after transplantation into the neonatal mouse brain.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116, 25293–25303 (2019).
	59.	Xu, R. et al. Human iPSC-derived mature microglia retain their identity and 
functionally integrate in the chimeric mouse brain. Nat. Commun. 11,  
1577 (2020).
	60.	Guttikonda, S. R. et al. Fully defined human pluripotent stem cell-derived 
microglia and tri-culture system model C3 production in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Nat. Neurosci. 24, 343–354 (2021).
	61.	Chen, S. W. et al. Efficient conversion of human induced pluripotent stem 
cells into microglia by defined transcription factors. Stem Cell Rep. 16, 
1363–1380 (2021).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to 
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other 
third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statu-
tory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022
Nature Neuroscience | VOL 25 | September 2022 | 1149–1162 | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
1162

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
Methods
Human iPSC culture. Human iPSCs (male WTC11 background, Coriell Catalog 
(Cat.) No. GM25256) were cultured in StemFlex Basal Medium (Gibco; Cat. No. 
A33493-01) on BioLite Cell Culture Treated Dishes (Thermo Fisher Scientific; 
assorted Cat. Nos.) coated with Growth Factor Reduced, Phenol Red-Free, 
LDEV-Free Matrigel Basement Membrane Matrix (Corning; Cat. No. 356231) 
diluted 1:100 in Knockout DMEM (GIBCO/Thermo Fisher Scientific; Cat. No. 
10829-018). StemFlex was replaced every other day or every day once 50% 
confluent. When 70–80% confluent, cells were passaged by aspirating media, 
washing with DPBS (Gibco; Cat. No. 14190-144), incubating with StemPro 
Accutase Cell Dissociation Reagent (GIBCO/Thermo Fisher Scientific; Cat. No. 
A11105-01) at 37 °C for 7 min, diluting Accutase 1:5 in StemFlex, collecting cells 
in conicals, centrifuging at 220g for 5 min, aspirating supernatant, resuspending 
cell pellet in StemFlex supplemented with 10 nM Y-27632 dihydrochloride ROCK 
inhibitor (Tocris; Cat. No. 125410), counting and plating onto Matrigel-coated 
plates at the desired number. Human iPSC studies at the University of California, 
San Francisco were approved by the Human Gamete, Embryo and Stem Cell 
Research Committee.
Human CRISPR iTF-iPS cell line generation. The two donor plasmids 
for inducible expression of six codon-optimized transcription factors were 
constructed using the plasmid pUCM (GENEWIZ). Human iPSCs (WTC11, 
Coriell Cat. No. GM25256) were engineered to express PU.1, CEBPβ and IRF5 
under a doxycyline-inducible system in the CLYBL safe-harbor locus and 
MAFB, CEBPα and IRF8 in the AAVS1 safe-harbor locus using Transcription 
Activator-Like Effector Nuclease (TALEN)-based editing as previously 
described11. Clones were selected using both neomycin and puromycin, thus 
generating the cell line we termed iTF-iPSCs. Next, iTF-iPSCs were transfected 
with pC13N-dCas9-BFP-KRAB (ref. 11), pRT029-CLYBL-CAG-DHFR-dCa
s9-BFP-KRAB-NLS-DHFR (ref. 11) or pRT043-CLYBL-DDdCas9VPH-GFP 
(ref. 12) to generate constitutive CRISPRi, inducible CRISPRi or inducible 
CRISPRa iTF-iPS cell lines, respectively, in the CLYBL safe-harbor locus using 
the same TALEN-editing method. After transfection, BFP-positive (CRISPRi) 
or GFP-positive (CRISPRa) iTF-iPSCs were repeatedly enriched via FACS (BD 
FACSAria Fusion).
To generate monoclonal cell lines, 5,000 polyclonal CRISPR iTF-iPSCs were 
plated on 10-cm dishes to enable isolation of individual clones under direct 
visualization with an inverted microscope (Evos FL, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 
a tissue culture hood via manual scraping. Monoclonal cell lines were tested for 
iTF-Microglia differentiation capability and CRISPRi/a activity.
Human iPSC-derived iTF-Microglia cell culture and differentiation. 
iTF-iPSCs were grown in StemFlex until reaching at least 50% confluency and 
were grown for at least 24 h without ROCK inhibitor. They were dissociated 
and centrifuged as described above and pelleted cells were resuspended in day 
0 differentiation medium containing the following: Essential 8 Basal Medium 
(Gibco; Cat. No. A15169-01) as a base, 10 nM ROCK inhibitor and 2 μg ml−1 
doxycycline (Clontech; Cat. No. 631311). iTF-iPSCs were counted and seeded 
onto double-coated plates (Poly-d-Lysine-precoated Bio plates (Corning, assorted 
Cat. No.) + Matrigel coating) with the following seeding densities: 10,000 cells 
per well for 96-well plate, 0.1 million per well for 12-well plate, 0.15 million per 
well for 6-well plate, 2 million per dish for 10-cm dish and 8 million per dish for 
15-cm dish. On day 2, medium was replaced with day 2 differentiation medium 
containing Advanced DMEM/F12 Medium (Gibco; Cat. No. 12634-010) as a 
base medium containing the following: 1 × Antibiotic-Antimycotic (Anti-Anti) 
(Gibco; Cat. No. 15240-062), 1 × GlutaMAX (Gibco; Cat. No. 35050-061), 
2 μg ml−1 doxycycline, 100 ng ml−1 Human IL-34 (Peprotech; Cat. No. 200-34) and 
10 ng ml−1 Human GM-CSF (Peprotech; Cat. No. 300-03). Two days later, on day 
4, the medium was replaced with iTF-Microglia medium, containing Advanced 
DMEM/F12 as a base medium and the following: 1 × Anti-Anti, 1 × GlutaMAX, 
2 μg ml−1 doxycycline, 100 ng ml−1 Human IL-34, 10 ng ml−1 Human GM-CSF, 
50 ng ml−1 Human M-CSF (Peprotech; Cat. No. 300-25) and 50 ng ml−1 Human 
TGFB1 (Peprotech; Cat. No. 100-21C). On day 8, the medium was replaced with 
fresh iTF-Microglia medium. iTF-Microglia can be cultured for at least 12 more 
days in iTF-Microglia medium with full medium changes every 3–4 d. Cells were 
assayed on day 8, day 9 or day 15 in most experiments. When differentiating the 
inducible CRISPRi/a iTF-Microglia, the medium was supplemented with 50 nM 
TMP (MP Biomedical; Cat. No. 195527) and changed every 2 d to maintain strong 
knockdown/overexpression.
For dissociation, iTF-Microglia were washed once with PBS before adding 
TrypLE Express (Gibco; Cat. No. 12605-028) and incubating for 10 min at 37 °C. 
Cells were diluted 1:3 in Advanced DMEM/F12 and spun down at 220g for 5 min 
before resuspending in appropriate media.
Doxycycline removal assay after day 8 of differentiation. First, 10,000 iTF-iPSCs 
were seeded into 96-well Flat Clear Bottom White Polystyrene Poly-d-Lysine 
Coated Microplates (Corning; Cat. No. 3843) and differentiated into iTF-Microglia 
as described above. At day 8 of the differentiation, the medium of iTF-Microglia 
was replaced with (1) full media change of iTF-Microglia medium containing 
2 μg ml−1 doxycycline, or (2) full media change of iTF-Microglia medium 
containing no doxycycline, or (3) half media changes of iTF-Microglia medium 
containing no doxycycline. This media-replacing paradigm was repeated every 
3 d until day 15. Microglia survival was assessed by performing the CellTiter-Glo 
2.0 (Promega; Cat. No. G9242) assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 
Luminescence signal was recorded with the M5 plate reader (SpectroMax).
Differentiation and culture of iPSC-derived microglia following the protocol 
by Brownjohn and colleagues. Brownjohn iPSC-Microglia (Brownjohn-iMG) 
were differentiated from dCas9-KRAB iPSCs (AICS-0090, Coriell Cat. No. AICS-
0090-391) using the published protocol18 with minor modifications. In brief, 
iPSCs (cultured in StemFlex medium with colonies at 60–80% confluency) were 
dissociated to single cells with Accutase, collected and plated at 10,000 cells per 
well in 96-well ultra-low attachment, round bottom plates (Corning; Cat. No. 
7007) in 100 μl of embryoid body medium (10 mM ROCK inhibitor, 50 ng ml−1 
BMP-4 (Peprotech; Cat. No. 120-05), 20 ng ml−1 SCF (Peprotech; Cat. No. 300-07)  
and 50 ng ml−1 VEGF (Peprotech; Cat. No. 100-20) in E8 medium), and then 
subjected to centrifugation at 300g for 3 min. Embryoid bodies were cultured 
for 4 d, with a half medium change after 2 d. On day 4, embryoid bodies were 
carefully collected and transferred into a 15-ml conical tube, and left to settle at 
the bottom. The embryoid medium was aspirated and 15–20 embryoid bodies 
were plated per well in 6-well plates and cultured in 3 ml of hematopoetic medium 
(2 mM GlutaMax, 1 × Anti-Anti, 55 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (BioRad; Cat. No. 
1610710), 100 ng ml−1 M-CSF and 25 ng ml−1 Human IL-3 (Peprotech; Cat. No. 
200-03) in X-Vivo 15 (Lonza; Cat. No. BE02-060F). Two-thirds of the medium 
was exchanged every 3–4 d. Microglia progenitors were collected from suspension 
after 14–21 d and plated onto PDL-coated plates in microglia maturation medium 
(2 mM GlutaMax, 1 × Anti-Anti, 100 ng ml−1 IL-34 and 10 ng ml−1 GM-CSF in 
Advanced RPMI-1640 (Gibco; Cat. No. 12633012)). Microglia progenitors were 
further differentiated for 8 d with full medium change every 2–3 d before using 
them for experiments.
iTF-Microglia coculture with iNeurons. iPSC-derived neurons (iNeurons) 
were differentiated from WTC11 iPSCs engineered to express NGN2 under 
a doxycycline-inducible system in the AAVS1 safe-harbor locus as previously 
described11,62 with minor modifications as follows: iPSCs were maintained and 
dissociated as described above and replated on Matrigel-coated dishes in N2 
Pre-Differentiation Medium. After 3 d, hereafter day 0, the pre-differentiated 
neurons were dissociated to single cells with Accutase, collected and plated at 
10,000 cells per well in PDL-coated 96-well plates in BrainPhys Neuronal Medium 
(BrainPhys (STEMCELL Technologies; Cat. No. 05790) as the base, 0.5 × N2 
Supplement (Thermo Fisher; Cat. No. 17502-048), 0.5 × B27 Supplement (GIBCO/
Thermo Fisher Scientific; Cat. No. 17504-044), 10 ng ml−1 NT-3 (PeproTech; 
Cat. No. 450-03), 10 ng ml−1 BDNF, 1 mg ml−1 Mouse laminin (Thermo Fisher; 
Cat. No. 23017-015) and 2 mg ml−1 doxycycline. On day 3, a full media change 
was performed. On day 7, half the medium was removed, and an equal volume 
of BrainPhys Neuronal Medium was added. On day 14, half the medium was 
removed and an equal volume of BrainPhys Neuronal Medium containing day 
8 iTF-Microglia expressing Lck-mNeonGreen and supplemented with 2× the 
cytokines of the iTF-Microglia medium was added. Then, 3,000 iTF-Microglia 
were added to each well and immunostaining experiments were performed  
after 1 d.
Lentiviral transduction of iPSCs with sgRNA constructs. Individual or pooled 
sgRNAs were lentivirally packaged in HEK293T cells (ATCC Cat. No. CRL-3216) 
as described11, and introduced into CRISPRi or CRISPRa iPSCs via lentiviral 
delivery using TransIT Lenti Reagent (Mirus Bio; Cat. No. MIR 6600) according 
to manufacturer’s protocol. Cells were selected with 2 µg ml−1 puromycin (Gibco; 
Cat. No. A11138-03) for 2–4 d until the fraction of infected cells was > 0.9, as 
determined by flow cytometry of sgRNA-BFP fluorescence, after which cells were 
cultured for 2–4 d in the absence of puromycin to allow them to recover. sgRNA 
protospacer sequences are provided in Supplementary Table 10.
qPCR. To quantify TFRC, INPP5D or PICALM knockdown or CXCR4, CD209 
or PFN1 overexpression, lysed cell pellets from human iPSCs or iTF-Microglia 
were thawed on ice, and total RNA was extracted using the Quick-RNA Miniprep 
Kit (Zymo; Cat. No. R1054). Complementary DNA was synthesized with the 
SensiFAST cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bioline; Cat. No. 65054). Samples were prepared 
for qPCR in technical triplicates in 5-µl reaction volumes using SensiFAST SYBR 
Lo-ROX 2X Master Mix (Bioline; Cat. No. BIO-94005), custom qPCR primers 
from Integrated DNA Technologies used at a final concentration of 0.2 µM and 
cDNA diluted at 1:3. qPCR was performed on an Applied Biosystems QuantStudio 
6 Pro Real-Time PCR System using QuantStudio Real Time PCR software 
(v.1.3) with the following Fast 2-Step protocol: (1) 95 °C for 20 s; (2) 95 °C for 5 s 
(denaturation); (3) 60 °C for 20 s (annealing/extension); (4) repeat steps 2 and 3 
for a total of 40 cycles; (5) 95 °C for 1 s; (6) ramp 1.92 °C s−1 from 60 °C to 95 °C 
to establish melting curve. Expression fold changes were calculated using the 
∆∆Ct method, normalizing to housekeeping gene GAPDH. Primer sequences are 
provided in Supplementary Table 10.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
Cell-surface protein staining for flow cytometry. Dissociated and resuspended 
iTF-Microglia were blocked for 15 min with 1:20 Human FC Block (BD 
Biosciences; Cat. No. 564220) and then stained with 1:66 PE/Cy7 anti-human 
CD184 (CXCR4) (BioLegend; Cat. No. 306514) for CRISPRa validation or 1:66 
PE-Cy7 anti-human CD71 (TFRC) (BioLegend; Cat. No. 334112) for CRISPRi 
validation for 30 min in the dark. For the CD38 screen and validation experiments, 
iTF-Microglia were stained with 1:200 anti-hCD38 PE (R&D Systems; Cat. No. 
FAB2404P). Cells were washed twice with DPBS before analyzing them by flow 
cytometry using the BD LSRFortessa X14 (BD Biosciences) using BD FACSDiva 
(v.8.0.1.1) software. Flow cytometry data were analyzed using FlowJo (FlowJo, 
v.10.7.1); raw median fluorescence intensity values of CD184, CD71 and CD38 
stained cells were normalized to nonstained control samples; and data were plotted 
as fold change using Prism 8 (GraphPad, v.8.4.2).
Intracellular protein staining for flow cytometry. iTF-Microglia were treated for 
6 h with 1:2,000 GolgiPlug (BD; Cat. No. 555029) or dimethylsulfoxide as control 
before dissociating. Cells were fixed and permeabilized with the eBioscience 
Intracellular Fixation and Permeabilization Buffer Set (Invitrogen; Cat. No. 88-
8824-00) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were stained with 1:75 
Anti-Hu Osteopontin (SPP1) eFluor 660 (eBioscience; Cat. No. 50-9096-42) or 
1:75 Human CCL13 488 (R&D Systems; Cat. No. IC327G) or their isotype controls 
Mouse IgG1 Control Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated (R&D Systems; Cat. No. IC002G) 
and Mouse IGG1 kappa Isotype (eBioscience; Cat. No. 50-4714-82) overnight at 
4 °C. Cells were washed twice with DPBS before analyzing them by flow cytometry 
using the BD FACS Celesta (BD Biosciences) or the BD FACSAria Fusion using BD 
FACSDiva (v.8.0.1.1) software. Flow cytometry data were analyzed using FlowJo, 
raw median fluorescence intensity values of Osteopontin (SPP1) and CCL13 
stained cells were normalized to isotype-control samples and data were plotted as 
fold change using Prism 8. The gating strategy used to determine the percentage of 
SPP1-positive cells is shown in Supplementary Fig. 1c.
Immunohistochemistry. iTF-Microglia monocultures and cocultures 
were differentiated in PDL-coated 96-well plates. They were fixed with 4% 
paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Sciences; Cat. No. 15710) for 10 min at 
room temperature. After washing with DPBS three times, cells were permeabilized 
and blocked with 5% normal goat serum (Vector Laboratories; Cat. No. S-1000-20) 
with 0.01% Triton X-100 (TEKnova; Cat. No. T1105) in PBS for 1 h at room 
temperature. Cells were then incubated with primary antibodies diluted in 
blocking buffer at 4 °C overnight. After that, cells were washed with DPBS three 
times and incubated with secondary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer for 1 h at 
room temperature. Cells were then washed with DPBS three times and stained with 
10 μg ml−1 Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Cat. No. H3570) for 10 min. 
Cells were imaged using a confocal microscope (Leica SP8) or an IN Cell Analyzer 
6000 (GE; Cat. No. 28-9938-51) using IN Cell Analyzer 6000 Acquisition Software 
(v.4.0). Primary antibodies used for immunofluorescence in this study were as 
follows: anti-mouse 1:150 GPR34 (R&D Systems; Cat. No. MAB4617), anti-rabbit 
1:1,000 IBA1 (Wako; Cat. No. 019-19741), anti-rabbit 1:200 TFRC (abcam; Cat. No. 
ab84036), anti-rabbit 1:1,000 synaptophysin (Synaptic Systems; Cat. No. 101 004). 
Secondary antibodies used in this study were as follows: goat anti-rabbit IgG Alexa 
Fluor 555 (1:500 dilution; abcam; Cat. No. ab150078), goat anti-mouse IgG Alexa 
Fluor 488 (1:500 dilution; abcam; Cat. No. ab150113) and goat anti-chicken IgG 
Alexa Fluor 647. F-actin was stained using ActinGreen 488 (Invitrogen; Cat. No. 
R37110) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Synaptosome isolation and pHrodo-Red labeling. Synaptosomes were isolated 
from fresh Innovative Grade US Origin Rat Sprague Dawley Brain (Innovative 
Research; Cat. No. IGRTSDBR) with the Syn-PER Synaptic Protein Extraction 
Reagent (Thermo Scientific; Cat. No. 87793) according to the manufacture’s 
protocol with minor changes. Briefly, 10 ml of Syn-PER Reagent supplemented with 
1 × protease inhibitor cOmplete Mini, EDTA free (Roche; Cat. No. 11836170001) 
and 1 × phosphatase inhibitor PhosSTOP (Roche; Cat. No. 4906845001) were 
added per gram of brain tissue. Dounce homogenization was performed on ice and 
homogenate was transferred to a conical tube and centrifuged at 1,200g for 10 min 
at 4 °C. The pellet was discarded, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube 
and the centrifugation step was repeated. The supernatant was then centrifuged 
at 15,000g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and the wet pellet 
was weighed. The synaptosome fractions were resuspended at a concentration 
of 50 mg ml−1. Then, 3 μM pHrodo-Red, succinimidyl ester (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific; Cat. No. P36600) was added to the synaptosome fraction and incubated 
for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. After diluting the solution 1:10 in 
DPBS, the synaptosomes were spun down at 2,500g for 5 min. The supernatant 
was removed and then the synaptosomes were washed two times with DPBS. 
The pHrodo-labeled synaptosomes were resuspended in iTF-Microglia medium 
at a stock concentration of 50 mg ml−1 and directly used for phagocytosis assays 
or frozen in synaptosome freezing medium (5% dimethylsulfoxide in Advanced 
DMEM/F12) for later use.
Phagocytosis assays. Day 8 iTF-Microglia were used for all phagocytosis assays. 
iTF-Microglia medium was prepared with pHrodo-Red-labeled synaptosomes 
at a concentration of 1 mg ml−1 or 0.5 μl ml−1 media of Fluoresbrite Carboxylate 
YG 1.0 Micron Microspheres (15702-10; Cat. No. 15702-10). After replacing 
the media with the substrate media, iTF-Microglia were incubated for 1.5 h 
in the incubator if not otherwise stated. Cells were washed twice with DPBS, 
dissociated, resuspended in ice-cold DPBS and analyzed via flow cytometry. 
Where indicated, actin polymerization was inhibited by pretreating cells with 
5 μM Cytochalasin D (Invitrogen; Cat. No. PHZ1063) for 30 min before the 
addition of phagocytic substrate media. For analyzing phagocytic capabilities 
within microglia clusters, pHrodo-Red-labeled synaptosomes at a concentration 
of 1 mg ml−1 were added to iTF-Microglia for 1.5 h. Microglia were washed three 
times with PBS before incubating them in iTF-Microglia media supplemented 
with 1:2,000 GolgiPlug (BD; Cat. No. 555029) for 4 h. Cells were dissociated, fixed 
and stained for CCL13 and SPP1 as described above. Flow cytometry data were 
analyzed using FlowJo, raw median fluorescence intensity values of phagocytosing 
cells were normalized to no-substrate control samples and data were plotted as 
fold change using Prism 8.
Human cytokine array. Day 8 iTF-Microglia were treated with 100 ng ml−1 LPS 
(Millipore Sigma; Cat. No. LPS25) or DPBS control. After 24 h, the supernatant was 
collected and processed using the Proteome Profiler Human Cytokine Array Kit 
(R&D Systems; Cat. No. ARY005B), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 
Data were acquired using Image Studio (v.5.2). For analysis of the signals, Fiji 
(v.2.0.0) was used to measure the integrated pixel density for each pair of duplicate 
dots representing a cytokine. Background signal was measured from negative 
control dots and then subtracted from each dot. The relative change in cytokine 
levels as a result of LPS treatment was obtained by comparing corresponding 
cytokine signals across multiple arrays performed in tandem.
Live-cell imaging. iTF-iPSCs transduced with individual sgRNAs as described 
above were passaged and differentiated into iTF-Microglia in the 96-well format 
described above. Starting on day 2 of differentiation, and continuing every 2 d 
until day 15, iTF-Microglia were stained with 10 μg ml−1 Hoechst 33342 for 10 min 
at 37 °C, washed with PBS and imaged with the IN Cell Analyzer 6000 using IN 
Cell Analyzer 6000 Acquisition Software (v.4.0). Using the same 96-well format 
as described above, day 8 iTF-Microglia were stained for F-actin using 25 nM 
SiR-actin (Cytoskeleton; Cat. No. CY-SC001) probe diluted in iTF-Microglia 
medium, with a 4-h incubation at 37 °C. A full media change with iTF-Microglia 
medium was completed before imaging using the IN Cell Analyzer 6000.
CellTiter-Glo assay after pharmaceutical inhibition of CSF1R or MAPK14. 
First, 10,000 iTF-iPSCs were seeded into 96-well Flat Clear Bottom White 
Polystyrene Poly-d-Lysine Coated Microplates (Corning; Cat. No. 3843) and 
differentiated into iTF-Microglia. For CSF1R inhibition, cells were treated with 
the CSF1R inhibitor PLX3397 at day 8 (ApexBio; Cat. No. B5854) at indicated 
concentrations or dimethylsulfoxide control for 24 h before performing the 
CellTiter-Glo 2.0 (Promega; Cat. No. G9242) assay according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. For MAPK14 inhibition, cells were treated with the MAPK14 
inhibitor Skepinone-L at day 8 (Selleckchem; Cat. No. 1221485831) at indicated 
concentrations or dimethylsulfoxide control for 24 h before performing the 
CellTiter-Glo 2.0 assay. Luminescence signal was recorded with the M5 plate 
reader (SpectroMax) using SoftMax Pro 6.5.1.
CRISPR screens. Large-scale survival-based and FACS-based screens. Inducible 
CRISPRi and CRISPRa iTF-iPSCs were infected with pooled CRISPRi or 
CRISPRa sgRNA libraries24 targeting the druggable genome and selected for 
lentiviral integration with puromycin, as described above. Day 0 iTF-iPSCs, with 
a cell count corresponding to an average 1,000× coverage per library element, 
were differentiated into iTF-Microglia as described above, with constant TMP 
supplementation for dCas9 stabilization.
For the survival screens, day 0 iPSCs and day 15 iTF-Microglia were lifted with 
Accutase or TryplE Express, respectively. Lifted cells were collected and subjected 
to sample preparation for next-generation sequencing as described below.
For the CD38-activation screen, day 8 iTF-Microglia were dissociated 
with TrypleE and then blocked and stained with anti-PE-CD38 as described 
in the cell-surface staining section. Cells were sorted into high- and low-signal 
populations corresponding to the top 30% and the bottom 30% of the CD38-PE 
signal distribution (gating strategy shown in Supplementary Fig. 1a).
For the phagocytosis FACS screen, day 15 iTF-Microglia were incubated 
with PhRodo-Red synaptosomes as described in the phagocytosis assay section. 
Cells were then dissociated with TryplE and sorted into high- and low-signal 
populations corresponding to the top 30% and the bottom 30% of the PhRodo-Red 
signal distribution (gating strategy shown in Supplementary Fig. 1b). Based 
on simulations, we previously found that this sorting strategy is optimal for hit 
detection in FACS-based screens63.
Cells were subjected to sample preparation for next-generation sequencing as 
previously described11. Briefly, for each screen sample, genomic DNA was isolated 
using a Macherey-Nagel Blood L kit (Macherey-Nagel; Cat. No. 740954.20). 
sgRNA-encoding regions were amplified and sequenced on an Illumina 
HiSeq-4000.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
QuantSeq. Cell culture medium was aspirated, cells were washed once with DPBS 
and RNA lysis buffer was added directly to wells containing day 0 iTF-iPSCs, day 
15 iTF-Microglia ± 50 ng ml−1 24-h LPS treatment, Brownjohn-iMG ± 100 ng ml−1 
24-h LPS treatment or day 15 iTF-Microglia. For assessing transcriptomic effects 
after PFN1 overexpression, two different PFN1 sgRNAs and NTC sgRNAs 
were transduced into inducible CRISPRa iPSCs and cells were differentiated to 
day 8 iTF-Microglia. Biological triplicates for each condition (approximately 
0.15 million cells each) were pelleted, snap frozen and stored at −80 °C. RNA 
was extracted using the Quick-RNA Miniprep Kit (Zymo; Cat. No. R1055). 
Libraries were prepared from total RNA (250–473 ng per sample) using the 
QuantSeq 3′ mRNA-Seq Library Prep Kit for Illumina (FWD) (Lexogen; Cat. No. 
015UG009V0252) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Library amplification 
was performed with 14 total PCR cycles. mRNA-Seq library concentrations 
(mean of 1.13 ± 0.66 ng μl−1) were measured with the Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit 
(Invitrogen; Cat. No. Q32851) on a Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer. Library fragment-length 
distributions (mean of 287 ± 28 base pairs) were quantified with High Sensitivity 
D5000 Reagents (Agilent Technologies; Cat. No. 5067-5593) on the 4200 
TapeStation System. The libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 2000 
instrument with single-end reads.
CROP-seq. A pooled sgRNA library consisting of two sgRNAs per targeted gene 
and four NTC sgRNAs was designed to target 39 genes which were selected hit 
genes from iTF-Microglia survival and FACS-based screens (Supplementary 
Table 5; only one sgRNA for gene DBF4 due to technical error). Briefly, top and 
bottom strands of sgRNA oligos were synthesized (Integrated DNA Technologies) 
and annealed in an arrayed format, pooled in equal amounts and ligated into our 
optimized CROP-seq vector, as previously described11.
Inducible CRISPRi iTF-iPSCs were infected with the pooled sgRNA library 
at <0.15 MOI and then selected for lentiviral integration. Next, iTF-iPSCs were 
differentiated into iTF-Microglia and cultured with the addition of TMP. Day 
8 iTF-Microglia were washed three times with DPBS, dissociated with TrypLE 
and resuspended in nuclease-free water before loading onto four wells of the 10x 
Chromium Controller (10X Genomics, v.3.1) according to the manufacturer’s 
protocol, with 35,000 cells recovered per sample as the target. Sample preparation 
was performed using the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3′ Reagent Kits 
v.3.1 (10X Genomics, Cat. No. PN-1000121) according to the manufacturer’s 
protocol, reserving 10–30 ng of full-length cDNA to facilitate sgRNA assignment 
by amplifying sgRNA-containing transcripts using hemi-nested PCR reactions 
adapted from a previously published approach11,64. cDNA fragment analysis 
was performed using the 4200 TapeStation System and sgRNA enrichment 
libraries were separately indexed and sequenced as spike-ins alongside the 
whole-transcriptome scRNA-seq libraries using a NovaSeq 6000 using the 
following configuration: Read 1: 28; i7 index: 8; i5 index: 0; Read 2: 91.
Computational and statistical analysis. Primary CRISPR screen analysis. 
Primary screens were analyzed using our previously published MAGeCK-iNC 
bioinformatics pipeline11, available at https://kampmannlab.ucsf.edu/mageck-inc. 
Briefly, raw sequencing reads from next-generation sequencing were cropped 
and aligned to the reference using Bowtie v.0.12.9 (ref. 65) to determine sgRNA 
counts in each sample. The quality of each screen was assessed by plotting the 
log10(counts) per sgRNA on a rank order plot using ggplot2 v.3.3.3 (ref. 66). Raw 
phenotype scores and significance P values were calculated for target genes, as well 
as for ‘negative-control-quasi-genes’ that were generated by random sampling with 
replacement of five NTC sgRNAs from all NTC sgRNAs. The final phenotype score 
for each gene was calculated by subtracting the raw phenotype score by the median 
raw phenotype score of ‘negative-control-quasi-genes’ and then dividing by the 
standard deviation of raw phenotype scores of ‘negative-control-quasi-genes’.
A ‘Gene Score’ was defined as the product of phenotype score and −log10(P 
value). Hit genes were determined based on the Gene Score cut-off corresponding 
to an empirical false discovery rate of 10%. Volcano plots of Gene Scores were 
generated using ggplot2 v.3.3.3 (ref. 66).
RNA-seq analysis. Alignment and mapping were performed using Salmon v.1.4.0 
(ref. 67) (the --noLengthCorrection flag was used for QuantSeq samples) and 
either the human reference genome GRCh38 (Gencode, release 37), or a custom 
GRCh38 reference genome containing the references for each 3TF transgene 
integrated in iTF-iPSCs, to obtain transcript abundance counts. Tximport v.1.18.0 
(ref. 68) was used to obtain gene-level count estimates. Genes with zero counts 
across all samples were removed from the analysis. To visualize differences in 
gene expression across samples, a list of gene symbols corresponding to microglia 
markers, microglia activation markers and iPSC markers was compiled from a 
previous publication56; the normalized counts of each of these genes were then 
standardized across samples (that is, subtracting by the mean and dividing by the 
standard deviation) and visualized using Complex Heatmap v.2.6.2 (ref. 69). To 
assess how iTF-Microglia compare to other iPSC-Microglia and primary microglia 
from a range of previous studies13,18,20,60,61, raw fastqs (obtained from the NCBI GEO 
database) were subjected to the same analysis pipeline stated above. Then, principal 
component analysis was performed using microglial marker genes as input with 
DESeq2 v.1.30.1 (ref. 70). For differential gene expression analysis of LPS-treated 
versus PBS-treated iTF-Microglia samples and the PFN1 overexpression versus 
NTC iTF-Microglia, DESeq2 v.1.30.1 (ref. 70) was used to calculate the log-fold 
change and P values and to perform shrinkage of log-fold change for downstream 
visualization using ggplot2 v.3.3.3 (ref. 66). To compare both LPS-treatment 
upregulated and downregulated DEGs in iTF-Microglia and Brownjohn-iMG, 
DEGs that were significant (Padj < 0.05) in at least one cell type were visualized 
using VennDiagram (v.1.6.20).
CROP-seq analysis. Alignment and gene expression quantification were performed 
on scRNA-seq libraries and sgRNA-enriched libraries using Cell Ranger (v.5.0.1, 
10X Genomics) with default parameters and reference genome GRCh38-3.0.0. 
Cellranger aggr was used to aggregate counts belonging to the same sample across 
different GEM wells. The resulting gene versus cell barcode matrix contained 
58,302 cells which had on average 41,827 reads per cell, and a median of 3,346 
genes per cell. sgRNA unique molecular identifier counts for each cell barcode 
were obtained using a previously described mapping workflow64. To facilitate 
sgRNA identity assignment, a combination of demuxEM71 and a z-score cut-off 
method we previously described11 were used such that only cells with a single 
sgRNA as determined by both methods were carried forward in the analysis.
The raw gene versus barcode matrix outputted by Cell Ranger was converted 
into a SingleCellExperiment (SCE) object using the read10xCounts function from 
the DropletUtils package v.1.10.3 (ref. 72) in R (v.4.0.3). sgRNA assignments were 
appended to the SCE metadata and filtered to only include cells with a single 
sgRNA, resulting in 28,905 cells. The SCE was converted into a Seurat object using 
Seurat::as.Seurat v.4.0.1 (ref. 73). The data were normalized and highly variable 
genes were identified using Seurat::SCTransform74. For initial data exploration, 
principal component analysis was performed using Seurat::RunPCA to determine 
the number of principal components to retain. UMAP dimensional reduction 
using Seurat::RunUMAP and clustering using Seurat::FindNeighbors and 
Seurat::FindClusters were performed on the retained principal components, with 
resolution = 0.7.
Initial data exploration revealed clusters that were not of interest due to a high 
proportion of mitochondrial-encoding genes or disrupted microglia differentiation 
(Extended Data Fig. 5a). These clusters were removed from the downstream 
analysis and the remaining ‘microglia cluster’ population was normalized, clustered 
and visualized using UMAP, as described above, with resolution = 0.25.
To determine the DEGs between UMAP clusters, Seurat::FindAllMarkers 
was used. Single-cell heatmaps, ridge plots, rank plots and UMAPs were made 
using Seurat::DoHeatmap, Seurat::RidgePlot, Seurat::VizDimLoadings, and 
Seurat::DimPlot or Seurat::FeaturePlot, respectively.
The relative proportion of cells with a given sgRNA in a given cluster compared 
with cells with NTC sgRNAs in the given cluster was calculated and visualized 
using Complex Heatmap v.2.6.2 (ref. 69) (Supplementary Table 7).
For each CRISPRi target gene, the population of cells with the strongest 
knockdown (cells with expression of target gene less than the median expression 
of the target gene) was carried forward to perform differential gene expression 
analysis using Seurat::FindMarkers with parameters test.use = ‘t’ (student’s t-test), 
assay = ‘SCT’, slot = ‘scale.data’, to compare the Pearson residuals of cells74 with 
knockdown sgRNAs versus NTC cells. Genes with an adjusted P < 0.1 were deemed 
significant. The top 20 DEGs for each target gene which had >50 cells comprised 
the set of genes used to visualize convergent pathways using Complex Heatmap 
v.2.6.2 (ref. 69).
The iTF-Microglia CROP-seq dataset was integrated with the previously 
published human scRNA-seq dataset (Olah-hMG)3 using Seurat75. Briefly, the 
Olah-hMG gene versus cell barcode matrix and metadata were used to create 
a Seurat object and cells from surgery samples or with nonmicroglia identities 
as previously determined3 were removed. Normalization and identification of 
highly variable genes were performed using Seurat::SCTransform with the same 
parameters as the iTF-Microglia. Next, integration features (3,000 features) and 
integration anchors were identified for each Seurat object using Seurat::SelectInte
grationFeatures and Seurat::FindIntegrationAnchors and subsequent integration 
with identified anchors was performed using Seurat::IntegrateData. The integrated 
Seurat object was normalized, clustered and visualized using UMAP, as described 
above, with resolution = 0.25. Gene expression was visualized with UMAP using 
Seurat::FeaturePlot and the percentage of cells in the integrated SPP1-high cluster 
or SPP1-low clusters of either AD brain or control brain origin was calculated and 
significance was calculated on the cell counts using Fisher’s exact test.
Image analysis with CellProfiler. Pipelines and example images are compiled in 
supplementary material and all analyses were performed using CellProfiler v.4.1.3. 
Cell morphology metrics: Nuclei were segmented as primary objects from Hoechst 
images. Cell segmentations were generated by propagating outward from nuclei 
objects until edges were identified in the phalloidin images. Area and shape metrics 
were calculated for each cell object. Integrated F-actin intensity per cell: For a given 
field of view, nuclei were segmented based on Hoechst images and total integrated 
SiR-actin intensity was summed. The resulting sum was divided by the number of 
nuclei. Longitudinal cell counts: For a given field of view, nuclei were segmented 
based on Hoechst images acquired daily. IBA1 intensity per cell: This metric was 
determined similarly to the integrated F-actin intensity per nucleus; for a given 
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
field of view, the total integrated intensity of the IBA1 stain was divided by the 
number of segmented nuclei based on Hoechst.
Statistics and reproducibility. No statistical methods were used to pre-determine 
sample sizes but our sample sizes are similar to those reported in previous 
publications11,12. No randomization of samples was used since treatment group of 
cells were generally derived from the same population of cells. Data collection and 
analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of the experiments. No data 
points were excluded from analysis. Data distribution was assumed to be normal 
but this was not formally tested. For all imaging experiments (Figs. 1b,d, 2a,c,f and 
3d and Extended Data Fig. 1a), similar results were observed in n = 3 independent 
experiments.
Reporting summary. Further information on research design is available in the 
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All screen datasets and RNA transcriptomic datasets are publicly available in the 
CRISPRbrain data commons (http://crisprbrain.org/) (associated with Figs. 1, 2, 
4, 5, 6 and 7 and Extended Data Figs. 1, 4, 5, 6 and 7). RNA-sequencing datasets 
reported in this paper are available on NCBI GEO, accession number GSE178317 
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE178317). There are no 
restrictions on data availability.
Code availability
The MAGeCK-iNC bioinformatics pipeline for analysis of pooled screens is 
available at https://kampmannlab.ucsf.edu/mageck-inc. The R notebooks for the 
RNA-seq and CROP-seq analyses are available at https://kampmannlab.ucsf.edu/
article/microglia-analysis. The CellProfiler pipelines will be made available on 
request to the corresponding authors (M.K.), and will also be submitted to the 
CellProfiler depository of published pipelines (https://cellprofiler.org/examples/
published_pipelines.html) upon publication.
References
	62.	Wang, C. et al. Scalable production of iPSC-derived human neurons to 
identify tau-lowering compounds by high-content screening. Stem Cell Rep. 9, 
1221–1233 (2017).
	63.	Nagy, T. & Kampmann, M. CRISPulator: a discrete simulation tool for pooled 
genetic screens. BMC Bioinform. 18, 347 (2017).
	64.	Hill, A. J. et al. On the design of CRISPR-based single-cell molecular screens. 
Nat. Methods 15, 271–274 (2018).
	65.	Langmead, B., Trapnell, C., Pop, M. & Salzberg, S. L. Ultrafast and 
memory-efficient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome. 
Genome Biol. 10, R25 (2009).
	66.	Wickham, H. ggplot2 Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis (Springer 
International Publishing, 2016).
	67.	Patro, R., Duggal, G., Love, M. I., Irizarry, R. A. & Kingsford, C. Salmon 
provides fast and bias-aware quantification of transcript expression.  
Nat. Methods 14, 417–419 (2017).
	68.	Soneson, C., Love, M. I. & Robinson, M. D. Differential analyses for 
RNA-seq: transcript-level estimates improve gene-level inferences. F1000Res 
4, 1521 (2015).
	69.	Gu, Z., Eils, R. & Schlesner, M. Complex heatmaps reveal patterns and 
correlations in multidimensional genomic data. Bioinformatics 32, 2847–2849 
(2016).
	70.	Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and 
dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550 (2014).
	71.	Gaublomme, J. T. et al. Nuclei multiplexing with barcoded antibodies for 
single-nucleus genomics. Nat. Commun. 10, 2907 (2019).
	72.	Lun, A. T. L. et al. EmptyDrops: distinguishing cells from empty  
droplets in droplet-based single-cell RNA sequencing data. Genome Biol. 20, 
63 (2019).
	73.	Hao, Y. et al. Integrated analysis of multimodal single-cell data. Cell 184, 
3573–3587 (2021).
	74.	Hafemeister, C. & Satija, R. Normalization and variance stabilization of 
single-cell RNA-seq data using regularized negative binomial regression. 
Genome Biol. 20, 296 (2019).
	75.	Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell 177, 
1888–1902.e21 (2019).
Acknowledgements
We thank R. Tian for discussions about CROP-seq; C. Bohlen for advice on synaptosome 
protocols; and J. Mella, K. Vivanco, C. Rinaldi, G. Sturm, Y. Li, C. Condello and M. 
Sullivan for contributions to preliminary studies. We thank A. Samelson for feedback on 
the manuscript and members of the Kampmann laboratory for discussions. This research 
was supported by NIH grants no. DP2 GM119139 and no. U01 MH115747 to M.K., 
no. U54 NS100717 to L.G. and M.K., no. R01 AG051390 to L.G., no. F30 AG066418 
to K.L. and no. F30 AG062043 to L.K.; was funded by the Center for Alzheimer’s and 
Related Dementias (CARD) of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under Award 
Number ZO1 AG000534-02; and was funded, in part, through the Intramural Research 
Program of the National Institutes of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (M.E.W.). The 
research was also supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship to O.M.T.; Tau 
Consortium Investigator Awards (Rainwater Charitable Foundation) to J.I., L.G. and 
M.K.; and a Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Ben Barres Early Career Acceleration Award and 
a Chan Zuckerberg Biohub Investigator Award to M.K. Development of new features 
for CRISPRbrain was supported, in part, by a collaboration among the Kampmann 
Lab, UCSF and Data Tecnica International, LLC, and by funding from the Center for 
Alzheimer’s and Related Dementias, National Institutes of Health. The funders had no 
role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of 
the manuscript.
Author contributions
The iTF-Microglia differentiation strategy was developed and characterized by C.T.-L.H. 
and L.G. with contributions from C.D.C., L.Z., J.C.U., L.K., J.I. and M.E.W. Additionally, 
N.M.D., S.M.S., O.M.T., K.L., J.H. and M.K. contributed to the optimization and 
characterization of iTF-Microglia. CRISPR-based functional genomics studies were 
designed, conducted and analyzed by N.M.D., S.M.S. and M.K. with contributions from 
O.M.T., K.L., G.A. and J.H. S.M.S. led the computational analysis of all screens and 
RNA-seq experiments. S.H.H. and F.F. developed new features for the CRISPRbrain data 
commons with critical input from S.M.S., N.M.D. and M.K. and feedback from M.A.N. 
and A.B.S. N.M.D., S.M.S., C.T.-L.H., O.M.T. and M.K. created the figures. N.M.D., 
S.M.S. and M.K. conceptualized and wrote the manuscript with input from the other 
authors. All authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
M.A.N. consults for Neuron23. M.A.N. and F.F. participated in this work in part due to 
a competitively awarded consulting contract between Data Tecnica International, LLC 
and the National Institutes of Health (USA). J.I. is a cofounder of AcuraStem, Inc. and 
Modulo Bio, and serves on the scientific advisory board of Spinogenix. L.G. is a founder 
of Aeton Therapeutics. M.K. is an inventor on US patent 11,254,933 related to CRISPRi 
and CRISPRa screening; serves on the scientific advisory boards of Engine Biosciences, 
Casma Therapeutics, Cajal Neuroscience and Alector; and is a consultant to Modulo Bio 
and Recursion Therapeutics. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01131-4.
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material 
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01131-4.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to 
Li Gan or Martin Kampmann.
Peer review information Nature Neuroscience thanks Mathew Blurton-Jones and the 
other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. This 
article has been peer reviewed as part of Springer Nature’s Guided Open Access initiative. 
Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
Extended Data Fig. 1 | See next page for caption.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

Articles
NATuRE NEuRoSCIEnCE
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Impact of Doxycycline removal on iTF-Microglia survival and sgRNA recovery in iPSC-derived microglia generated with 
different protocols. a, Comparison of iTF-Microglia viability after Day 8 with different protocols. Top: timeline with different doxycycline supplementation 
paradigms, bottom: representative phase-contrast images at Day 15 with the indicated doxyccycline supplementation. Scale bar: 50 μm. b, Survival of 
iTF-Microglia at Day 15 after different doxycycline treatments indicated in a. Viable cells were quantified using the CellTiter-Glo assay. Values represent 
mean + /− sd of n = 12 biological replicates; p values from two-tailed Student’s t-test. c, Principal component analysis (PCA) on the expression of microglia 
marker genes of iTF-Microglia, human adult ex-vivo microglia60, fetal and adult microglia13, human myeloid cells20, other iPSC-microglia13,18,61. No iPSC 
samples were included. Each dot reflects an independent biological sample. Colors represent the different cell types. d, sgRNA recovery after transduction 
with a pooled sgRNA library in iPSCs and differentiation with two different iPSC-Microglia protocols. Strategy for the infection of iPSCs with an sgRNA 
library with 13,025 elements and timepoint of sgRNA recovery in iPSC-Microglia with the actual recovered counts of sgRNAs after next-generation-
sequencing (NGS) from the protocol from Brownjohn et al.18 (Top) and iTF-Microglia (Bottom).
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience

===== DudvarskiStankovic2016_ActaNeuropathol_Microglia+BloodVessel =====
1 3
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363
DOI 10.1007/s00401-015-1524-y
REVIEW
Microglia–blood vessel interactions: a double‑edged sword 
in brain pathologies
Nevenka Dudvarski Stankovic1,2,3 · Marcin Teodorczyk1 · Robert Ploen4 · 
Frauke Zipp4 · Mirko H. H. Schmidt1,2,3 
Received: 28 September 2015 / Revised: 9 November 2015 / Accepted: 12 December 2015 / Published online: 28 December 2015 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015
extravasation of leukocytes and angiogenesis. However, 
microglia functioning requires tight control as their dys-
regulation is implicated in the initiation and progression of 
numerous neurological diseases. Disruption of the BBB, 
changes in blood flow, introduction of pathogens in the sen-
sitive CNS niche, insufficient nutrient supply, and abnor-
mal secretion of cytokines or expression of endothelial 
receptors are reported to prime and attract microglia. Such 
reactive microglia have been reported to even escalate the 
damage of the brain parenchyma as is the case in ischemic 
injuries, brain tumors, multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer’s and 
Parkinson’s disease. In this review, we present the current 
state of the art of the causes and mechanisms of pathologi-
cal interactions between microglia and blood vessels and 
explore the possibilities of targeting those dysfunctional 
interactions for the development of future therapeutics.
Abstract  Microglia are long-living resident immune cells 
of the brain, which secure a stable chemical and physical 
microenvironment necessary for the proper functioning of 
the central nervous system (CNS). These highly dynamic 
cells continuously scan their environment for pathogens 
and possess the ability to react to damage-induced sig-
nals in order to protect the brain. Microglia, together with 
endothelial cells (ECs), pericytes and astrocytes, form 
the functional blood–brain barrier (BBB), a specialized 
endothelial structure that selectively separates the sensi-
tive brain parenchyma from blood circulation. Microglia 
are in bidirectional and permanent communication with 
ECs and their perivascular localization enables them to sur-
vey the influx of blood-borne components into the CNS. 
Furthermore, they may stimulate the opening of the BBB, 
N. Dudvarski Stankovic and M. Teodorczyk contributed equally 
to this work.
 *	 Mirko H. H. Schmidt 
	
mirko.schmidt@unimedizin‑mainz.de
	
Nevenka Dudvarski Stankovic 
	
Nevenka.Dudvarski‑Stankovic@unimedizin‑mainz.de
	
Marcin Teodorczyk 
	
Marcin.Teodorczyk@unimedizin‑mainz.de
	
Robert Ploen 
	
Robert.Ploen@unimedizin‑mainz.de
	
Frauke Zipp 
	
Frauke.Zipp@unimedizin‑mainz.de
1	
Molecular Signal Transduction Laboratories, Institute 
for Microscopic Anatomy and Neurobiology, Focus Program 
Translational Neuroscience (FTN), Rhine Main Neuroscience 
Network (rmn²), University Medical Center of the Johannes 
Gutenberg University, Langenbeckstr. 1, 55131 Mainz, 
Germany
2	
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany
3	
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, 
Germany
4	
Department of Neurology, Focus Program 
Translational Neuroscience (FTN) and Research Center 
for Immunotherapy (FZI), Rhine Main Neuroscience 
Network (rmn²), University Medical Center of the Johannes 
Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany

348
	
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363
1 3
Keywords  Blood vessels · Blood–brain barrier · 
Microglia · Ischemic stroke · Brain tumors · Neurological 
pathologies
Introduction
The central nervous system (CNS) has been considered 
immune-privileged as it was believed to lack a lymphatic 
system and to be shielded from the circulatory immune sys-
tem by the blood–brain barrier (BBB) [79, 145]. However, 
during the last three decades, it has become evident that the 
brain has a tightly controlled system of immune surveil-
lance [57] and even a lymphatic system inside the dural 
sinuses has recently been described [123]. The most abun-
dant resident immune cells in the CNS are the long-lived 
microglia cells that display little turnover under physiologi-
cal conditions [26, 58, 102]. Their morphology depends 
on the activation state, and, under physiological condi-
tions, the so-called surveying microglia are characterized 
by a small soma that extrudes numerous protrusions with 
secondary branches used for the continuous exploration of 
their territory (Fig. 1) [164, 181]. Activated microglia, on 
the other hand, can be recognized by a de-ramified pheno-
type with retracted and thicker processes and enlarged cell 
bodies [35, 72, 133]. Microglia comprise up to 12 % of the 
total glial cell population in the adult murine brain or up to 
16.6 % in humans [8, 112, 136]. Further myeloid cells in 
the brain are macrophages and dendritic cells of the choroid 
plexus, the meninges, and the perivascular areas (PVM) 
[144, 159]. All these mononuclear phagocytes are char-
acterized by the same markers, including the chemokine 
receptor CX3CR1 (also known as fractalkine receptor), 
CD11b/c and CD45. Currently, the level of CD45 on the 
CD11b/c positive population is used to distinguish micro-
glia from macrophages. The CD45low expressing cells in 
the CD11b/c positive population are considered microglia 
in comparison with CD45high blood-derived macrophages 
[92]. Although microglia and PVM may be distinguished 
in the resting state based on their location, phenotype, and 
morphology [63, 96, 130], the task becomes much more 
challenging upon activation, as aside of the expression level 
of CD45 there is no exclusive marker available to discrimi-
nate between both cell populations [29, 51, 69, 71]. Thus, it 
cannot be excluded that some functions attributed to micro-
glia might be actually fulfilled by other myeloid cell types.
Microglia, just as macrophages, are phagocytes of the 
CNS, capable of engulfing microorganisms, whole neu-
rons [24] or parts of blood vessels [91] depending on their 
different activation states, as governed by the antigen they 
encounter. Microglia may be activated by stimuli rang-
ing from viral or bacterial infections over peripheral nerve 
Fig. 1   Impact of microglia polarization on blood vessels. Continu-
ously surveying microglia palpate their microenvironment. Depend-
ing on the activation signal they encounter, they can differentiate into 
manifold activation states represented by two extreme phenotypes, 
namely the pro-inflammatory M1 state and anti-inflammatory M2 
state. Among other functions, M1-like microglia promote the open-
ing of the blood–brain barrier followed by the extravasation of leu-
kocytes, while M2-like cells secrete pro-angiogenic and immunosup-
pressive mediators

349
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363	
1 3
injury to direct mechanical brain trauma [178]. In the 
response to microbial products, the so-called classic, pro-
inflammatory M1 phenotype is developed. M1-like micro-
glia are characterized by the production of pro-inflamma-
tory mediators including interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β) and 
tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) [20, 153] as well as an 
increased expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase 
(iNOS). Pro-inflammatory cytokines together with nitric 
oxide (NO) induce the increase in the BBB permeability 
and the extravasation of leukocytes. M1 cells are competent 
in antigen processing and presentation [105] and, as such, 
are promoters of cytotoxicity and inflammation [183]. 
Alternatively, microglia may assume an M2 phenotype, 
which is pro-angiogenic and immunosuppressive, induces 
effector T cell anergy and demonstrates impairments in 
cytotoxicity [56, 126, 192]. Such cells express anti-inflam-
matory cytokines, such as IL-10 and transforming growth 
factor β (TGF-β) (Fig. 1; Table 1) [20]. The terms M1-like 
or M2-like are used throughout this review to designate 
pro-inflammatory (M1) or pro-angiogenic and immuno-
suppressive (M2) characteristics to microglia. However, it 
should be noted that this is an oversimplification; in fact, 
numerous activation states exist that partially display over-
lapping functions and rather form a continuum than two 
discrete states [15, 33].
Due to overlapping markers as well as morphological 
and functional similarities, microglia have been suggested 
to be of a hematopoietic origin and derived from circulating 
monocytes. Accordingly, adult microglia have been shown to 
arise in the ventral wall of the dorsal aorta in zebrafish [194]. 
Furthermore, it has been reported that intravenously injected 
fluorospheres can be found in a subpopulation of neonatal 
ramified cortical microglia, suggesting the recruitment of cir-
culating leukocytes into the brain parenchyma [83]. However, 
recent data from genetic fate-mapping experiments in birds 
and mammals suggest that microglia are dominantly derived 
from yolk sac-descended macrophage progenitor cells that 
populate the CNS before the vascularization of the CNS 
takes place [61, 107, 160, 173]. Mature microglia have a 
long half-life and a strong proliferation potential [159]; there-
fore, the microglial pool only requires marginal if any input 
from extravasating monocytes throughout life [61], as con-
firmed by parabiosis models [7]. The ongoing debate might 
be further stimulated by the fact that the number of micro-
glia can rapidly rise under pathological conditions [26] such 
as inflammation [58, 164, 175]. Indeed, upon irradiation and 
bone marrow transplantation, the brain has been reported to 
be repopulated by cells derived from hematopoietic stem cells 
[160]. Although a few studies have shown that hematopoietic 
cells may reconstitute depleted microglia [32, 38], it remains 
unclear whether or not these cells fulfill all functions of yolk 
sac-derived microglia [160]. The origin of microglia under 
physiological and pathological conditions remains a matter of 
scientific debate, and by extension, the question of whether 
or not microglia express the CCR2 receptor. CCR2 was criti-
cal for the efficient accumulation of blood-borne monocytes 
in the inflamed brain parenchyma upon subjection of CCR2-
RFP knock-in mice to experimental autoimmune encephalo-
myelitis (EAE). However, brain-residing microglia did not 
emit an RFP signal under these conditions, indicating that 
extravasating monocytes may contribute to the microglial 
population [137] under pathological conditions.
Microglia and blood vessels
The BBB, in the strict sense, is formed by a continuous 
layer of non-fenestrated endothelial cells (ECs) connected 
Table 1   Microglial phenotypes and characteristic markers
Markers and 
protein products 
Suggested func
ons
Surveying Microglia
CX3CR1 (Fractalkine receptor)
CD11b/c
CD45low
Gate-keepers of the brain
Regulators of the growing 
vasculature
M1
Classically acvated 
CX3CR1 (Fractalkine receptor)
CD11b/c
CD45low
IL-1β
TNF-α
iNOS, NO
ROS
Pro-inﬂammatory
Microbial defense
Tissue damage
Tumor resistance
M2
Alternavely acvated
CX3CR1 (Fractalkine receptor)
CD11b/c
CD45low
IL-10
TGF-β
VEGF
Immunoregulatory
An-inﬂammatory
Allergic and an-parasic 
response
Tumor promoon
Matrix remodeling

350
	
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363
1 3
by tight-junctions. Together with pericytes, astrocytes, 
microglia and the surrounding basement membrane it forms 
a selective physical barrier that separates the blood stream 
from the brain parenchyma and protects the CNS to secure 
physiological functioning [204]. Due to their perivascular 
localization, microglia can survey the influx of blood-borne 
components into the brain. This designates microglia as the 
first line of CNS defense. Studies on the role of microglia 
in embryonic blood vessel formation identified them as 
key regulators and guides of the forming CNS vasculature 
(Table 1) [10, 47, 111, 168]. On the other hand, it has been 
shown that postnatal depletion of microglia does not impair 
BBB integrity [46, 152]. However, the role of the blood 
vessel–microglia interface in adults under physiological 
conditions has not been fully explored, yet.
In order to experimentally mimic infection/inflamma-
tion microglia are often pretreated with lipopolysaccha-
ride (LPS), one of the strongest M1-priming antigens. It 
has been shown in BBB models in vitro that the addition 
of LPS to the abluminal side induced a reorganization of 
tight-junctions (TJs), decreased transendothelial electri-
cal resistance, and increased the paracellular transport of 
sodium-fluorescein. All three characteristics of increased 
permeability of the endothelium were reversed when the 
co-cultures were treated with an NADPH oxidase inhibi-
tor. The data imply that activated microglia produce reac-
tive oxygen species (ROS), through NAPDH oxidase and 
by this induce the dysfunction of the BBB [179].
In another example, conditioned medium derived from 
LPS-activated microglia increased the proliferation rate of 
brain ECs. On the other hand, the medium harvested from 
non-LPS treated cells, considered as surveying microglia, 
inhibited proliferation of brain ECs. Subsequent experi-
ments using blocking antibodies identified TNF-α as a 
pro- and TGF-β1 as an anti-angiogenic factor in both con-
ditioned media [189]. Subsequently, microglial TNF-α was 
identified to stimulate the migration of brain ECs [117].
Aside from the findings above, the plethora of data on 
the microglia–blood vessel interface has been collected in 
the context of brain pathologies. The disruption of blood 
vessels and the breakdown of the BBB under pathophysi-
ological conditions, e.g., in ischemic trauma, brain tumors, 
and neurodegenerative diseases, correlate with the accu-
mulation of activated microglia [13, 132]. Thus, microglia 
have been suggested to be associated with the dysfunction 
of blood vessels and pro-inflammatory signals.
Microglia promote blood vessel breakdown in the 
ischemic brain
Stroke, one of the most frequent neurological diseases, is 
caused by an acute interruption of the blood flow (BF) to a 
confined region of the brain due to either vessel occlusion 
(ischemia) or, less frequently, intracerebral hemorrhage 
[142]. The infarcted area consists of a necrotic core, where 
the local cerebral BF drops below 20 % of pre-occlusion 
values [76], and a penumbra, where BF drops to 25–50 % 
[55, 75]. The penumbra is a potentially salvageable region 
provided that the local BF can be reestablished within short 
time frame [76]. However, in case of delayed reperfusion, 
excitotoxicity, inflammatory response, or the disruption of 
the BBB, the infarct progresses and the necrosis expands 
into the penumbra [74].
The acute phase of stroke proceeds rapidly as the mas-
sive neuron loss in the core occurs within minutes upon 
BF reduction. The sub-acute phase starts 6 h post infarct 
and the brain tissue of the ischemic penumbra suffers from 
functional failure. At this point, the damage may be still 
repaired if perfusion is reestablished within 24 h [119]. The 
period after 24 h, defined as the so-called delayed injury 
phase, is characterized by vasogenic edema and inflamma-
tion [91]. The magnitude of neuronal damage depends on 
the duration of this phase, which may range from few days 
to several weeks.
Microglia are the first immune cells to become activated 
upon cerebral ischemia [59, 171]. Initially, they exhibit 
anti-inflammatory properties and perform phagocytosis of 
the cellular debris. The hypoxic tissue in the penumbra trig-
gers the upregulation of vascular endothelial growth fac-
tor (VEGF) [201] as VEGF expression has been reported 
to peak 4 h post insult. In particular, VEGF [116, 188] is 
a potent pro-angiogenic mediator [28] and induces quies-
cent vessels to sprout [158]. This process leads to the par-
tial opening of the BBB and leakage of serum proteins such 
as fibrinogen and albumin from the blood stream into the 
brain parenchyma. These proteins attract microglia within 
a time frame of 24 h after the ischemic insult as detected 
in vivo by time-lapse two-photon imaging of the ischemic 
mouse brain. Subsequently, perivascular microglia migrate 
towards the disrupted blood vessels and further damage 
them by phagocytizing ECs (Fig. 2a) [91].
Microglia-driven disintegration of blood vessels starts in 
the late phase of BBB opening and in addition to phago-
cytosis involves ROS, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) 
and pro-inflammatory cytokines. It has been reported that 
ROS, generated by NADPH oxidase, provokes EC contrac-
tions and consequently increases permeability of the BBB. 
Indeed, lesion volume and leakage of the BBB in Cybb 
(encoding a subunit of NADPH oxidase) knockout mice 
upon middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO), a rodent 
model of ischemic stroke, was attenuated as compared to 
those of wild-type mice. Correspondingly, the permeability 
of the BBB in the ischemic hemisphere of wild-type mice 
was diminished after apocynin-induced NADPH inhibi-
tion as measured by the leaked fluorescein [93]. Further, 

351
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363	
1 3
MMPs and in particular MMP-9 are upregulated and pre-
dominantly produced by microglia in the stroke experimen-
tal model [89, 191]. As a matter of fact, post-mortem his-
topathological analyses of human stroke patients yielded a 
co-localization of MMP-9 and microglia [166]. Population 
studies linked elevated levels of MMP-9 in the blood with 
a higher risk of hemorrhagic transformation [139]. In addi-
tion, MMP-9 has been shown to directly induce neuronal 
apoptosis [49].
An increase in blood vessel damage together with 
the upregulation of endothelial ICAM-1, P-selectin and 
VCAM, provokes the extravasation of circulating mono-
cytes and granulocytes [106]. These immune cells are 
actively recruited into the brain parenchyma as microglia 
gradually transform into the neuro-destructive M1-like acti-
vation state and fuel the inflammatory process by releasing 
pro-inflammatory cytokines. As a matter of fact, M1-like 
cells are the dominant cell type in the ipsilateral penum-
bra 1 week after MCAO [84]. Damaging effects of M1-like 
microglia in the stroke mouse model were demonstrated 
using drugs inhibiting their activation, such as minocy-
cline (Fig. 3a; Table 1). This antibiotic inhibits microglia 
proliferation and polarization by blocking p38 mitogen-
activated protein kinase [202] and the receptor CCR2, 
which is responsible for the activation of microglia by 
LPS. Furthermore, minocycline is an inhibitor of MMP-9 
[125] and it selectively changes the secretome of microglia 
[101]. This drug has been shown to decrease the secre-
tion levels of IL-1β and NO in microglia, which correlated 
with a smaller infarct size in the MCAO model [195, 199]. 
However, inconsistent results of minocycline treatment of 
stroke patients, collected in a clinical phase II study [103, 
Fig. 2   Interaction of microglia and blood vessels in neuropatholo-
gies. The perivascular localization of microglia enables them to 
survey the physiological status of blood vessels in their surveyed 
territory. a Upon ischemic stroke, blood vessels in the surround-
ing penumbra become underperfused and trigger an M1-like acti-
vation of microglia. Such activated microglia upregulate VEGF 
and iNOS, which partially provoke an opening of the BBB. Subse-
quently, blood-borne components leaking from the vessel attract 
and activate microglia, which in turn start to phagocytize the dam-
aged blood vessel. The increasingly corrupted blood vessels in turn 
allow for the extravasation of leukocytes which amplify the inflam-
mation process. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (cCT) 
identifies an ischemic region in the territory of the middle cerebral 
artery (left). b In glioma, brain tumor cells attract and take control of 
TAMs, which are major mediators of neovascularization. These cells 
produce high levels of pro-angiogenic molecules, such as VEGF, but 
also secrete immunosuppressive components, such as TGF-β. Loca-
tion of a glioma in a transverse section of a T1-weighted magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) of a human patient with contrast enhance-
ment (right). Predominantly, an activation of microglia towards the 
M1-like state is triggered by protein aggregations in the brain of PD 
and AD patients (c), while in MS patients (d) injured neurons are 
the prime stimulus. Active microglia render the blood vessel permis-
sive by the secretion of VEGF, NO and ROS and thereby enable the 
extravasation of leukocytes, which in turn activate more microglia 
and extend the damage, a vicious circle. Coronal fluid-attenuated 
inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI in a patient with multiple sclerosis 
reveals multiple periventricular high signal intensity lesions, which 
exhibit a typical distribution for multiple sclerosis (right). VEGF vas-
cular endothelial growth factor, iNOS inducible nitric oxide synthase, 
BBB blood–brain barrier, TAMs tumor-associated macrophages, TGF-
β tumor growth factor beta, PD Parkinson´s disease, AD Alzheimer´s 
disease, MS multiple sclerosis, ROS reactive oxygen species, media-
tors* microglial products promoting opening of the BBB

352
	
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363
1 3
109], indicate the necessity of further studies of minocy-
cline functions and specificity. In addition, minocycline 
has been reported to have sex-dependent neuroprotective 
effects that may be due to its function as an inhibitor of 
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase. This protein promoted cell 
death through bioenergetic failure and the loss of its sign-
aling protected male but not female mice [115]. Further, 
an open-label evaluator-blinded study suggested minocy-
cline improved neurological parameters upon stroke, but 
this result was restricted to males as females were not sig-
nificantly affected [9]. Another drug, ticagrelor, an antago-
nist of the purinergic receptor P2Y12, inhibits microglial 
chemotaxis and activation. Similar to minocycline, tica-
grelor decreased the expression of the pro-inflammatory 
molecules IL-1, CCL2 (ligand of CCR2) and iNOS and 
reduced the infarct size after focal cerebral ischemia in 
rats [60]. Aside from the receptor P2Y12, the fractalkine 
receptor CX3CR1 is relevant for the activation of micro-
glia in the ischemic injured brain, as Cx3cr1-deficient mice 
displayed a reduction in the size of infarcted area [40, 91, 
180]. Most of the current data suggest that the inhibition 
of microglia during the first 24 h after the ischemic stroke 
may reduce BBB damage and facilitate the recovery of the 
ischemic penumbra (Fig. 3). However, recent evidence sug-
gests that shifting the polarization of microglia towards a 
reparative M2-like phenotype, instead of inhibiting them 
in general, may be a better way to treat stroke patients. In 
the acute and sub-acute phase of stroke, 1 week following 
MCAO, M2-like cells were predominantly localized in the 
damaged ischemic area, while their number dropped after 
this time point [84]. During this period, M2-like microglia 
clear the cellular debris and promote angiogenesis in the 
potentially salvageable penumbra. In contrast, the density 
of pro-inflammatory M1-like cells rises over 2 weeks [87, 
113]. The resulting activation of the adaptive immune sys-
tem induces further damage of the injured brain area. This 
duality of microglia functions displayed in the time course 
of stroke indicate that finding a balance between benefi-
cial and detrimental microglial effects may be used for the 
treatment of stroke [113].
Fig. 3   Skewing microglia polarization as a drug target. a In Parkin-
son’s as well as Alzheimer’s disease, stroke and multiple sclerosis, 
microglia produce pro-inflammatory cytokines that fuel inflammation 
and maintain the M1-like state. Further, in these neuropathological 
diseases, accumulation of M1-like microglia and leukocytes increase 
the damage of the neuronal tissue and in order to treat them, medi-
cations such as minocycline, ticagrelor, dimethyl fumarate (DMF), 
fingolimod (FTY720) and laquinimod that inhibit inflammation 
and skew microglia into an anti-inflammatory and pro-angiogenic 
M2-like phenotype may be applied. b Conversely, drugs that skew 
microglia towards an M1-like state could be favorable in brain tumor 
treatment because TAMs are mediators of the tumor’s immune eva-
sion and vascularization. M1-like microglia may activate an adaptive 
immune response and direct it against the tumor cells by presenting 
tumor-specific antigens. TAM tumor-associated macrophage

353
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363	
1 3
Microglia stimulate the sprouting of blood vessels 
in brain neoplasia
The growth of brain tumors relies on an abundant blood 
supply. In order to acquire a sufficient amount of nutrients 
necessary for their rapid growth, tumor cells trigger angio-
genic sprouting and are therefore characterized by a high 
amount of peri- and intra-tumoral blood vessels [18, 121, 
122]. Especially high-grade brain tumors are among the 
most vascularized human tumors [120]. The level of angio-
genesis positively correlates with the malignancy of tumors 
and negatively with the survival of diagnosed patients. 
Thus, it is used as an assessment of the tumor grade. The 
newly formed vasculature of tumors is disorganized, leaky, 
and characterized by abnormal endothelial walls, pericyte 
coverage, and an irregular basal lamina [54, 88]. In the 
most devastating and lethal form of all brain tumors, glio-
blastoma multiforme (GBM), it has been shown that ECs 
display a low expression level of VE-cadherin and major 
proteins of TJs, claudin-1, and claudin-5. Further, glioma 
ECs share some biological characteristics with tumor cells, 
such as suppression of apoptosis, high proliferation rates, 
and a strong migratory capacity [8]. Eventually, the tumor 
becomes a solid mass with a high, but ineffective angio-
genic potential and consequently with many necrotic areas 
and thrombi [157].
Tumor cells produce a wide spectrum of chemokines 
attracting microglia and influence their activation state by 
an elevated production of M2-activating cytokines [197], 
as well as M1-suppressing mediators such as TGF-β1 and 
IL-10 [188]. This results in tumor-controlled microglia 
known as tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). TAMs 
fail to activate the immune system [85, 86] as they do not 
produce IL-1β, TNFα nor express co-stimulatory mol-
ecules. Further, the number of tumor-controlled microglia 
rises up to 78 % of all cells in human gliomas and up to 
70 % in human brain metastasis [140, 141]. This marked 
increase in the number of TAMs, a mixed, yolk sac- or 
bone marrow-derived cell population [121], is due to prolif-
eration of brain-residing microglia [100] and infiltration of 
hematopoietic cells [39].
TAMs have been reported to stimulate the growth of 
the tumor vasculature and a positive correlation has been 
found between microvessel density and the number of 
microglial cells [188]. Mechanistically, TAMs are the main 
source of pro-angiogenic stimuli, including VEGF. Fur-
thermore, microglia-derived VEGF stimulates the prolif-
eration of tumor cells, which triggers a positive feedback 
loop, because tumor cells have been identified as a source 
of VEGF as well [176, 193].
However, VEGF is not the only enhancer of tumor 
growth, angiogenesis, and microglia attraction. The 
chemokine CXCL1 is responsible for the attraction of 
microglia and their priming towards an M2-like activation 
state. These M2-like activated microglia promote angio-
genesis by the secretion of TGF-β. Additional mediators 
have been reported to orchestrate EC migration and prolif-
eration, e.g., ECs in meningiomas, a slowly growing and 
benign type of brain tumor, express CX3CL1 while its frac-
talkine receptor CX3CR1 was predominantly detected on 
microglia. The expression of CX3CR1 has been implicated 
in malignant transformation since WHO grade III menin-
giomas exhibited a significantly lower expression of the 
fractalkine receptor as compared to WHO grade IV brain 
tumors [114]. Moreover, hepatocellular carcinoma patients 
with an enhanced expression of CX3CL1 and its receptor 
displayed a decrease in recurrence and metastasis, includ-
ing brain metastasis [131], which identified the fractalkine 
receptor as a prognostic marker. Interestingly, CX3CR1-
positive tumor microglia trigger a specific antitumor 
response via their interaction with ECs by the attraction of 
circulating leukocytes into the tumor lesion. Physiologi-
cal interaction between microglia and ECs via fractalkine 
receptor has been abrogated in more malignant tumors and 
this uncoupling has resulted in the decreased attraction of 
blood-borne leukocytes. Thus, TAMs promote neoangio-
genesis and secure a good nutrient supply for the growing 
CNS tumors, while at the same time minimizing potential 
antitumor immune responses (Fig. 2b; Table 1).
It should be noted, however, that the influence of TAMs 
on tumor outgrowth is not solely restricted to the promo-
tion of angiogenesis or the modulation of the immune 
response. TAMs also produce MMPs, which are needed to 
initiate neovascularization by the degradation of the basal 
membrane and the creation of a provisional scaffold needed 
for ECs migration of the nascent sprout [158]. Tumor cells 
prompt TAMs to elevate the expression levels of membrane 
type-1 MMP (MT1-MMP), which in turn initiates brain 
tumor-derived pro-MMP-2, implicated in the remodeling 
of the extracellular matrix surrounding tumor cells [129]. 
Thereby, microglia support tumor cells to invade neighbor-
ing tissues and even to metastasize to other organs.
Neoplastic cells prime microglia to act in favor of tumor 
growth by priming them to a M2-like phenotype. Recent 
data on glioma suggest that microglia adopt an M2-like 
state during later phases of the tumor growth [188]. These 
findings suggest that their phenotype is still undetermined 
during the initial neoplastic changes of the CNS tissue. 
Indeed, inhibition of Stat3 by corosolic and oleanolic acids 
suppressed M2 characteristic markers and tumor growth in 
the murine glioma model (Fig. 3b) [52, 53, 200]. Further, 
the application of minocycline, a drug already enrolled 
in the clinical trials for the treatment of ischemic stroke, 
attenuated the pro-tumorigenic character of TAMs by sup-
pressing MMPs expression and glioma cell invasion [128, 
196], while the cyclosporine A-induced change of the 

354
	
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363
1 3
microglial secretome resulted in reduced tumor growth and 
neoangiogenesis [56]. In another study, an inhibitor of the 
colony stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R), BLZ945, 
has been used in brain tumor mouse models, where it pro-
moted regression of established gliomas and increased sur-
vival of tumor bearing animals. However, BLZ945 depleted 
microglia in the normal brain but did not reduce the num-
ber of TAMs. Interestingly, TAMs exhibited a reduction in 
the expression of M2-markers, indicating that the inhibition 
of CSF-1R may be important for the polarization of TAMs 
[163]. Thus, skewing microglia activation into the M1-like 
state presents a potential goal for pharmacological inter-
vention (Fig. 3). Such therapies might be in turn combined 
with an adoptive cell transfer of tumor-targeting lympho-
cytes in order to enhance their recruitment to the tumor site.
Microglia and blood vessels in neurological 
pathologies
Parkinson’s disease
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a common movement disor-
der characterized by the progressive loss of dopaminergic 
(DA) neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) and the nerve 
terminals in the striatum [31]. There is increasing evidence 
that the immune system is involved in the etiology of PD, 
although the direct causality has not yet been demonstrated. 
Genomic wide association studies (GWAS) provide valua-
ble information on susceptibility to PD. Several loci associ-
ated with innate and adaptive immune responses have been 
identified as strong risk factors, e.g., HLA-DQB1, LRRK2, 
GPNMB and BST-1 [118, 155]. Moreover, LRRK2, Par-
kin, PLA2G6, DJ-1, and SNCA, mutated in familial and 
idiopathic PD, are associated with inflammation/immunity 
and microglial activity [43, 78, 167]. The long-term appli-
cation of non-aspirin nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) has been associated with a decreased risk of PD 
[97], further linking PD and inflammation. Finally, a per-
sistent activation of microglia has been observed in PD 
patients [186, 190].
In animal studies, it has been shown that the injection 
of pro-inflammatory agents such as LPS, thrombin or tis-
sue plasminogen activator into the SN induced the death of 
dopaminergic neurons [77]. Furthermore, activated micro-
glia have been detected in the SN and/or striatum of MPTP-
intoxicated animals, the most widely used in  vivo PD 
model [104, 143]. These microglia exhibited a pro-inflam-
matory and neurotoxic M1-like phenotype, and, according 
to current data, became activated by protein aggregates of 
α-synuclein [98]. Data concerning BBB opening in PD is 
still limited, yet features of a dysfunctional BBB have been 
observed in the MPTP experimental model [23] as well as 
in post-mortem SN and the striatum of PD patients [23, 64]. 
Moreover, an increased albumin level has been detected in 
the cerebrospinal fluid of PD patients [156]. Whether or not 
this BBB opening is caused by enhanced angiogenesis is 
not yet clear. In fact, VEGF levels are elevated in the SN 
of PD patients [185] and an increased number of blood 
vessels has been observed in close proximity to degener-
ating DA neurons in the SN of non-human primates [12]. 
Further, punctate areas corresponding to BBB leakage 
were found to co-localize with integrin β3 in a rat model 
of PD [30]. Post-mortem analysis of human brain samples 
showed that both activated microglia and angiogenic ECs 
(as detected by integrin αvβ3 [146]) were more abundant 
in the SN of PD subjects as compared to controls [41]. It 
should be noted that the opening of the BBB is a prereq-
uisite for extravasation of leukocytes into the brain paren-
chyma and activation of an adaptive immune response. 
However, there is no evidence of microglia physically dam-
aging blood vessels in PD; the BBB opening is rather con-
nected to enhanced angiogenesis [41] (Fig. 2c).
Alzheimer’s disease
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the most common disorder 
causing age-related dementia, is the fourth leading cause 
of death in the subpopulation over 65 years. It is charac-
terized by deteriorating cognitive functions [68] resulting 
from severe neuronal cell death. Compared to other neuro-
degenerative disorders, AD has been more frequently asso-
ciated with vascular dysfunctions and inflammation. The 
major pathology characterizing AD is the accumulation of 
senile plaques in the brain parenchyma, whose main con-
stituent is β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) [42]. The important role 
of neuroinflammation in AD is supported by several lines 
of evidence. Exposure to aggregated Aβ in vitro resulted in 
the activation of microglia, which started producing pro-
inflammatory cytokines and chemokines [45, 124, 177]. 
Moreover, increases in the Aβ concentration in aging amy-
loid precursor protein (APP) transgenic mice were associ-
ated with increased concentrations of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines, including TNFα, IL-6, IL-1α, and GM-CSF 
[154]. In addition, the genetic ablation of the IL-12/IL-23 
signaling molecules in APP/PS1 mice (carrying mutated 
human APP and presenilin 1) resulted in decreased cer-
ebral amyloid load. Accordingly, an increased level of pro-
inflammatory and a decreased level of anti-inflammatory 
cytokines has been detected in the brains as well as CSF of 
AD patients [19, 27, 66]. Interestingly, the first two large-
scale GWAS identified polymorphisms in the gene encod-
ing complement receptor 1 as a risk factor for AD [70, 
108]. Furthermore, rare mutations of genes for immune 
receptors, including TREM2 [67] and CD33 [22, 65] were 
associated with an increased risk of late onset AD (LOAD). 

355
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363	
1 3
However, genetic studies do not prove causality and thus it 
remains to be demonstrated whether or not inflammation is 
a cause or a consequence of neuronal damage in AD.
Microglia have been reported to localize to perivascular 
Aβ depositions and to senile plaques [81, 187] in two to 
fivefold higher numbers as compared to adjacent Aβ-free 
areas [50]. According to their cytokine secretome, plaque-
associated microglia express IL-1β and TNF-α and mostly 
exhibit an M1-like phenotype [48]. The early activation of 
microglia has most likely a protective character as indi-
cated by electron microscopy studies showing internaliza-
tion of Aβ in microglial cell culture [151]. Moreover, in 
a CC-chemokine receptor-deficient mouse model of AD, 
namely the Tg-2576 transgenic murine strain, decreased 
microglial accumulation correlated with an increased 
deposition of perivascular Aβ and decreased survival [44]. 
However, as the disease progresses, the pro-inflamma-
tory response induced by microglia impairs the BBB and 
induces severe neurodestruction [80]. The most impor-
tant mechanism of Aβ clearance is across the BBB via 
receptor-mediated transcytosis and there are many pieces 
of evidence indicating the deposition of Aβ in the wall of 
blood vessels in the brain [16]. M1-like microglia pro-
voke an opening of the BBB and damage the endothelium 
already burdened with Aβ plaques. Indeed, numerous stud-
ies report vascular abnormalities in AD patients, including 
decreased vessel density [37], diminished glucose transport 
through the BBB [94] and reduced local BF [90]. In addi-
tion, the vascular changes identified in AD precede neuro-
degeneration [82, 170]. Microglia are the main source of 
MMP-9 and post-mortem AD samples show significant 
levels of MMP-9 [11]. MMP-9 is involved in the degrada-
tion of the basement membrane, the reorganization of TJs 
between neighboring ECs and, thereby, in the disruption of 
the BBB. Besides the destructive influence on the endothe-
lium, microglial iNOS and NAPDH increase the level of 
ROS. In turn, superoptimal ROS levels are suggested to 
oxidize soluble form of the low-density lipoprotein recep-
tor related protein 1, the major endogenous Aβ chaperone 
in the plasma [169]. Data indicate that activated microglia 
attracted by the perivascular Aβ accumulation phagocytize 
plaques unsuccessfully. In parallel, they contribute to the 
progression of the disease by expanding the damage of the 
blood vessels, which are a key component of Aβ clearance.
Multiple sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease 
of the CNS that leads to demyelination and eventual pro-
gressive loss of functional neurons [174, 203]. Histologi-
cal hallmarks of MS are perivascular lesions composed 
of inflammatory infiltrates with adjacent demyelination 
and axonal transections [147]. Active lesions are always 
associated with the presence of activated microglia and/or 
macrophages [110]. It is widely believed that pathologi-
cal changes of MS are initiated by an aberrant autoimmune 
response against the protein components of the myelin 
sheath [172]. This finding has been utilized in EAE, an ani-
mal model, which displays striking histological and clinical 
similarities to MS [17].
Several reports indicate an early BBB breakdown in the 
CNS of EAE already in the pre-symptomatic disease phase, 
which coincides with an increased vessel density and EC 
proliferation [62]. Along these lines, increased angiogen-
esis levels and VEGF signaling have been observed spe-
cifically in the inflamed lesions [21, 62]. Further, the level 
of inflammation elevates in areas injected with exogenous 
VEGF in EAE animals [161]. In the human disease, a local 
impairment of the BBB has been demonstrated to precede 
other clinical symptoms and to be a prominent event in 
disease progression as measured by magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) [25, 95]. Moreover, the histology of post-
mortem MS lesions yielded a reduction of TJ proteins in 
CNS-ECs and an infiltration of plasma components, thus 
providing evidence for the breakdown of the BBB [99, 
150]. Yet another link between vessel leakage and MS pro-
gression is the deposition of fibrinogen in plaques, one of 
the earliest events associated with MS lesion formation 
[127, 184]. Plasma components have the potential to recruit 
and activate microglia as discussed above in the case of 
stroke. Indeed, experiments using fibrinogen knock-in mice 
identified fibrinogen as an activator of microglia [2]. Fur-
thermore, hindering the fibrinogen–microglia interaction by 
pharmacological and genetic means led to reduced severity 
of EAE [1, 36]. Leakage of plasma components through 
the BBB is followed by the transmigration of peripheral 
blood leukocytes into CNS and occurs early in the course 
of MS. Blocking the entry of monocytes into the CNS con-
firmed that their infiltration is a fundamental requirement 
for disease development [6, 135]. Altogether, BBB disrup-
tion is recognized as a relevant step in the pathogenesis and 
allows immune cells and inflammatory molecules to enter 
the CNS, which may lead to autoimmunity in genetically 
susceptible individuals (Fig. 2d).
Therapies
To date, treatments of patients suffering from PD and AD 
mostly target the symptoms without affecting progres-
sion of the diseases. Disease modifying treatments have a 
greater potential to help patients in the long term and have 
already become the standard regimen for MS. BBB disrup-
tion caused either directly or indirectly by microglia is a 
common pathology in PD, MS, and AD, and thus favorable 
therapies should modulate the inflammation and/or the oxi-
dative damage of the endothelium (Fig. 3a). Although the 

356
	
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363
1 3
novel drugs have specific targets and are relatively effec-
tive at reducing new MS lesion formation and relapse rates, 
they are associated with side effects and their efficacy var-
ies among patients. Several of these drugs inhibit angiogen-
esis [62], reduce BBB leakage [149] and inhibit microglial 
activation (dimethyl fumarate, fingolimod, and laquinimod) 
[73] but their effects are neither EC- nor microglia-specific. 
Targeting the inflammation explicitly in the CNS might 
reduce the observed side effects. For this purpose, primary 
antibodies are being tested in clinical trials, such as an anti-
GM-CSF antibody that blocks the inflammatory functions 
of macrophages/microglia, which has already completed 
phase 1b [34].
When it comes to AD treatment, pre-clinical and clinical 
trials have shown a lack of efficacy or treatment-induced 
toxicity in the case of steroidal (prednisone) as well as 
NSAIDs such as nimesulide, indomethacin, rofecoxib or 
naproxen [3–5, 165]. Similarly, clinical trials on potential 
antioxidants such as vitamin E and ω3 fatty acids reported 
no beneficial effects in AD patients [14, 198] (Fig. 3a).
Concluding remarks
The interaction of microglia and blood vessels ensures 
a healthy environment in the CNS, which is essential for 
maintaining cognitive performance [134, 152, 182]. Under 
pathophysiological conditions, this interface contributes to 
the progression of neurological diseases and it culminates 
in the breakdown of the BBB, mainly caused by microglia, 
which either phagocytize already hypoperfused blood ves-
sels (e.g., in stroke) or promote sprouting (e.g., in CNS 
tumors). The time frame for the effective administration 
of potential medications is very limited and has been well 
defined in the case of ischemic injury of the brain. Here, 
drugs suppressing inflammatory and phagocytic actions of 
microglia should be applied within the first 24 h post stroke 
in order to save the ischemic penumbra and to locally 
restrict the stroke area.
The inflammatory response can be seen as a double-
edged sword in the advancing neuropathology. While 
microglia provide an inherent mechanism for the removal 
of pathogens, protein aggregates and cellular debris from 
the brain parenchyma, and thus help to control damage, 
prolonged exposure to their cytokine secretome usually 
results in further degeneration of neurons, ECs and other 
glial cells. Therefore, specific activation of microglia for 
phagocytosis in combination with anti-inflammatory drugs 
reducing levels of pro-inflammatory molecules such as 
minocycline or dexamethasone could potentially be a ther-
apy of interest in the neurological conditions discussed in 
this review. It is possible that such a medication may be 
applied over long time frames to prevent progression of the 
disease. In order to determine the benefits and costs of such 
medications as well as to monitor physiological and cogni-
tive parameters that may be influenced, longitudinal studies 
over long periods of time are needed [68].
Drugs modifying the activation state of microglia by 
reducing their neurotoxicity while stimulating their neuro-
protective functions can be promising therapeutics in neu-
rological pathologies, e.g., the approved MS therapeutics 
glatiramer acetate (GA) or IFN-β. Both drugs act in part 
by the modification of the M1/M2 balance in the immune 
system and shift the secretome from M1- to M2-type 
cytokines, such as IL-10 [138]. Furthermore, GA has been 
shown to stimulate the phagocytic activity of microglia 
in vitro [162]. Furthermore, recovery of the BBB is pivotal 
to the survival of the brain parenchyma, so that understand-
ing the mechanisms behind BBB dysfunction could lead 
to new therapeutic targets for clinical application. A few 
agents are already being tested in pre-clinical studies with 
other indications, e.g., Ang-1/Tie2 agents, Fibrinopeptide 
Bb15–42 (FXO6) and S1P1/Slit2N agonists, which stabi-
lize VE-cadherins and interendothelial junctions, or exhibit 
anti-apoptotic activity on EC [148]. Prospective clinical 
trials will provide information on the beneficial effects of 
these drugs in re-establishing blood vessels, which in com-
bination with microglia-modulating treatments will offer 
new hope to stricken individuals.
Acknowledgments  We thank Darragh O’Neill for proofreading the 
manuscript.
Compliance with ethical standards 
Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.
Funding  This work was supported by a grant of the German Aca-
demic Exchange Service (DAAD) to NDS, the German Research 
Foundation (DFG) via the collaborative research center 1080, pro-
jects A3 (MHHS) and B6 (FZ), the DFG Grant SCHM 2159/2-1 to 
MHHS and by a German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) grant to NDS 
and MHHS.
References
	 1.	 Adams RA, Bauer J, Flick MJ, Sikorski SL, Nuriel T, Lass-
mann H, Degen JL, Akassoglou K (2007) The fibrin-derived 
gamma377-395 peptide inhibits microglia activation and sup-
presses relapsing paralysis in central nervous system auto-
immune disease. J Exp Med 204:571–582. doi:10.1084/
jem.20061931
	 2.	 Adams RA, Schachtrup C, Davalos D, Tsigelny I, Akassoglou 
K (2007) Fibrinogen signal transduction as a mediator and ther-
apeutic target in inflammation: lessons from multiple sclerosis. 
Curr Med Chem 14:2925–2936
	 3.	 Aisen PS, Davis KL, Berg JD, Schafer K, Campbell K, 
Thomas RG, Weiner MF, Farlow MR, Sano M, Grundman M 
et  al (2000) A randomized controlled trial of prednisone in 

357
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363	
1 3
Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study. 
Neurology 54:588–593
	 4.	 Aisen PS, Schafer KA, Grundman M, Pfeiffer E, Sano M, Davis 
KL, Farlow MR, Jin S, Thomas RG, Thal LJ et al (2003) Effects 
of rofecoxib or naproxen vs placebo on Alzheimer disease pro-
gression: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 289:2819–2826. 
doi:10.1001/jama.289.21.2819
	 5.	 Aisen PS, Schmeidler J, Pasinetti GM (2002) Randomized pilot 
study of nimesulide treatment in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurol-
ogy 58:1050–1054
	 6.	 Ajami B, Bennett JL, Krieger C, McNagny KM, Rossi FM 
(2011) Infiltrating monocytes trigger EAE progression, but 
do not contribute to the resident microglia pool. Nat Neurosci 
14:1142–1149. doi:10.1038/nn.2887
	 7.	 Ajami B, Bennett JL, Krieger C, Tetzlaff W, Rossi FM (2007) 
Local self-renewal can sustain CNS microglia maintenance and 
function throughout adult life. Nat Neurosci 10:1538–1543. 
doi:10.1038/nn2014
	 8.	 Alves TR, Lima FRS, Kahn SA, Lobo D, Dubois LGF, Soletti 
R, Borges H, Neto VM (2011) Glioblastoma cells: a heteroge-
neous and fatal tumor interacting with the parenchyma. Life Sci 
89:532–539. doi:10.1016/j.lfs.2011.04.022
	 9.	 Amiri-Nikpour MR, Nazarbaghi S, Hamdi-Holasou M, Rezaei Y 
(2015) An open-label evaluator-blinded clinical study of mino-
cycline neuroprotection in ischemic stroke: gender-dependent 
effect. Acta Neurol Scand 131:45–50. doi:10.1111/ane.12296
	 10.	 Arnold T, Betsholtz C (2013) Correction: the importance of 
microglia in the development of the vasculature in the central 
nervous system. Vasc Cell 5:12. doi:10.1186/2045-824X-5-12
	 11.	 Asahina M, Yoshiyama Y, Hattori T (2001) Expression of 
matrix metalloproteinase-9 and urinary-type plasminogen acti-
vator in Alzheimer’s disease brain. Clin Neuropathol 20:60–63
	 12.	 Barcia C, Bautista V, Sanchez-Bahillo A, Fernandez-Villalba E, 
Faucheux B, Poza y Poza M, Fernandez Barreiro A, Hirsch EC, 
Herrero MT (2005) Changes in vascularization in substantia 
nigra pars compacta of monkeys rendered parkinsonian. J Neu-
ral Transm 112:1237–1248. doi:10.1007/s00702-004-0256-2
	 13.	 Barkauskas DS, Dixon Dorand R, Myers JT, Evans TA, 
Barkauskas KJ, Askew D, Purgert R, Huang AY (2015) Focal 
transient CNS vessel leak provides a tissue niche for sequen-
tial immune cell accumulation during the asymptomatic phase 
of EAE induction. Exp Neurol 266:74–85. doi:10.1016/j.
expneurol.2015.02.018
	 14.	 Barten DM, Albright CF (2008) Therapeutic strategies for Alz-
heimer’s disease. Mol Neurobiol 37:171–186. doi:10.1007/
s12035-008-8031-2
	 15.	 Bell-Temin H, Culver-Cochran AE, Chaput D, Carlson CM, 
Kuehl MN, Burkhardt BR, Bickford PC, Liu B, Stevens SM 
Jr (2015) Novel molecular insights into classical and alter-
native activation states of microglia as revealed by SILAC-
based proteomics. Mol Cell Proteom MCP. doi:10.1074/mcp.
M115.053926
	 16.	 Bell RD, Zlokovic BV (2009) Neurovascular mechanisms and 
blood–brain barrier disorder in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neu-
ropathol 118:103–113. doi:10.1007/s00401-009-0522-3
	 17.	 Ben-Nun A, Kaushansky N, Kawakami N, Krishnamoorthy G, 
Berer K, Liblau R, Hohlfeld R, Wekerle H (2014) From clas-
sic to spontaneous and humanized models of multiple sclerosis: 
impact on understanding pathogenesis and drug development. J 
Autoimmun 54:33–50. doi:10.1016/j.jaut.2014.06.004
	 18.	 Blouw B, Song H, Tihan T, Bosze J, Ferrara N, Gerber HP, 
Johnson RS, Bergers G (2003) The hypoxic response of tumors 
is dependent on their microenvironment. Cancer Cell 4:133–146
	 19.	 Blum-Degen D, Muller T, Kuhn W, Gerlach M, Przuntek H, 
Riederer P (1995) Interleukin-1 beta and interleukin-6 are 
elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid of Alzheimer’s and de novo 
Parkinson’s disease patients. Neurosci Lett 202:17–20
	 20.	 Boche D, Perry VH, Nicoll JA (2013) Review: activation pat-
terns of microglia and their identification in the human brain. 
Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 39:3–18. doi:10.1111/nan.12011
	 21.	 Boroujerdi A, Welser-Alves JV, Milner R (2013) Extensive vas-
cular remodeling in the spinal cord of pre-symptomatic experi-
mental autoimmune encephalomyelitis mice; increased vessel 
expression of fibronectin and the alpha5beta1 integrin. Exp 
Neurol 250:43–51. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2013.09.009
	 22.	 Bradshaw EM, Chibnik LB, Keenan BT, Ottoboni L, Raj T, 
Tang A, Rosenkrantz LL, Imboywa S, Lee M, Von Korff A 
et  al (2013) CD33 Alzheimer’s disease locus: altered mono-
cyte function and amyloid biology. Nat Neurosci 16:848–850. 
doi:10.1038/nn.3435
	 23.	 Brochard V, Combadiere B, Prigent A, Laouar Y, Perrin A, 
Beray-Berthat V, Bonduelle O, Alvarez-Fischer D, Callebert J, 
Launay JM et al (2009) Infiltration of CD4+ lymphocytes into 
the brain contributes to neurodegeneration in a mouse model of 
Parkinson disease. J Clin Investig 119:182–192. doi:10.1172/
JCI36470
	 24.	 Brown GC, Neher JJ (2014) Microglial phagocytosis of live 
neurons. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:209–216. doi:10.1038/nrn3710
	 25.	 Bruck W, Bitsch A, Kolenda H, Bruck Y, Stiefel M, Lass-
mann H (1997) Inflammatory central nervous system demy-
elination: correlation of magnetic resonance imaging findings 
with lesion pathology. Ann Neurol 42:783–793. doi:10.1002/
ana.410420515
	 26.	 Bruttger J, Karram K, Wortge S, Regen T, Marini F, Hoppmann 
N, Klein M, Blank T, Yona S, Wolf Y et al (2015) Genetic cell 
ablation reveals clusters of local self-renewing microglia in 
the mammalian central nervous system. Immunity 43:92–106. 
doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2015.06.012
	 27.	 Cacabelos R, Barquero M, Garcia P, Alvarez XA, Varela de Sei-
jas E (1991) Cerebrospinal fluid interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta) 
in Alzheimer’s disease and neurological disorders. Methods 
Find Exp Clin Pharmacol 13:455–458
	 28.	 Carmeliet P, Mackman N, Moons L, Luther T, Gressens P, Van 
Vlaenderen I, Demunck H, Kasper M, Breier G, Evrard P et al 
(1996) Role of tissue factor in embryonic blood vessel develop-
ment. Nature 383:73–75. doi:10.1038/383073a0
	 29.	 Cartier N, Lewis CA, Zhang R, Rossi FM (2014) The role of 
microglia in human disease: therapeutic tool or target? Acta 
Neuropathol 128:363–380. doi:10.1007/s00401-014-1330-y
	 30.	 Carvey PM, Zhao CH, Hendey B, Lum H, Trachten-
berg J, Desai BS, Snyder J, Zhu YG, Ling ZD (2005) 
6-Hydroxydopamine-induced 
alterations 
in 
blood–brain 
barrier 
permeability. 
Eur 
J 
Neurosci 
22:1158–1168. 
doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04281.x
	 31.	 Chao Y, Wong SC, Tan EK (2014) Evidence of inflammatory 
system involvement in Parkinson’s disease. BioMed Res Int 
2014:308654. doi:10.1155/2014/308654
	 32.	 Chen SK, Tvrdik P, Peden E, Cho S, Wu S, Spangrude G, 
Capecchi MR (2010) Hematopoietic origin of pathologi-
cal grooming in Hoxb8 mutant mice. Cell 141:775–785. 
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.03.055
	 33.	 Cherry JD, Olschowka JA, O’Banion MK (2014) Neuroinflam-
mation and M2 microglia: the good, the bad, and the inflamed. J 
Neuroinflammation 11:98. doi:10.1186/1742-2094-11-98
	 34.	 Constantinescu CS, Asher A, Fryze W, Kozubski W, Wagner 
F, Aram J, Tanasescu R, Korolkiewicz RP, Dirnberger-Her-
tweck M, Steidl S et al (2015) Randomized phase 1b trial of 
MOR103, a human antibody to GM-CSF, in multiple sclerosis. 
Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm 2:e117. doi:10.1212/
NXI.0000000000000117

358
	
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363
1 3
	 35.	 Davalos D, Grutzendler J, Yang G, Kim JV, Zuo Y, Jung S, 
Littman DR, Dustin ML, Gan WB (2005) ATP mediates rapid 
microglial response to local brain injury in vivo. Nat Neurosci 
8:752–758. doi:10.1038/nn1472
	 36.	 Davalos D, Ryu JK, Merlini M, Baeten KM, Le Moan N, 
Petersen MA, Deerinck TJ, Smirnoff DS, Bedard C, Hako-
zaki H et  al (2012) Fibrinogen-induced perivascular micro-
glial clustering is required for the development of axonal dam-
age in neuroinflammation. Nat Commun 3:1227. doi:10.1038/
ncomms2230
	 37.	 Davies DC, Hardy JA (1988) Blood brain barrier in ageing and 
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 9:46–48
	 38.	 Davies LC, Rosas M, Jenkins SJ, Liao CT, Scurr MJ, Brom-
bacher F, Fraser DJ, Allen JE, Jones SA, Taylor PR (2013) 
Distinct bone marrow-derived and tissue-resident macrophage 
lineages proliferate at key stages during inflammation. Nat 
Commun 4:1886. doi:10.1038/ncomms2877
	 39.	 De Palma M, Venneri MA, Galli R, Sergi Sergi L, Politi LS, 
Sampaolesi M, Naldini L (2005) Tie2 identifies a hematopoietic 
lineage of proangiogenic monocytes required for tumor vessel 
formation and a mesenchymal population of pericyte progeni-
tors. Cancer Cell 8:211–226. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2005.08.002
	 40.	 Dénes A, Ferenczi S, Halász J, Környei Z, Kovács KJ (2008) 
Role of CX3CR1 (fractalkine receptor) in brain damage and 
inflammation induced by focal cerebral ischemia in mouse. 
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 28:1707–1721. doi:10.1038/
jcbfm.2008.64
	 41.	 Desai Bradaric B, Patel A, Schneider JA, Carvey PM, Hendey B 
(2012) Evidence for angiogenesis in Parkinson’s disease, inci-
dental Lewy body disease, and progressive supranuclear palsy. J 
Neural Transm 119:59–71. doi:10.1007/s00702-011-0684-8
	 42.	 Dickson DW (1997) The pathogenesis of senile plaques. J Neu-
ropathol Exp Neurol 56:321–339
	 43.	 Dzamko N, Geczy CL, Halliday GM (2015) Inflammation is 
genetically implicated in Parkinson’s disease. Neuroscience 
302:89–102. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.10.028
	 44.	 El Khoury J, Toft M, Hickman SE, Means TK, Terada K, Geula 
C, Luster AD (2007) Ccr2 deficiency impairs microglial accu-
mulation and accelerates progression of Alzheimer-like disease. 
Nat Med 13:432–438. doi:10.1038/nm1555
	 45.	 El Khoury JB, Moore KJ, Means TK, Leung J, Terada K, Toft 
M, Freeman MW, Luster AD (2003) CD36 mediates the innate 
host response to beta-amyloid. J Exp Med 197:1657–1666. 
doi:10.1084/jem.20021546
	 46.	 Elmore MR, Najafi AR, Koike MA, Dagher NN, Spangen-
berg EE, Rice RA, Kitazawa M, Matusow B, Nguyen H, West 
BL et  al (2014) Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor signal-
ing is necessary for microglia viability, unmasking a micro-
glia progenitor cell in the adult brain. Neuron 82:380–397. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2014.02.040
	 47.	 Fantin A, Vieira JM, Gestri G, Denti L, Schwarz Q, Prykhozhij 
S, Peri F, Wilson SW, Ruhrberg C (2010) Tissue macrophages 
act as cellular chaperones for vascular anastomosis down-
stream of VEGF-mediated endothelial tip cell induction. Blood 
116:829–840. doi:10.1182/blood-2009-12-257832
	 48.	 Farfara D, Lifshitz V, Frenkel D (2008) Neuroprotective 
and neurotoxic properties of glial cells in the pathogen-
esis of Alzheimer’s disease. J Cell Mol Med 12:762–780. 
doi:10.1111/j.1582-4934.2008.00314.x
	 49.	 Flavin MP, Zhao G, Ho LT (2000) Microglial tissue plasmino-
gen activator (tPA) triggers neuronal apoptosis in  vitro. Glia 
29:347–354
	 50.	 Frautschy SA, Yang F, Irrizarry M, Hyman B, Saido TC, Hsiao 
K, Cole GM (1998) Microglial response to amyloid plaques in 
APPsw transgenic mice. Am J Pathol 152:307–317
	 51.	 Fu R, Shen Q, Xu P, Luo JJ, Tang Y (2014) Phagocytosis of 
microglia in the central nervous system diseases. Mol Neuro-
biol 49:1422–1434. doi:10.1007/s12035-013-8620-6
	 52.	 Fujiwara Y, Komohara Y, Ikeda T, Takeya M (2011) Coro-
solic acid inhibits glioblastoma cell proliferation by sup-
pressing the activation of signal transducer and activator of 
transcription-3 and nuclear factor-kappa B in tumor cells and 
tumor-associated macrophages. Cancer Sci 102:206–211. 
doi:10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01772.x
	 53.	 Fujiwara Y, Komohara Y, Kudo R, Tsurushima K, Ohnishi K, 
Ikeda T, Takeya M (2011) Oleanolic acid inhibits macrophage 
differentiation into the M2 phenotype and glioblastoma cell 
proliferation by suppressing the activation of STAT3. Oncol 
Rep 26:1533–1537. doi:10.3892/or.2011.1454
	 54.	 Fukumura D, Xu L, Chen Y, Gohongi T, Seed B, Jain RK 
(2001) Hypoxia and acidosis independently up-regulate vas-
cular endothelial growth factor transcription in brain tumors 
in vivo. Cancer Res 61:6020–6024
	 55.	 Furlan M, Marchal G, Viader F, Derlon JM, Baron JC (1996) 
Spontaneous neurological recovery after stroke and the fate of 
the ischemic penumbra. Ann Neurol 40:216–226. doi:10.1002/
ana.410400213
	 56.	 Gabrusiewicz K, Ellert-Miklaszewska A, Lipko M, Sielska M, 
Frankowska M, Kaminska B (2011) Characteristics of the alter-
native phenotype of microglia/macrophages and its modulation 
in experimental gliomas. PLoS ONE 6:e23902. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0023902
	 57.	 Galea I, Bechmann I, Perry VH (2007) What is immune 
privilege (not)? Trends Immunol 28:12–18. doi:10.1016/j.
it.2006.11.004
	 58.	 Geissmann F, Manz MG, Jung S, Sieweke MH, Merad M, Ley 
K (2010) Development of monocytes, macrophages, and den-
dritic cells. Science 327:656–661. doi:10.1126/science.1178331
	 59.	 Gelderblom M, Leypoldt F, Steinbach K, Behrens D, Choe CU, 
Siler DA, Arumugam TV, Orthey E, Gerloff C, Tolosa E et al 
(2009) Temporal and spatial dynamics of cerebral immune cell 
accumulation in stroke. Stroke 40:1849–1857. doi:10.1161/
strokeaha.108.534503
	 60.	 Gelosa P, Lecca D, Fumagalli M, Wypych D, Pignieri A, Cim-
ino M, Verderio C, Enerbäck M, Nikookhesal E, Tremoli E et al 
(2014) Microglia is a key player in the reduction of stroke dam-
age promoted by the new antithrombotic agent ticagrelor. J Cereb 
Blood Flow Metab 34:979–988. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2014.45
	 61.	 Ginhoux F, Greter M, Leboeuf M, Nandi S, See P, Gokhan S, 
Mehler MF, Conway SJ, Ng LG, Stanley ER et al (2010) Fate 
mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia derive from 
primitive macrophages. Science 330:841–845. doi:10.1126/
science.1194637
	 62.	 Girolamo F, Coppola C, Ribatti D, Trojano M (2014) Angiogen-
esis in multiple sclerosis and experimental autoimmune enceph-
alomyelitis. Acta Neuropathol Commun 2:84. doi:10.1186/
s40478-014-0084-z
	 63.	 Graeber MB, Streit WJ, Kreutzberg GW (1989) Identity of 
ED2-positive perivascular cells in rat brain. J Neurosci Res 
22:103–106. doi:10.1002/jnr.490220114
	 64.	 Gray MT, Woulfe JM (2015) Striatal blood–brain barrier per-
meability in Parkinson’s disease. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 
35:747–750. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2015.32
	 65.	 Griciuc A, Serrano-Pozo A, Parrado AR, Lesinski AN, Asse-
lin CN, Mullin K, Hooli B, Choi SH, Hyman BT, Tanzi RE 
(2013) Alzheimer’s disease risk gene CD33 inhibits microglial 
uptake of amyloid beta. Neuron 78:631–643. doi:10.1016/j.
neuron.2013.04.014
	 66.	 Griffin WS, Stanley LC, Ling C, White L, MacLeod V, Per-
rot LJ, White CL 3rd, Araoz C (1989) Brain interleukin 1 and 

359
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363	
1 3
S-100 immunoreactivity are elevated in Down syndrome and 
Alzheimer disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86:7611–7615
	 67.	 Guerreiro R, Hardy J (2013) TREM2 and neurodegenerative 
disease. N Engl J Med 369:1569–1570
	 68.	 Halliday G, Robinson SR, Shepherd C, Kril J (2000) Alzhei-
mer’s disease and inflammation: a review of cellular and thera-
peutic mechanisms. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 27:1–8
	 69.	 Hanisch UK (2013) Functional diversity of microglia—how 
heterogeneous are they to begin with? Front Cell Neurosci 7:65. 
doi:10.3389/fncel.2013.00065
	 70.	 Harold D, Abraham R, Hollingworth P, Sims R, Gerrish A, 
Hamshere ML, Pahwa JS, Moskvina V, Dowzell K, Williams A 
et al (2009) Genome-wide association study identifies variants 
at CLU and PICALM associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat 
Genet 41:1088–1093. doi:10.1038/ng.440
	 71.	 Harry GJ (2013) Microglia during development and aging. Phar-
macol Ther 139:313–326. doi:10.1016/j.pharmthera.2013.04.013
	 72.	 Haynes SE, Hollopeter G, Yang G, Kurpius D, Dailey ME, Gan 
WB, Julius D (2006) The P2Y12 receptor regulates microglial 
activation by extracellular nucleotides. Nat Neurosci 9:1512–
1519. doi:10.1038/nn1805
	 73.	 Healy LM, Michell-Robinson MA, Antel JP (2015) Regulation 
of human glia by multiple sclerosis disease modifying thera-
pies. Semin Immunopathol. doi:10.1007/s00281-015-0514-4
	 74.	 Heiss W-D (2012) The ischemic penumbra: how does tis-
sue injury evolve? Ann N Y Acad Sci 1268:26–34. 
doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06668.x
	 75.	 Heiss WD (2000) Ischemic penumbra: evidence from functional 
imaging in man. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 20:1276–1293. 
doi:10.1097/00004647-200009000-00002
	 76.	 Heiss WD (2012) The ischemic penumbra: how does tis-
sue injury evolve? Ann N Y Acad Sci 1268:26–34. 
doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06668.x
	 77.	 Herrera AJ, Espinosa-Oliva AM, Carrillo-Jimenez A, Oliva-
Martin MJ, Garcia-Revilla J, Garcia-Quintanilla A, de Pablos 
RM, Venero JL (2015) Relevance of chronic stress and the two 
faces of microglia in Parkinson’s disease. Front Cell Neurosci 
9:312. doi:10.3389/fncel.2015.00312
	 78.	 Herrero MT, Estrada C, Maatouk L, Vyas S (2015) Inflamma-
tion in Parkinson’s disease: role of glucocorticoids. Front Neu-
roanat 9:32. doi:10.3389/fnana.2015.00032
	 79.	 Hickey WF, Kimura H (1987) Graft-vs.-host disease elicits 
expression of class I and class II histocompatibility antigens 
and the presence of scattered T lymphocytes in rat central nerv-
ous system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84:2082–2086
	 80.	 Hickman SE, Allison EK, El Khoury J (2008) Microglial dys-
function and defective beta-amyloid clearance pathways in 
aging Alzheimer’s disease mice. J Neurosci 28:8354–8360. 
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0616-08.2008
	 81.	 Hickman SE, El Khoury J (2010) Mechanisms of mononuclear 
phagocyte recruitment in Alzheimer’s disease. CNS Neurol Dis-
ord Drug Targets 9:168–173
	 82.	 Hirao K, Ohnishi T, Hirata Y, Yamashita F, Mori T, Morigu-
chi Y, Matsuda H, Nemoto K, Imabayashi E, Yamada M et al 
(2005) The prediction of rapid conversion to Alzheimer’s dis-
ease in mild cognitive impairment using regional cerebral 
blood flow SPECT. Neuroimage 28:1014–1021. doi:10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2005.06.066
	 83.	 Hristova M, Cuthill D, Zbarsky V, Acosta-Saltos A, Wallace A, 
Blight K, Buckley SM, Peebles D, Heuer H, Waddington SN 
et al (2010) Activation and deactivation of periventricular white 
matter phagocytes during postnatal mouse development. Glia 
58:11–28. doi:10.1002/glia.20896
	 84.	 Hu X, Li P, Guo Y, Wang H, Leak RK, Chen S, Gao 
Y, 
Chen 
J 
(2012) 
Microglia/macrophage 
polarization 
dynamics reveal novel mechanism of injury expansion after 
focal cerebral ischemia. Stroke 43:3063–3070. doi:10.1161/
strokeaha.112.659656
	 85.	 Hussain S, Yang D, Suki D, Grimm E, Heimberger A (2006) 
Innate immune functions of microglia isolated from human gli-
oma patients. J Transl Med 4:1–9. doi:10.1186/1479-5876-4-15
	 86.	 Hussain SF, Yang D, Suki D, Aldape K, Grimm E, Heimberger 
AB (2006) The role of human glioma-infiltrating microglia/
macrophages in mediating antitumor immune responses. Neuro 
Oncol 8:261–279. doi:10.1215/15228517-2006-008
	 87.	 Ito D, Tanaka K, Suzuki S, Dembo T, Fukuuchi Y (2001) 
Enhanced expression of Iba1, ionized calcium-binding adapter 
molecule 1, after transient focal cerebral ischemia in rat brain. 
Stroke 32:1208–1215
	 88.	 Jain RK, di Tomaso E, Duda DG, Loeffler JS, Sorensen AG, 
Batchelor TT (2007) Angiogenesis in brain tumours. Nat Rev 
Neurosci 8:610-622. doi:http://www.nature.com/nrn/journal/v8/
n8/suppinfo/nrn2175_S1.html
	 89.	 Jian Liu K, Rosenberg GA (2005) Matrix metalloproteinases 
and free radicals in cerebral ischemia. Free Radic Biol Med 
39:71–80. doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2005.03.033
	 90.	 Johnson NA, Jahng GH, Weiner MW, Miller BL, Chui HC, 
Jagust WJ, Gorno-Tempini ML, Schuff N (2005) Pattern of 
cerebral hypoperfusion in Alzheimer disease and mild cogni-
tive impairment measured with arterial spin-labeling MR imag-
ing: initial experience. Radiology 234:851–859. doi:10.1148/
radiol.2343040197
	 91.	 Jolivel V, Bicker F, Biname F, Ploen R, Keller S, Gollan R, 
Jurek B, Birkenstock J, Poisa-Beiro L, Bruttger J et al (2015) 
Perivascular microglia promote blood vessel disintegration 
in the ischemic penumbra. Acta Neuropathol 129:279–295. 
doi:10.1007/s00401-014-1372-1
	 92.	 Watters JJ, Schartner JM, Badie B (2005) Microglia function in 
brain tumors. J Neurosci Res 81:447–455
	 93.	 Kahles T, Luedike P, Endres M, Galla HJ, Steinmetz H, Busse 
R, Neumann-Haefelin T, Brandes RP (2007) NADPH oxi-
dase plays a central role in blood–brain barrier damage in 
experimental stroke. Stroke 38:3000–3006. doi:10.1161/
strokeaha.107.489765
	 94.	 Kalaria RN, Harik SI (1989) Reduced glucose transporter at the 
blood–brain barrier and in cerebral cortex in Alzheimer disease. 
J Neurochem 53:1083–1088
	 95.	 Kermode AG, Thompson AJ, Tofts P, MacManus DG, Ken-
dall BE, Kingsley DP, Moseley IF, Rudge P, McDonald WI 
(1990) Breakdown of the blood–brain barrier precedes symp-
toms and other MRI signs of new lesions in multiple scle-
rosis. Pathogenetic and clinical implications. Brain 113(Pt 
5):1477–1489
	 96.	 Kida S, Steart PV, Zhang ET, Weller RO (1993) Perivascular 
cells act as scavengers in the cerebral perivascular spaces and 
remain distinct from pericytes, microglia and macrophages. 
Acta Neuropathol 85:646–652
	 97.	 Kieburtz K, Wunderle KB (2013) Parkinson’s disease: evi-
dence for environmental risk factors. Mov Disord 28:8–13. 
doi:10.1002/mds.25150
	 98.	 Kim C, Ho DH, Suk JE, You S, Michael S, Kang J, Joong Lee 
S, Masliah E, Hwang D, Lee HJ et al (2013) Neuron-released 
oligomeric alpha-synuclein is an endogenous agonist of TLR2 
for paracrine activation of microglia. Nat Commun 4:1562. 
doi:10.1038/ncomms2534
	 99.	 Kirk J, Plumb J, Mirakhur M, McQuaid S (2003) Tight junc-
tional abnormality in multiple sclerosis white matter affects 
all calibres of vessel and is associated with blood–brain bar-
rier leakage and active demyelination. J Pathol 201:319–327. 
doi:10.1002/path.1434

360
	
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363
1 3
	100.	 Klein R, Roggendorf W (2001) Increased microglia prolifera-
tion separates pilocytic astrocytomas from diffuse astrocyto-
mas: a double labeling study. Acta Neuropathol 101:245–248
	101.	 Kobayashi K, Imagama S, Ohgomori T, Hirano K, Uchimura K, 
Sakamoto K, Hirakawa A, Takeuchi H, Suzumura A, Ishiguro N 
et al (2013) Minocycline selectively inhibits M1 polarization of 
microglia. Cell Death Dis 4:e525. doi:10.1038/cddis.2013.54
	102.	 Kofler 
J, 
Wiley 
CA 
(2011) 
Microglia: 
key 
innate 
immune cells of the brain. Toxicol Pathol 39:103–114. 
doi:10.1177/0192623310387619
	103.	 Kohler E, Prentice DA, Bates TR, Hankey GJ, Claxton A, van 
Heerden J, Blacker D (2013) Intravenous minocycline in acute 
stroke: a randomized, controlled pilot study and meta-analysis. 
Stroke 44:2493–2499. doi:10.1161/strokeaha.113.000780
	104.	 Kohutnicka M, Lewandowska E, Kurkowska-Jastrzebska I, 
Czlonkowski A, Czlonkowska A (1998) Microglial and astro-
cytic involvement in a murine model of Parkinson’s disease 
induced 
by 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine 
(MPTP). Immunopharmacology 39:167–180
	105.	 Kostianovsky AM, Maier LM, Anderson RC, Bruce JN, Ander-
son DE (2008) Astrocytic regulation of human monocytic/
microglial activation. J Immunol 181:5425–5432
	106.	 Kunsch C, Medford RM (1999) Oxidative stress as a regulator 
of gene expression in the vasculature. Circ Res 85:753–766
	107.	 Kurz H, Christ B (1998) Embryonic CNS macrophages and 
microglia do not stem from circulating, but from extravascular 
precursors. Glia 22:98–102
	108.	 Lambert JC, Heath S, Even G, Campion D, Sleegers K, Hil-
tunen M, Combarros O, Zelenika D, Bullido MJ, Tavernier B 
et  al (2009) Genome-wide association study identifies vari-
ants at CLU and CR1 associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat 
Genet 41:1094–1099. doi:10.1038/ng.439
	109.	 Lampl Y, Boaz M, Gilad R, Lorberboym M, Dabby R, Rapo-
port A, Anca-Hershkowitz M, Sadeh M (2007) Minocy-
cline treatment in acute stroke: an open-label, evaluator-
blinded study. Neurology 69:1404–1410. doi:10.1212/01.
wnl.0000277487.04281.db
	110.	 Lassmann H, Bruck W, Lucchinetti CF (2007) The immuno-
pathology of multiple sclerosis: an overview. Brain Pathol 
17:210–218. doi:10.1111/j.1750-3639.2007.00064.x
	111.	 Lassmann H, Zimprich F, Vass K, Hickey WF (1991) Microglial 
cells are a component of the perivascular glia limitans. J Neuro-
sci Res 28:236–243. doi:10.1002/jnr.490280211
	112.	 Lawson LJ, Perry VH, Dri P, Gordon S (1990) Heteroge-
neity in the distribution and morphology of microglia in 
the normal adult mouse brain. Neuroscience 39:151–170. 
doi:10.1016/0306-4522(90)90229-W
	113.	 Lee Y, Lee SR, Choi SS, Yeo HG, Chang KT, Lee HJ (2014) 
Therapeutically targeting neuroinflammation and microglia 
after acute ischemic stroke. BioMed Res Int 2014:297241. 
doi:10.1155/2014/297241
	114.	 Li G, Hattermann K, Mentlein R, Mehdorn HM, Held-Feindt J 
(2013) The transmembrane chemokines CXCL16 and CX3CL1 
and their receptors are expressed in human meningiomas. Oncol 
Rep 29:563–570. doi:10.3892/or.2012.2164
	115.	 Li J, McCullough LD (2009) Sex differences in minocycline-
induced neuroprotection after experimental stroke. J Cereb 
Blood Flow Metab 29:670–674. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2009.3
	116.	 Li W, Graeber MB (2012) The molecular profile of micro-
glia under the influence of glioma. Neuro Oncol 14:958–978. 
doi:10.1093/neuonc/nos116
	117.	 Li Y, Liu DX, Li MY, Qin XX, Fang WG, Zhao WD, Chen 
YH (2014) Ephrin-A3 and ephrin-A4 contribute to microglia-
induced angiogenesis in brain endothelial cells. Anat Rec 
(Hoboken) 297:1908–1918. doi:10.1002/ar.22998
	118.	 Liu M, Bing G (2011) Lipopolysaccharide animal mod-
els for Parkinson’s disease. Parkinson’s Dis 2011:327089. 
doi:10.4061/2011/327089
	119.	 Lo EH (2008) A new penumbra: transitioning from injury into 
repair after stroke. Nat Med 14:497–500. doi:10.1038/nm1735
	120.	 Lopes MBS (2003) Angiogenesis in brain tumors. Microsc Res 
Tech 60:225–230. doi:10.1002/jemt.10260
	121.	 Lorger M (2012) Tumor microenvironment in the brain. Can-
cers 4:218–243. doi:10.3390/cancers4010218
	122.	 Lorger M, Krueger JS, O’Neal M, Staflin K, Felding-Haber-
mann B (2009) Activation of tumor cell integrin alphavbeta3 
controls angiogenesis and metastatic growth in the brain. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:10666–10671. doi:10.1073/
pnas.0903035106
	123.	 Louveau A, Smirnov I, Keyes TJ, Eccles JD, Rouhani SJ, Peske 
JD, Derecki NC, Castle D, Mandell JW, Lee KS et  al (2015) 
Structural and functional features of central nervous system lym-
phatic vessels. Nature 523:337–341. doi:10.1038/nature14432
	124.	 Lue LF, Rydel R, Brigham EF, Yang LB, Hampel H, Murphy 
GM Jr, Brachova L, Yan SD, Walker DG, Shen Y et al (2001) 
Inflammatory repertoire of Alzheimer’s disease and nonde-
mented elderly microglia in vitro. Glia 35:72–79
	125.	 Machado LS, Kozak A, Ergul A, Hess DC, Borlongan CV, 
Fagan SC (2006) Delayed minocycline inhibits ischemia-
activated matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9 after experimental 
stroke. BMC Neurosci 7:56. doi:10.1186/1471-2202-7-56
	126.	 Mantovani A, Sozzani S, Locati M, Allavena P, Sica A (2002) 
Macrophage polarization: tumor-associated macrophages as a 
paradigm for polarized M2 mononuclear phagocytes. Trends 
Immunol 23:549–555. doi:10.1016/S1471-4906(02)02302-5
	127.	 Marik C, Felts PA, Bauer J, Lassmann H, Smith KJ (2007) 
Lesion genesis in a subset of patients with multiple sclerosis: a 
role for innate immunity? Brain 130:2800–2815. doi:10.1093/
brain/awm236
	128.	 Markovic DS, Vinnakota K, van Rooijen N, Kiwit J, Synowitz 
M, Glass R, Kettenmann H (2011) Minocycline reduces glioma 
expansion and invasion by attenuating microglial MT1-MMP 
expression. Brain Behav Immun 25:624–628. doi:10.1016/j.
bbi.2011.01.015
	129.	 Markovic DS, Vinnakota K, Chirasani S, Synowitz M, Raguet 
H, Stock K, et al (2009) Gliomas induce and exploit microglial 
MT1-MMP expression for tumor expansion. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 106:12530–12535
	130.	 Mato M, Ookawara S, Sakamoto A, Aikawa E, Ogawa T, Mit-
suhashi U, Masuzawa T, Suzuki H, Honda M, Yazaki Y et al 
(1996) Involvement of specific macrophage-lineage cells sur-
rounding arterioles in barrier and scavenger function in brain 
cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:3269–3274
	131.	 Matsubara T, Ono T, Yamanoi A, Tachibana M, Nagasue N 
(2007) Fractalkine-CX3CR1 axis regulates tumor cell cycle and 
deteriorates prognosis after radical resection for hepatocellular 
carcinoma. J Surg Oncol 95:241–249. doi:10.1002/jso.20642
	132.	 Matsumoto J, Dohgu S, Takata F, Nishioku T, Sumi N, Machida 
T, Takahashi H, Yamauchi A, Kataoka Y (2012) Lipopolysac-
charide-activated microglia lower P-glycoprotein function in 
brain microvascular endothelial cells. Neurosci Lett 524:45–48. 
doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2012.07.004
	133.	 Melani A, Amadio S, Gianfriddo M, Vannucchi MG, Volonte C, 
Bernardi G, Pedata F, Sancesario G (2006) P2X7 receptor mod-
ulation on microglial cells and reduction of brain infarct caused 
by middle cerebral artery occlusion in rat. J Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab 26:974–982. doi:10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600250
	134.	 Meyer-Luehmann M, Prinz M (2015) Myeloid cells in Alzhei-
mer’s Disease: culprits, victims or innocent bystanders? Trends 
Neurosci 38:659–668. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2015.08.011

361
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363	
1 3
	135.	 Mildner A, Mack M, Schmidt H, Bruck W, Djukic M, Zabel 
MD, Hille A, Priller J, Prinz M (2009) CCR2+ Ly-6Chi mono-
cytes are crucial for the effector phase of autoimmunity in the 
central nervous system. Brain 132:2487–2500. doi:10.1093/
brain/awp144
	136.	 Mittelbronn M, Dietz K, Schluesener HJ, Meyermann R (2001) 
Local distribution of microglia in the normal adult human cen-
tral nervous system differs by up to one order of magnitude. 
Acta Neuropathol 101:249–255
	137.	 Mizutani M, Pino PA, Saederup N, Charo IF, Ransohoff 
RM, Cardona AE (2012) The fractalkine receptor but not 
CCR2 is present on microglia from embryonic development 
throughout adulthood. J Immunol 188:29–36. doi:10.4049/
jimmunol.1100421
	138.	 Moehle MS, West AB (2015) M1 and M2 immune activation 
in Parkinson’s Disease: foe and ally? Neuroscience 302:59–73. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.11.018
	139.	 Montaner J, Alvarez-Sabin J, Molina CA, Angles A, Abilleira 
S, Arenillas J, Monasterio J (2001) Matrix metalloproteinase 
expression is related to hemorrhagic transformation after cardi-
oembolic stroke. Stroke 32:2762–2767
	140.	 Morantz RA, Wood GW, Foster M, Clark M, Gollahon K 
(1979) Macrophages in experimental and human brain tumors. 
Part 1: studies of the macrophage content of experimental rat 
brain tumors of varying immunogenicity. J Neurosurg 50:298–
304. doi:10.3171/jns.1979.50.3.0298
	141.	 Morantz RA, Wood GW, Foster M, Clark M, Gollahon K (1979) 
Macrophages in experimental and human brain tumors. Part 2: 
studies of the macrophage content of human brain tumors. J 
Neurosurg 50:305–311. doi:10.3171/jns.1979.50.3.0305
	142.	 Moskowitz MA, Lo EH, Iadecola C (2010) The science of 
stroke: mechanisms in search of treatments. Neuron 67:181–
198. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2010.07.002
	143.	 Mosley RL, Benner EJ, Kadiu I, Thomas M, Boska MD, Hasan 
K, Laurie C, Gendelman HE (2006) Neuroinflammation, Oxi-
dative stress and the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s Disease. Clin 
Neurosci Res 6:261–281. doi:10.1016/j.cnr.2006.09.006
	144.	 Nayak D, Roth TL, McGavern DB (2014) Microglia devel-
opment and function. Annu Rev Immunol 32:367–402. 
doi:10.1146/annurev-immunol-032713-120240
	145.	 Nicholas MK, Antel JP, Stefansson K, Arnason BG (1987) 
Rejection of fetal neocortical neural transplants by H-2 incom-
patible mice. J Immunol 139:2275–2283
	146.	 Nikolic I, Stankovic ND, Bicker F, Meister J, Braun H, Awwad 
K, Baumgart J, Simon K, Thal SC, Patra C et al (2013) EGFL7 
ligates alphavbeta3 integrin to enhance vessel formation. Blood 
121:3041–3050. doi:10.1182/blood-2011-11-394882
	147.	 Noseworthy JH, Lucchinetti C, Rodriguez M, Weinshenker 
BG (2000) Multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 343:938–952. 
doi:10.1056/NEJM200009283431307
	148.	 Opal SM, van der Poll T (2015) Endothelial barrier dysfunc-
tion in septic shock. J Intern Med 277:277–293. doi:10.1111/
joim.12331
	149.	 Ortiz GG, Pacheco-Moises FP, Macias-Islas MA, Flores-Alva-
rado LJ, Mireles-Ramirez MA, Gonzalez-Renovato ED, Her-
nandez-Navarro VE, Sanchez-Lopez AL, Alatorre-Jimenez MA 
(2014) Role of the blood–brain barrier in multiple sclerosis. 
Arch Med Res 45:687–697. doi:10.1016/j.arcmed.2014.11.013
	150.	 Padden M, Leech S, Craig B, Kirk J, Brankin B, McQuaid S 
(2007) Differences in expression of junctional adhesion mol-
ecule-A and beta-catenin in multiple sclerosis brain tissue: 
increasing evidence for the role of tight junction pathology. Acta 
Neuropathol 113:177–186. doi:10.1007/s00401-006-0145-x
	151.	 Paresce DM, Ghosh RN, Maxfield FR (1996) Microglial cells 
internalize aggregates of the Alzheimer’s disease amyloid beta-
protein via a scavenger receptor. Neuron 17:553–565
	152.	 Parkhurst CN, Yang G, Ninan I, Savas JN, Yates JR 3rd, Lafaille 
JJ, Hempstead BL, Littman DR, Gan WB (2013) Microglia 
promote learning-dependent synapse formation through brain-
derived neurotrophic factor. Cell 155:1596–1609. doi:10.1016/j.
cell.2013.11.030
	153.	 Patel AR, Ritzel R, McCullough LD, Liu F (2013) Microglia 
and ischemic stroke: a double-edged sword. Int J Physiol Patho-
physiol Pharmacol 5:73–90
	154.	 Patel NS, Paris D, Mathura V, Quadros AN, Crawford FC, Mul-
lan MJ (2005) Inflammatory cytokine levels correlate with amy-
loid load in transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J 
Neuroinflammation 2:9. doi:10.1186/1742-2094-2-9
	155.	 Pihlstrom L, Axelsson G, Bjornara KA, Dizdar N, Fardell 
C, Forsgren L, Holmberg B, Larsen JP, Linder J, Niss-
brandt H et  al (2013) Supportive evidence for 11 loci from 
genome-wide association studies in Parkinson’s disease. 
Neurobiol 
Aging 
34(1708):e1707–e1713. 
doi:10.1016/j.
neurobiolaging.2012.10.019
	156.	 Pisani V, Stefani A, Pierantozzi M, Natoli S, Stanzione P, Fran-
ciotta D, Pisani A (2012) Increased blood-cerebrospinal fluid 
transfer of albumin in advanced Parkinson’s disease. J Neuroin-
flammation 9:188. doi:10.1186/1742-2094-9-188
	157.	 Plate KH, Mennel HD (1995) Vascular morphology and 
angiogenesis in glial tumors. Exp Toxicol Pathol 47:89–94. 
doi:10.1016/S0940-2993(11)80292-7
	158.	 Potente M, Gerhardt H, Carmeliet P (2011) Basic and therapeu-
tic aspects of angiogenesis. Cell 146:873–887. doi:10.1016/j.
cell.2011.08.039
	159.	 Prinz M, Priller J (2014) Microglia and brain macrophages in 
the molecular age: from origin to neuropsychiatric disease. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 15:300–312. doi:10.1038/nrn3722
	160.	 Prinz M, Tay TL, Wolf Y, Jung S (2014) Microglia: unique and 
common features with other tissue macrophages. Acta Neuro-
pathol 128:319–331. doi:10.1007/s00401-014-1267-1
	161.	 Proescholdt MA, Jacobson S, Tresser N, Oldfield EH, Merrill 
MJ (2002) Vascular endothelial growth factor is expressed in 
multiple sclerosis plaques and can induce inflammatory lesions 
in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis rats. J Neuropathol 
Exp Neurol 61:914–925
	162.	 Pul R, Moharregh-Khiabani D, Skuljec J, Skripuletz T, Garde 
N, Voss EV, Stangel M (2011) Glatiramer acetate modulates 
TNF-alpha and IL-10 secretion in microglia and promotes their 
phagocytic activity. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 6:381–388. 
doi:10.1007/s11481-010-9248-1
	163.	 Pyonteck SM, Akkari L, Schuhmacher AJ, Bowman RL, Sev-
enich L, Quail DF, Olson OC, Quick ML, Huse JT, Teijeiro 
V et al (2013) CSF-1R inhibition alters macrophage polariza-
tion and blocks glioma progression. Nat Med 19:1264–1272. 
doi:10.1038/nm.3337
	164.	 Ransohoff RM, Perry VH (2009) Microglial physiology: unique 
stimuli, specialized responses. Annu Rev Immunol 27:119–145. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.immunol.021908.132528
	165.	 Rogers J, Kirby LC, Hempelman SR, Berry DL, McGeer PL, 
Kaszniak AW, Zalinski J, Cofield M, Mansukhani L, Willson P 
et al (1993) Clinical trial of indomethacin in Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Neurology 43:1609–1611
	166.	 Rosell A, Ortega-Aznar A, Alvarez-Sabin J, Fernandez-
Cadenas I, Ribo M, Molina CA, Lo EH, Montaner J (2006) 
Increased brain expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 after 
ischemic and hemorrhagic human stroke. Stroke 37:1399–1406. 
doi:10.1161/01.STR.0000223001.06264.af
	167.	 Russo I, Bubacco L, Greggio E (2014) LRRK2 and neuroin-
flammation: partners in crime in Parkinson’s disease? J Neuro-
inflammation 11:52. doi:10.1186/1742-2094-11-52
	168.	 Rymo SF, Gerhardt H, Wolfhagen Sand F, Lang R, Uv A, Bet-
sholtz C (2011) A two-way communication between microglial 

362
	
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363
1 3
cells and angiogenic sprouts regulates angiogenesis in aor-
tic ring cultures. PLoS ONE 6:e15846. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0015846
	169.	 Sagare A, Deane R, Bell RD, Johnson B, Hamm K, Pendu R, 
Marky A, Lenting PJ, Wu Z, Zarcone T et al (2007) Clearance 
of amyloid-beta by circulating lipoprotein receptors. Nat Med 
13:1029–1031. doi:10.1038/nm1635
	170.	 Samuraki M, Matsunari I, Chen WP, Yajima K, Yanase D, 
Fujikawa A, Takeda N, Nishimura S, Matsuda H, Yamada 
M (2007) Partial volume effect-corrected FDG PET and grey 
matter volume loss in patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease. 
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 34:1658–1669. doi:10.1007/
s00259-007-0454-x
	171.	 Schilling M, Besselmann M, Leonhard C, Mueller M, Ringel-
stein EB, Kiefer R (2003) Microglial activation precedes and 
predominates over macrophage infiltration in transient focal 
cerebral ischemia: a study in green fluorescent protein trans-
genic bone marrow chimeric mice. Exp Neurol 183:25–33
	172.	 Segal BM (2014) Stage-specific immune dysregulation in 
multiple sclerosis. J Interferon Cytokine Res 34:633–640. 
doi:10.1089/jir.2014.0025
	173.	 Sheng J, Ruedl C, Karjalainen K (2015) Most tissue-resident 
macrophages except microglia are derived from fetal hemat-
opoietic stem cells. Immunity 43:382–393. doi:10.1016/j.
immuni.2015.07.016
	174.	 Siffrin V, Vogt J, Radbruch H, Nitsch R, Zipp F (2010) Multi-
ple sclerosis—candidate mechanisms underlying CNS atrophy. 
Trends Neurosci 33:202–210. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2010.01.002
	175.	 Soulet D, Rivest S (2008) Microglia. Curr Biol 18:R506–R508. 
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2008.04.047
	176.	 Stefanik DF, Fellows WK, Rizkalla LR, Rizkalla WM, Stefanik 
PP, Deleo AB, Welch WC (2001) Monoclonal antibodies to vas-
cular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and the VEGF receptor, 
FLT-1, inhibit the growth of C6 glioma in a mouse xenograft. J 
Neurooncol 55:91–100
	177.	 Stewart CR, Stuart LM, Wilkinson K, van Gils JM, Deng J, 
Halle A, Rayner KJ, Boyer L, Zhong R, Frazier WA et al (2010) 
CD36 ligands promote sterile inflammation through assem-
bly of a Toll-like receptor 4 and 6 heterodimer. Nat Immunol 
11:155–161. doi:10.1038/ni.1836
	178.	 Streit WJ, Graeber MB, Kreutzberg GW (1988) Functional 
plasticity of microglia: a review. Glia 1:301–307. doi:10.1002/
glia.440010502
	179.	 Sumi N, Nishioku T, Takata F, Matsumoto J, Watanabe T, Shuto 
H, Yamauchi A, Dohgu S, Kataoka Y (2010) Lipopolysaccha-
ride-activated microglia induce dysfunction of the blood–brain 
barrier in rat microvascular endothelial cells co-cultured with 
microglia. Cell Mol Neurobiol 30:247–253. doi:10.1007/
s10571-009-9446-7
	180.	 Tang Z, Gan Y, Liu Q, Yin J-X, Liu Q, Shi J, Shi F-D (2014) 
CX3CR1 deficiency suppresses activation and neurotoxicity of 
microglia/macrophage in experimental ischemic stroke. J Neu-
roinflammation 11:26. doi:10.1186/1742-2094-11-26
	181.	 Torres-Platas SG, Comeau S, Rachalski A, Bo GD, Cruceanu C, 
Turecki G, Giros B, Mechawar N (2014) Morphometric charac-
terization of microglial phenotypes in human cerebral cortex. J 
Neuroinflammation 11:12. doi:10.1186/1742-2094-11-12
	182.	 Town T, Jeng D, Alexopoulou L, Tan J, Flavell RA (2006) 
Microglia recognize double-stranded RNA via TLR3. J Immu-
nol 176:3804–3812
	183.	 van Rossum D, Hanisch U-K (2004) Microglia. Metab Brain 
Dis 19:393–411. doi:10.1023/B:MEBR.0000043984.73063.d8
	184.	 Vos CM, Geurts JJ, Montagne L, van Haastert ES, Bo L, van 
der Valk P, Barkhof F, de Vries HE (2005) Blood–brain bar-
rier alterations in both focal and diffuse abnormalities on 
postmortem MRI in multiple sclerosis. Neurobiol Dis 20:953–
960. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2005.06.012
	185.	 Wada K, Arai H, Takanashi M, Fukae J, Oizumi H, Yasuda 
T, Mizuno Y, Mochizuki H (2006) Expression levels of vas-
cular endothelial growth factor and its receptors in Parkin-
son’s disease. NeuroReport 17:705–709. doi:10.1097/01.
wnr.0000215769.71657.65
	186.	 Wang S, Chu CH, Stewart T, Ginghina C, Wang Y, Nie H, Guo 
M, Wilson B, Hong JS, Zhang J (2015) Alpha-synuclein, a che-
moattractant, directs microglial migration via H2O2-dependent 
Lyn phosphorylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:E1926–
E1935. doi:10.1073/pnas.1417883112
	187.	 Wegiel J, Wisniewski HM (1990) The complex of microglial 
cells and amyloid star in three-dimensional reconstruction. Acta 
Neuropathol 81:116–124
	188.	 Wei J, Gabrusiewicz K, Heimberger A (2013) The Controver-
sial role of microglia in malignant gliomas. Clin Dev Immunol 
2013:12. doi:10.1155/2013/285246
	189.	 Welser JV, Li L, Milner R (2010) Microglial activation state 
exerts a biphasic influence on brain endothelial cell prolifera-
tion by regulating the balance of TNF and TGF-beta1. J Neuro-
inflammation 7:89. doi:10.1186/1742-2094-7-89
	190.	 Whitton PS (2007) Inflammation as a causative factor in the 
aetiology of Parkinson’s disease. Br J Pharmacol 150:963–976. 
doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0707167
	191.	 Woo MS, Park JS, Choi IY, Kim WK, Kim HS (2008) 
Inhibition of MMP-3 or -9 suppresses lipopolysaccha-
ride-induced 
expression 
of 
proinflammatory 
cytokines 
and 
iNOS 
in 
microglia. 
J 
Neurochem 
106:770–780. 
doi:10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05430.x
	192.	 Wu A, Wei J, Kong L-Y, Wang Y, Priebe W, Qiao W, Sawaya R, 
Heimberger AB (2010) Glioma cancer stem cells induce immu-
nosuppressive macrophages/microglia. Neuro Oncol 12:1113–
1125. doi:10.1093/neuonc/noq082
	193.	 Xu C, Wu X, Zhu J (2013) VEGF promotes proliferation of 
human glioblastoma multiforme stem-like cells through VEGF 
receptor 2. Sci World J 2013:8. doi:10.1155/2013/417413
	194.	 Xu J, Zhu L, He S, Wu Y, Jin W, Yu T, Qu JY, Wen Z (2015) 
Temporal-spatial resolution fate mapping reveals distinct ori-
gins for embryonic and adult microglia in zebrafish. Dev Cell 
34:632–641. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2015.08.018
	195.	 Yenari MA, Xu L, Tang XN, Qiao Y, Giffard RG (2006) 
Microglia potentiate damage to blood–brain barrier constitu-
ents: improvement by minocycline in vivo and in vitro. Stroke 
37:1087–1093. doi:10.1161/01.STR.0000206281.77178.ac
	196.	 Yeung YT, Bryce NS, Adams S, Braidy N, Konayagi M, 
McDonald KL, Teo C, Guillemin GJ, Grewal T, Munoz L 
(2012) p38 MAPK inhibitors attenuate pro-inflammatory 
cytokine production and the invasiveness of human U251 
glioblastoma cells. J Neurooncol 109:35–44. doi:10.1007/
s11060-012-0875-7
	197.	 Yi L, Xiao H, Xu M, Ye X, Hu J, Li F, Li M, Luo C, Yu S, Bian 
X et  al (2011) Glioma-initiating cells: a predominant role in 
microglia/macrophages tropism to glioma. J Neuroimmunol 
232:75–82
	198.	 Yiannopoulou KG, Papageorgiou SG (2013) Current and future 
treatments for Alzheimer’s disease. Ther Adv Neurol Disord 
6:19–33. doi:10.1177/1756285612461679
	199.	 Yrjanheikki J, Tikka T, Keinanen R, Goldsteins G, Chan PH, 
Koistinaho J (1999) A tetracycline derivative, minocycline, 
reduces inflammation and protects against focal cerebral 
ischemia with a wide therapeutic window. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 96:13496–13500
	200.	 Zhang L, Alizadeh D, Van Handel M, Kortylewski M, Yu H, 
Badie B (2009) Stat3 inhibition activates tumor macrophages 

363
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:347–363	
1 3
and abrogates glioma growth in mice. Glia 57:1458–1467. 
doi:10.1002/glia.20863
	201.	 Zhang ZG, Zhang L, Jiang Q, Zhang R, Davies K, Powers C, 
Bruggen N, Chopp M (2000) VEGF enhances angiogenesis and 
promotes blood–brain barrier leakage in the ischemic brain. J 
Clin Investig 106:829–838. doi:10.1172/jci9369
	202.	 Zhu S, Stavrovskaya IG, Drozda M, Kim BY, Ona V, Li M, 
Sarang S, Liu AS, Hartley DM, Wu DC et al (2002) Minocy-
cline inhibits cytochrome c release and delays progression 
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in mice. Nature 417:74–78. 
doi:10.1038/417074a
	203.	 Zipp F, Gold R, Wiendl H (2013) Identification of inflammatory 
neuronal injury and prevention of neuronal damage in multiple 
sclerosis: hope for novel therapies? JAMA Neurol 70:1569–
1574. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.4391
	204.	 Zlokovic BV (2008) The blood–brain barrier in health and 
chronic neurodegenerative disorders. Neuron 57:178–201. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2008.01.003

===== Dumoulin2021_JCompNeurol_AxonGuidance+SpinalCordMidline =====
T O O L B O X
Axon guidance at the spinal cord midline—A live
imaging perspective
Alexandre Dumoulin1,2
|
Nikole R. Zuñiga1,2
|
Esther T. Stoeckli1,2
1Department of Molecular Life Sciences,
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
2Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Correspondence
Esther T. Stoeckli, Department of Molecular
Life Sciences, University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich,
Switzerland.
Email: esther.stoeckli@mls.uzh.ch
Funding information
Swiss National Science Foundation
Abstract
During neural circuit formation, axons navigate several choice points to reach their
final target. At each one of these intermediate targets, growth cones need to switch
responsiveness from attraction to repulsion in order to move on. Molecular mecha-
nisms that allow for the precise timing of surface expression of a new set of recep-
tors that support the switch in responsiveness are difficult to study in vivo. Mostly,
mechanisms are inferred from the observation of snapshots of many different growth
cones analyzed in different preparations of tissue harvested at distinct time points.
However, to really understand the behavior of growth cones at choice points, a single
growth cone should be followed arriving at and leaving the intermediate target. Exis-
ting ex vivo preparations, like cultures of an “open-book” preparation of the spinal
cord have been successfully used to study floor plate entry and exit, but artifacts pre-
vent the analysis of growth cone behavior at the floor plate exit site. Here, we
describe a novel spinal cord preparation that allows for live imaging of individual
axons during navigation in their intact environment. When comparing growth cone
behavior in our ex vivo system with snapshots from in vivo navigation, we do not see
any differences. The possibility to observe the dynamics of single growth cones navi-
gating their intermediate target allows for measuring growth speed, changes in mor-
phology, or aberrant behavior, like stalling and wrong turning. Moreover, observation
of the intermediate target—the floor plate—revealed its active participation and inter-
action with commissural axons during midline crossing.
K E Y W O R D S
axon guidance, commissural neurons, floor plate, live imaging, midline, neural circuit
formation, spinal cord culture
1
|
INTRODUCTION
Commissural axons in the developing spinal cord have been used for
over two decades to learn fundamental molecular mechanisms of
axon guidance (Stoeckli, 2018). The dI1 subtype of dorsal commissural
interneurons
are
an
excellent
model,
as
their
axons
have
a
stereotypical trajectory at the ventral midline, as all axons of this sub-
population cross the floor plate (FP), exit it and turn rostrally along the
contralateral border. Thus, dI1 commissural neurons offer an easy
read-out for deciphering molecular mechanisms of axon guidance at
choice points. Since the first application of lipophilic dye tracing in
open-book preparations of rat spinal cords that revealed the normal
Received: 14 September 2020
Revised: 10 December 2020
Accepted: 8 January 2021
DOI: 10.1002/cne.25107
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is properly cited.
© 2021 The Authors. The Journal of Comparative Neurology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.
J Comp Neurol. 2021;529:2517–2538.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/cne
2517

trajectory of these axons 30 years ago (Bovolenta & Dodd, 1990), this
method continues to be used to assess axon guidance at the midline
in mouse and chicken embryos. The comparison between axons in
open-book preparations of control and experimentally manipulated
spinal cords, dissected at specific time points, offered a solid under-
standing of molecules involved in axonal midline crossing and subse-
quent turning in higher vertebrates. However, the information
about mechanisms that can be extracted from such experiments is
limited, as it is deduced from snapshots of axons taken from differ-
ent animals sacrificed at a specific time point. For this reason, we
have established a live-imaging approach that allows for visualiza-
tion of dI1 axonal behavior at the FP, while axons are in the process
of crossing the midline and then turning rostrally. We have chosen
the chicken embryo, as it is a very accessible model for studying
various developmental processes in intact tissues in vivo and
ex vivo (Boubakar et al., 2017; Das & Storey, 2014; Li et al., 2019;
Sanders et al., 2013). Thanks to a very stable and reproducible spinal
cord culture, we could for the first time characterize the exact timing of
midline crossing and the details of rostral turning by dI1 axons in an
intact environment in control and experimentally manipulated spinal
cords. We could get more insight into growth cone dynamics and mor-
phologies at their choice point, the FP. Furthermore, our ex vivo
method also shed new light on the role of the intermediate target, the
FP cells, their dynamics, morphology and interaction with commissural
axons during midline crossing. Finally, our results on the dynamic
behavior of growth cones at the spinal cord midline allowed us to com-
pare axonal behavior at different choice points, such as the optic chi-
asm,
reported
previously
(Godement
et
al.,
1994; Sretavan
&
Reichardt, 1993).
2
|
MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1
|
In ovo electroporation
Plasmids encoding farnesylated td-Tomato under control of the
Math1 enhancer and the β-globin promoter for dI1 neuron-specific
expression (Math1::tdTomato-F, 700 ng/μl) and farnesylated EGFP
under control of the β-actin promoter (β-actin::EGFP-F, 30 ng/μl) were
coinjected into the central canal of the chicken neural tube in ovo at
HH17-18 (Hamburger & Hamilton, 1951) and unilaterally electro-
porated, using a BTX ECM830 square-wave electroporator (five
pulses at 25 V with 50 ms duration each), as previously described
(Wilson & Stoeckli, 2012). A final concentration of 0.1% (vol/vol) of
Fast Green was added to the plasmid mix to trace injection site and
volume of the plasmid mix. After electroporation, embryos were cov-
ered with sterile PBS and eggs were sealed with tape and incubated
at 39C for 26–30 h, until embryos reached stage HH22, or for
36–46 h, until embryos reached HH24. For the FP study EGFP-F was
expressed from a plasmid with the Hoxa1 enhancer and the β-globin
minimal
promoter
(Wilson
&
Stoeckli,
2011)
(Hoxa1::EGFP-F,
1000 ng/μl) and coinjected with the Math1::tdTomato-F plasmid
(700 ng/μl) and unilaterally electroporated as above, or bilaterally
electroporated (three pulses in each direction at 25 V with 50 ms
duration each). For knockdown of Fzd3 (or luciferase as control) in dI1
neurons (Math1 enhancer) plasmids previously published (Math1::EGFP-
F; miFzd3 and Math1::EGFP-F; mi2Luc, 700 ng/μl) were coinjected with
the β-actin::mRFP plasmid (30 ng/μl) and unilaterally electroporated at
HH16 for more efficient knockdown (Alther et al., 2016).
2.2
|
Dissection of intact spinal cords
Intact spinal cords were dissected from HH22 embryos in ice-cold,
sterile PBS (Gibco) in a silicon-coated Petri dish with sterile instru-
ments. Embryos were pinned down with their dorsal side down with
thin needles (insect pins). Here, special care was taken not to damage
or detach meninges surrounding the spinal cord by avoiding too much
rostro-caudal and lateral tension. Internal organs and ventral verte-
brae were removed to access the spinal cord. Ventral roots were cut
off and the spinal cord was carefully extracted from the embryo with
forceps, avoiding any excessive bending. Note that dorsal root ganglia
were not cut off and all were still attached to the spinal cord. The ven-
tral and dorsal midlines were kept intact throughout dissection.
Finally, remaining dorsal tissues were discarded. See Figure 1 for a
detailed step-by-step protocol to successfully dissect intact HH22 spi-
nal cords. Note that this procedure can also be applied to older
embryos (at least HH24-25). Once intact spinal cords were dissected
and cleaned from any remaining dorsal tissues, they were embedded
with the ventral side down in a warm (39C) 100-μl drop of 0.5% low-
melting agarose in a 35-mm Ibidi μ-dish with glass bottom (Ibidi,
#81158) (Figure 2(d,e); Figure 1(g); 3.5% agarose (FMC) was prepared
in water, spinal cord medium (MEM with Glutamax [Gibco] sup-
plemented with 4 mg/ml Albumax [Gibco], 1 mM pyruvate [Sigma],
100 units/ml Penicillin and 100 μg/ml Streptomycin [Gibco]) was
added to get 0.5% final agarose concentration). Note that the spinal
cord should be as straight as possible with the dorso-ventral axis per-
pendicular to the glass bottom, as any pronounced curvature or tilting
of the midline would induce axon guidance artifacts or death of the
axons, respectively. To this end, a 12-mm flexiPERM conA ring
(Sarstedt) was placed in the center of the culture dish before the aga-
rose drop was added (the drop should not touch the ring). Hence, the
medium added to the drop of low-melting agarose could touch the
ring all around and therefore stabilize the position of the agarose drop
and avoid any movement of the spinal cord during recordings thanks
to surface tension (Figure 1(g)). Once the agarose solidified (around
5 min at room temperature), 200 μl of spinal cord medium were added
to the drop and the culture could be started.
2.3
|
Dissection of open-books
Open-book preparations of spinal cords were dissected from HH24
embryos as previously described in a video protocol for HH25-26
embryos (Wilson & Stoeckli, 2012). The first steps were identical to
the protocol for intact spinal cord dissection given above (steps a,b in
2518
DUMOULIN ET AL.

Figure 1). Starting there, the tension along the rostro-caudal axis was
increased using the upper and lower needles and meninges were
removed with a blade made of fire-polished tungsten wire. Spinal
cords were cut transversally at the wing and leg levels and carefully
extracted from the embryo with forceps. At this point, the dorsal mid-
line spontaneously opened. Open-book preparations of spinal cords
were then plated with the apical side down (Figure 2(g,h)) in the cen-
ter of a 35-mm Ibidi μ-dish with glass bottom (Ibidi, #81158),
precoated with 20 μg/ml poly-L-lysine (Sigma). A homemade, harp-like
holder made out of a Teflon ring and thin nylon strings was used to
keep the spinal cord in place (Figure 2(g)). Note that the strings were
barely touching the open-books but stabilized the flat position of the
spinal cord. Then, 100 μl of 0.5% low-melting agarose (see above)
were added on top of the spinal cord. Once the agarose solidified
(around 5 min at room temperature), 200 μl of spinal cord medium
were added to the agarose drop and the culture could be started.
FIGURE 1
Dissection of intact spinal cords (SCs) from HH22 chicken embryos. (a) HH22 embryos were pinned down with the dorsal side
down in a silicon-coated Petri dish in sterile, cold PBS. Internal organs were removed by first cutting the ventral skin along the dashed lines and
pinching out the organs with forceps. (b) Then, a laminectomy was performed, that is, the ventral vertebrae were cut along the caudal–rostral axis
at the level of the outer SC boundaries and the stripe of bone structure was removed with forceps. (c) The ventral roots exiting the ventral part of
the SC and the peripheral processes of the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) were cut in parallel to the SC without cutting off any DRG. (d) The SC was
then cut at the level of the wings and legs. (e) The SC with attached DRG was carefully separated from the rest of the embryo with forceps. Here,
special care should be given not to bend the SC by stabilizing the tissue with a second forceps. (f) At this point, the dorsal skin and
dermomyotome (black arrows) were removed by first inducing an opening with forceps (white asterisk) taking care not to damage the dorsal
SC. Then, using forceps, the dorsal skin and dermomyotome were carefully removed all along the caudal–rostral axis. After this step, the dorsal SC
should look as clean as the ventral SC with clearly visible midline and no remaining tissues attached (compare dorsal and ventral view). (g) Finally,
the intact SC with attached DRG could be embedded as straight as possible in a drop of low-melting agarose-medium mix with the ventral side
down. White dashed lines indicate where cuts with small spring scissors should be made
DUMOULIN ET AL.
2519

2.4
|
Live imaging
Live imaging recordings were carried out with an Olympus IX83
inverted microscope equipped with a spinning disk unit (CSU-X1
10,000 rpm, Yokogawa). Cultured spinal cords were kept at 37C with
5% CO2 and 95% air in a PeCon cell vivo chamber (PeCon). Tempera-
ture and CO2-levels were controlled by the cell vivo temperature con-
troller and the CO2 controller units (PeCon). Spinal cords were
incubated for at least 30 min before imaging was started. We acquired
18–40 planes (1.5 μm spacing) of 2 × 2 binned z-stack images every
15 min for 24 h with a ×20 air objective (UPLSAPO ×20/0.75, Olym-
pus) and an Orca-Flash 4.0 camera (Hamamatsu) with the Olympus
CellSens Dimension 2.2 software. We performed most of our record-
ings in the lumbar level of the spinal cord and always took three chan-
nels of interest: emission at 488 and 561 nm, as well as bright field.
Recordings of axons after Fzd3 or luciferase knockdown were per-
formed at the thoracic level (see cartoon in Figure 5(g)). For higher mag-
nification recordings, a ×40 silicone oil objective was used (UPLSAPO S
×40/1.25, Olympus) with the same acquisition settings as above.
Images taken every 5–15 min. The quantifications of growth cone
behavior, such as splitting in the FP, formation of ventral–dorsal protru-
sions and protrusions before FP exit, were based on a time resolution
of one stack taken every 15 min. The analysis of protrusions before FP
exit could be done only on the first axons exiting the FP, because with
time it was difficult to visualize the small protrusions correctly due to
the increase in the density of axons at the FP exit site.
2.5
|
Data processing and virtual tracing
Z-stacks and maximum projections of Z-stack movies were evaluated
and processed using Fiji/ImageJ (Schindelin et al., 2012). The MtrackJ
plugin (Meijering et al., 2012) was used to virtually trace single
Math1-positive dI1 commissural axons crossing the FP. This helped to
keep track of which axons had already been quantified. The leading
edge (and not filopodia) of growth cones was always selected for each
FIGURE 2
Labeling strategy for dI1 interneurons and
spinal cord (SC) culture systems. (a–c) In ovo injection and
electroporation of a plasmid mix to specifically label dI1
interneurons. (a) The plasmid mix was injected into the
central canal of the SC of HH17-18 chicken embryo in ovo,
followed by unilateral electroporation. (b) Plasmid constructs
injected to target all cells (β-actin::EGFP-F) and dI1
interneurons (Math1::tdTomato-F). en., enhancer; β-glob.,
β-globin. (c) Immunostaining of a transverse cryosection of a
HH22 SC taken from an embryo sacrificed 1 day after
electroporation with the plasmids indicated in (b). At this
stage, most dI1 growth cones were approaching the FP area,
but none of them had crossed it yet (white arrowheads).
However, a substantial number of Math1-negative, but
EGFP-F-expressing commissural axons of more ventral
populations had already crossed the FP at HH22 (arrow). (d–
f) Intact SC culture. (d) Intact SCs of embryos injected and
electroporated 1 day earlier were embedded with the ventral
side down in a drop of low-melting agarose. (e) The ventral
SC area was imaged with an inverted spinning disk
microscope. The green-colored hemisphere represents the
electroporated side of the SC. (f) Low magnification
overview of a SC visualized with this set-up with cells
expressing EGFP-F under the β-actin promoter on one side
merged with the bright-field image. (g–i) Culture of an open-
book preparation of a SC. (g) Intact open-book preparations
of HH24 SCs dissected from embryos injected and
electroporated about one and a half day earlier were
embedded with the apical side down in an agarose drop with
strings to hold it in place. (h) The midline area was visualized
with the same inverted spinning disk microscope as above.
The green-colored hemisphere represents the electroporated
side of the SC. (i) Low magnification overview of a SC
visualized with this set-up with cells expressing EGFP-F
under the β-actin promoter on one side merged with the
bright-field image. d, dorsal; v, ventral. Scale bars: 100 μm
2520
DUMOULIN ET AL.

time point. At the exit site, the central domain of the growth cone was
selected with the tracing tool, as growth cones very often slightly chan-
ged their directionality and drastically change their shape before turn-
ing. For comparable analyses of axonal behavior and speed in the two
halves of the FP, we only traced and quantified axons that entered,
crossed and exited the FP during the 24-hour imaging period. Axons
already in the FP at the beginning of the imaging period were not
considered. Overlays of labeled axons with EGFP-F and bright-field
channels were used to assess the FP boundaries and midline localiza-
tion. The virtual tracing tool was also used to extract the local growth
speed for each single axon. Local speed is defined here as the average
speed calculated for the last 15 min time period. Note that the mon-
tage of dI1 commissural axons shown in Movie 2 was generated from
z-stacks that were 2D deconvolved (nearest neighbor) using the
Olympus CellSens Dimension 2.2 software and assembled with Fiji/
ImageJ. All data acquired with higher magnification (×40 silicone oil
objective)
were
3D
deconvolved
using
constrained
iterative
deconvolution of the Olympus CellSens Dimension 2.2 software (five
iterations with adaptive PSF and background removal, Olympus).
Maximum projections of live images containing Hoxa1::EGFP-F-
positive cells (channel) were corrected for photo bleaching in Fiji/
ImageJ.
2.6
|
Temporal-color projections and kymographic
analysis
Temporal-color projections were generated using Fiji/ImageJ. Kymo-
graph analysis of axons crossing or exiting the FP as previously
described (Medioni et al., 2015) using a region of interest (ROI) selec-
tion, the re-slice function and the z-projection of the re-sliced results
in Fiji/ImageJ, which allowed following pixel movements within the
horizontal axis. The ROI in the FP was selected as a 103 × 51 μm2
(Figure 7(c,d)) or 103 × 27 μm2 (Figure 7(e,f)) rectangle.
2.7
|
Immunohistochemistry
Spinal cords dissected from HH22 embryos or intact spinal cords that
were cultured for 1 day ex vivo were fixed 1 h at room temperature
with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS, washed three times for 5 min each
with PBS and cryopreserved for at least 24 h at 4C in 25% sucrose in
PBS. After mounting in O.C.T. compound (Tissue-Tek) and freezing the
spinal cords, 25-μm thick cryosections were collected using a cryostat.
The next day, sections were blocked and permeabilized 1 h at room
temperature with 5% FCS in 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS (blocking
buffer). Primary antibodies were diluted in blocking buffer and added to
sections
overnight
at
4C
(1:400
for
goat-anti-GFP-FITC,
Cat#
600-102-215, RRID: AB_218187, Rockland; 1:2500 for rabbit-anti-
RFP, Cat# ABIN129578, RRID: AB_10781500, antibodies-online; 1:200
for rabbit-anti-cleaved caspase 3, Cat# 9661S, RRID: AB_2341188, Cell
Signaling; 1:500 for goat-anti-NrCAM, G68, polyclonal antibody pro-
duced against the full length of chicken NrCAM purified from E14
chicken brain membranes (Fitzli et al., 2000); supernatants containing
monoclonal mouse antibodies obtained from DSHB: anti-Lhx2 (clone
PCRP-LHX2-1C11, RRID: AB_2618817), anti-islet-1 (clone 40.2D6,
RRID: AB_528315), anti-Nkx2.2 (clone 74.5A5, RRID: AB_531794),
anti-Hnf3β (clone 4C7, RRID: AB_2278498); 3.1 μg/ml of mouse-anti-
Shh (clone 5E1, RRID: AB_2188307); mouse-anti-laminin-1 (clone
3H11, RRID: AB_528342); mouse-anti-BEN/SC-1 (clone BEN, RRID:
AB_2314001)). The next day, sections were washed three times for
15 min each at room temperature with 0.1% Triton-X100 in PBS. Pri-
mary antibodies (except anti-GFP-FITC) were detected with a 2-h incu-
bation in adequate secondary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer
(1:1000 for donkey-anti-mouse-IgG-Cy5, Cat#115-175-146, RRID:
AB_2338713 or donkey-anti-rabbit-IgG-Cy3, Cat# 711-165-152, RRID:
AB_2307443, both from Jackson ImmunoResearch). Finally, nuclei were
counterstained for 10 min at room temperature with 2.5 μg/ml of
Hoechst diluted in 0.1 Triton X-100 in PBS (Cat# H3570, Invitrogen),
washed three times for 10 min each with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS
and two times for 5 min each with PBS before mounting the slides in
Mowiol/DABCO. Images were taken with an Olympus IX83 inverted
microscope equipped with a spinning disk unit (CSU-X1 10,000 rpm,
Yokogawa), a ×20 air objective (UPLSAPO ×20/0.8, Olympus) or a
×40 silicon oil objective (UPLSAPO S ×40/1.25, Olympus), and an
Orca-Flash 4.0 camera (Hamamatsu) with the Olympus CellSens
Dimension 2.2 software, or with an Olympus BX61 upright micro-
scope and a ×10 air objective (UPLFL PH ×10/0.30, Olympus) or ×40
water objective (UAPO W/340 ×40/1.15, Olympus) and an Orca-R2
camera (Hamamatsu) with the Olympus CellSens Dimension 2.2
software.
2.8
|
Whole-mount immunostaining
Intact spinal cords dissected from HH24-25 embryos were fixed for 1 h
at room temperature in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS and washed three
times 10 min each with PBS. Spinal cords were permeabilized and incu-
bated for 1 h at room temperature with 5% FCS in 0.1% Triton X-100
in PBS (blocking buffer). Primary antibodies were diluted in blocking
buffer and added to spinal cords for incubation overnight at 4C
(1:800 of goat-anti-GFP-FITC, Rockland; 1:5000 of rabbit-anti-RFP,
antibodies-online; 1:200 of mouse-anti-laminin supernatant, clone 3H1,
RRID: AB_528342, DSHB). The next day, sections were washed three
times 30 min each at room temperature with 0.1% Triton-X100 in PBS.
The primary antibody against RFP was detected with a 2-h incubation
with donkey-anti-rabbit-IgG-Cy3 antibody (1:1000, Cat# 711-165-152,
RRID: AB_2307443, Jackson ImmunoResearch) and the one against
laminin with donkey-anti-mouse-IgG-Cy5 (1:1000, Cat#115-175-146,
RRID: AB_2338713, Jackson ImmunoResearch) diluted in blocking
buffer. Finally, nuclei were counterstained for 30 min at room tempera-
ture with 2.5 μg/ml of Hoechst diluted in 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS
(Invitrogen). Samples were washed three times 30 min each with 0.1%
Triton X-100 in PBS and two times 15 min each in PBS. Stained spinal
cords where mounted in 100 μl of 0.5% low-melting agarose in PBS
with the ventral midline pointing down on a 35-mm Ibidi μ-dish with
DUMOULIN ET AL.
2521

glass bottom (Ibidi, #81158), similarly as described above. This allowed
accessing the commissure of fixed in vivo samples and visualization of
dI1 axons and their growth cone with an Olympus IX83 inverted micro-
scope equipped with a spinning disk unit (CSU-X1 10,000 rpm,
Yokogawa). Pictures were taken with a ×4 air objective (UPLFLN PH
×4/0.13, Olympus), a ×20 air objective (UPLSAPO ×20/0.75, Olympus)
or a ×40 silicon oil objective (UPLSAPO S ×40/1.25, Olympus) and an
Orca-Flash 4.0 camera (Hamamatsu) with the Olympus CellSens
Dimension 2.2 software. Note that the same mounting and microscopy
procedure was applied to HH23-25 intact spinal cords that were not
stained and were used for the quantification of average growth cone
areas in vivo (shown in Figure 9(c)).
FIGURE 3
Live imaging of cultured intact spinal cords allowed for the visualization of dI1 axons during floor plate crossing and navigation
into the longitudinal axis. (a) 24-h time-lapse recording showed that Math1-positive dI1 commissural axons could cross the floor plate (FP) (white
arrowheads), turn anteriorly, as expected, and form the contralateral ventral funiculus (white arrows) in cultured intact HH22 spinal cords. The
asterisk indicates a population of Math1-positive ipsilateral axons. (b) Transversal view of a region of interest from the time-lapse recording
shown in (a), highlighting the trajectory of dI1 axons and the formation of the commissure. The white arrow indicates the position of the
contralateral ventral funiculus. The white asterisk labels ipsilateral axons. (c) The normal development of the commissure could be verified by
immunochemistry on transverse sections of spinal cords cultured for 24 h. Nuclei were counterstained with Hoechst (shown in blue). (d) 4-h time-
lapse recording showing Math1-positive dI1 commissural axons in a cultured open-book preparation of a HH24 spinal cord. Note that within less
than 2 h in culture the majority of dI1 commissural axons were overshooting the contralateral FP boundary and growing straight into the
contralateral side after having crossed the FP (white arrowheads). White arrows indicate the contralateral ventral funiculus. (e) Transversal view
of a region of interest from the time-lapse sequence shown in (d) highlighting the aberrant trajectory of dI1 commissural axons (white
arrowheads) growing straight past the contralateral ventral funiculus (white arrow). (f) The aberrant development of the commissure could be
verified by immunochemistry on transverse sections of open-books cultured for 24 h. This clearly showed dI1 axons growing straight after having
crossed the FP (white arrowheads). Nuclei were counterstained with Hoechst (shown in blue). (g) Single dI1 growth cones (black arrowheads)
could be tracked crossing the FP, exiting it and turning rostrally in an intact spinal cord preparation. Math1-positive axons are now shown in
black. (h) Single dI1 growth cones could also be tracked crossing the FP, exiting it, but instead of turning rostrally, most of them overshot in the
contralateral part (black arrowheads). Black and white dashed lines indicate FP boundaries, magenta dashed lines the midline, respectively. d,
dorsal; v, ventral; r, rostral; c, caudal. Scale bars: 50 μm
2522
DUMOULIN ET AL.

2.9
|
Shh intensity measurement in the FP
Transverse cryosections from the lumbar and the thoracic regions
(see Figure 5(g)) were immunostained for Shh and counterstained
with Hoechst to reveal the FP morphology (see Section 2.7).
The mean intensity was measured in the FP using a circle ROI with
a
diameter
of
100 μm.
For
each
embryo,
this
intensity
was
measured from two to three consecutive sections per level (lumbar
and thoracic), averaged and normalized to the average intensity of
the lumbar level. This was performed for four intact spinal cords
and open-book preparations that were fixed after 24 h in culture.
For all embryos and levels, the acquisition settings were exactly the
same. Images were taken with an Olympus BX61 upright micro-
scope
and
a
×20
water
objective
(UAPO
W/340
×20/0.70,
FIGURE 4
Legend on next page.
DUMOULIN ET AL.
2523

Olympus) and an Orca-R2 camera (Hamamatsu) with the Olympus
CellSens Dimension 2.2 software.
2.10
|
Statistics and figures assembly
Statistical analyses were carried out with GraphPad Prism 7.02 soft-
ware. All data were assessed for normality (normal distribution)
using the D'Agostino and Pearson omnibus K2 normality test and
visual assessment
of the normal quantile–quantile plot before
choosing an appropriate (parametric or nonparametric) statistical
test. p-Values of the simple linear regression shown in Figure 7(i,j)
demonstrate whether the slope is significantly different to zero and
the
dashed
lines
represent
the
95%
confidence
intervals.
Figures were assembled using Corel Draw 2017.
3
|
RESULTS
3.1
|
Electroporation is an efficient tool to
selectively label dI1 neurons
We used unilateral in ovo electroporation of the chicken spinal cord
in Hamburger and Hamilton (HH) stage 17–18 embryos to specifically
express farnesylated td-Tomato (td-Tomato-F) in Math1-positive dI1
neurons, as well as farnesylated EGFP (EGFP-F) expression in their
environment (Figure 2(a,b)). One day after electroporation, at HH22,
embryos showed expression of td-Tomato-F restricted to dI1 neurons
and EGFP-F expression in the entire half of the spinal cord, as
expected (Figure 2(c)) (Wilson & Stoeckli, 2011). At this stage, most of
the Math1-positive dI1 axons approached the FP, but did not yet cross
the midline, whereas other more ventral populations of commissural
neurons expressing EGFP-F already projected many axons to the con-
tralateral side of the spinal cord (white arrowheads and arrow, respec-
tively, Figure 2(c)). For this reason, we chose HH22 as the optimal
stage to start tracing dI1 axons at the midline using live imaging.
3.2
|
Live imaging of dI1 axons at the midline of
intact spinal cord
We extracted the intact spinal cord 1 day after electroporation
(Figure 1), cultured it with the ventral midline down and imaged it with
an inverted spinning disk microscope and a ×20 objective (Figure 2(d–
f)). Math1-positive dI1 axons crossing the FP could be visualized for
at least 24 h (white arrowheads, Figure 3(a); Movies 1, 2). Within this
time window, many dI1 axons crossed the midline, exited the FP,
turned rostrally and formed the contralateral ventral funiculus (white
arrows, Figure 3(b)). A Math1-positive ipsilateral subpopulation of
axons could also be seen in these recordings as previously reported
in vivo (Phan et al., 2010) (white asterisk, Figure 3(a)). Cultures of
intact spinal cords turned out to be a very stable system as the U-
shaped morphology of the commissure was preserved over time
(Figure 3(b,c), Movie 2) and all major cell populations were still in place
after 1 day ex vivo (Figure 4(a–d)). DRGs were still attached to the spi-
nal cord via their central afferents forming the dorsal roots (black
asterisks), the dorsal funiculi were intact (black arrows) and the ventral
roots formed by axons of motor neurons were still pointing outward
of the spinal cord as visualized by BEN (also termed ALCAM or SC-1)
staining (magenta asterisks, Figure 4(e)). The same staining also
FIGURE 4
Patterning and morphology of cultured intact spinal cords were conserved after 1 day ex vivo. After intact HH22 spinal cords
were cultured and imaged for 1 day ex vivo, they were fixed and transverse cryosections were immunostained for different dorsal and ventral
patterning markers, and counterstained with Hoechst. (a) The dI1 interneuron marker Lhx2 confirmed that these neurons were still localized in
the most dorsal part of the spinal cord, as expected (black arrowheads). (b) Islet-1 was used as a marker for dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons
(magenta asterisks), dI3 interneurons (black arrows) and motoneurons (black arrowheads). All of them maintained the appropriate position:
clustered DRG neurons adjacent to the spinal cord; dI3 interneurons localized ventrally of dI1 interneurons; motoneurons on both sides of the
ventral spinal cord. (c) Nkx2.2 staining was used to reveal the ventral population of V3 progenitors that are just next to the FP and form the
typical inverted V-shape (black arrow). (d) Finally, FP cells forming the intermediate target for dI1 axons were visualized with Hnf3β staining. They
were localized at the ventral midline of the spinal cord as expected (black arrow). (e) Intact spinal cord cultured for 24 h maintained morphology
and localization of cell types as illustrated by staining for BEN: motor neurons (black arrowheads) and their ventral roots (magenta asterisks, the
dorsal roots (black asterisks), and the dorsal funiculi (black arrows) formed by DRG afferents. (f) BEN staining also revealed that the FP maintained
its triangular shape (dashed lines) and its bulky basal segment (white arrow). (g) Same staining of open-book preparations, which were cultured for
the same amount of time: the motor column (black arrowhead) is stained for BEN but ventral roots and DRG afferents were removed during
dissection. (h) The FP (dashed line) lost its triangular shape and its basal segment appeared to be much narrower in cultured open-books (white
arrow). (i) Overview image of an intact spinal cord cultured for 24 h and stained for laminin, revealing intact meninges surrounding the spinal cord
(black arrowheads). (j) Higher magnification image showing intact laminin-positive basal lamina (white arrowheads) at the ventral midline.
(k) Overview image of an open-book cultured for 24 h showing the lack of meninges on the basal side of the spinal cord (black arrowheads) and a
patch of meninges that remained below the FP (black arrow). (l) Higher magnification of the same section revealed that the laminin-enriched basal
lamina was intact but deformed at the level of the FP (white arrow) and discontinued around it (white arrowheads). (m,n) Staining for cleaved
caspase revealed a weak signal in the DRG (black asterisks) and a very weak signal in the motor column (arrowheads) of a cultured intact spinal
cord. (o,p) The same staining showed a very strong signal in the ventral spinal cord of a cultured open-book (arrowheads). Hoechst was used to
counterstain nuclei. The dashed black lines represent the outer border of the spinal cord. Note that small images on the upper right corner of the
different panels show the β-actin::EGFP-F-electroporated side of the spinal cord. When not indicated dorsal is up. DEV, day ex vivo; d, dorsal; v,
ventral, Cleav., Cleaved. Scale bars: 50 μm (a–e,g,I,k,m,o) and 25 μm (f,h,j,l,n,p)
2524
DUMOULIN ET AL.

revealed that the overall triangular shape of the FP was preserved
with enlarged basal structures in the commissure area (white arrow,
Figure 4(f)). Furthermore, the secreted guidance cue Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) was still restricted to the FP and showed the caudal (lumbar,
high) to rostral (thoracic, low) gradient, like in vivo (Figure 5(a–c,g,h))
(Bourikas et al., 2005). Additionally, NrCAM, a cell adhesion molecule
that guides dI1 axons into the FP, was still expressed there (Figure 5
(j)) (Stoeckli & Landmesser, 1995). Most importantly, dI1 axons'
navigation was identical to the in vivo situation during this time win-
dow (Figure 6). We also compared our ex vivo method with a recently
published protocol using open-book preparations of HH24-26 chicken
spinal cords for the analysis of receptor dynamics to push axons out
of the midline area (Pignata et al., 2019) (Figure 2(g–i)). In contrast to
this protocol, our ex vivo method did not result in overshooting axons,
an artifact that we have already seen after short times in cultures of
open-book preparations, with Math1-positive dI1 commissural axons
FIGURE 5
A Shh gradient is still present in cultured intact spinal cords (SCs) but not open-books after 1 day ex vivo. Intact HH22 SCs or
open-books were cultured for 1 day ex vivo before fixation. Transverse cryosections were immunostained with antibodies against Shh (5E1 clone)
and counterstained with Hoechst. (a,b) Shh was still expressed in the floor plate (FP) of intact SCs after 1 day ex vivo in a similar manner as right
after dissection (black arrows). (c) Moreover, in agreement with previous descriptions in vivo, Shh was expressed in a decreasing caudal-to-rostral
gradient with higher expression at the lumbar compared to the thoracic level (black arrowheads). (d,e) Shh was still expressed in the FP of
cultured open-books (black arrows). (f) However, the gradient was lost with no more obvious difference in expression between lumbar and
thoracic levels (black arrows). (g) Cartoon depicting the different levels taken for the quantification in (h) and (i). (h,i) Quantification of the mean
intensity of Shh staining in the lumbar versus thoracic FP of cultured intact SCs and open-books. Note that values were normalized to the lumbar
level (value = 1). (h) There was a significant decrease in the intensity of Shh in the FP of intact SC at thoracic levels (0.7 ± 0.1) compared to lumbar
levels (N = 4 embryos). (i) However, in cultured open-books this difference disappeared (average value in thoracic level = 1.1 ± 0.1, mean ± SD,
N = 4 embryos, two-tailed Mann–Whitney U test). Error bars represent SD. p < .05 (*) and p ≥.05 (ns). (j) NrCAM (shown in magenta) was still
expressed in the FP (dashed line) of a cultured intact SC. Note that small images on the upper right corner of the different panels show the
β-actin::EGFP-F-electroporated side of the SC. The dashed black lines represent the outer border of the SC. d, dorsal; v, ventral; r, rostral; c,
caudal. Scale bars: 50 μm
DUMOULIN ET AL.
2525

that crossed the midline but then failed to turn into the longitudinal
axis and continued to grow straight into the contralateral side instead
(white arrowheads, Figure 3(d,e); Movie 3). Because many of our stud-
ies focus on the turning behavior of postcrossing axons at the FP exit
site, the high incidence of aberrant axon growth into the contralateral
half of the spinal cord is not acceptable. We found that 91 ± 6% of
dI1 axons overshot, whereas 8 ± 6% turned rostrally, and 1 ± 1%
turned caudally at the contralateral side (mean ± SD, N(embryos) = 4,
n(axons) = 392). In our system, none of them overshot, and 98 ± 2%
turned rostrally and 2 ± 2% caudally at the contralateral side
(mean ± SD, N(embryos) = 7, n(axons) = 305). Although open-book cul-
tures offer the possibility to follow midline crossing of single dI1
axons (Figure 3(h)), we could observe a number of important differ-
ences in tissue integrity compared to intact spinal cord cultures. The
observed axon guidance artifacts are most likely explained by the
deformation of the FP and commissure in this preparation (Figures 3
(e,f) and 4(h)) and the fact that diffusible guidance cues are not well
retained in the tissue, as exemplified by Shh that lost its caudal (lumbar)
to rostral (thoracic) gradient after 24 h in culture (Figure 5(d–f,g,i)).
In line with this, staining for laminin revealed that the meninges sur-
rounding the spinal cord were intact in our culture system (black
arrowheads, Figure 4(i)) but mostly absent from open-book prepara-
tions (black arrowheads, Figure 4(k)), where only an isolated patch
remained at the FP (black arrow, Figure 4(k)). Meninges secrete extra-
cellular matrix proteins that are deposited in and organize the basal
lamina surrounding the spinal cord (Siegenthaler & Pleasure, 2011).
The integrity of the basal lamina and the secreted guidance molecules
that are localized in it were shown to play a crucial role in guidance of
commissural axons at the ventral midline of the spinal cord (Burstyn-
Cohen et al., 1999; Wright et al., 2012; Zisman et al., 2007). The
laminin staining also revealed that the basal lamina was intact at the
commissure of cultured intact spinal cord (white arrowheads, Figure 4
(j)), whereas it was deformed (white arrow) and discontinued in
cultured open-books (white arrowheads, Figure 4(l)). We also assessed
possible apoptosis in cultured intact spinal cords by staining for
cleaved caspase. We found very little apoptosis in the ventral spinal
cord (arrowheads, Figure 4(m,n)) and DRGs in our system (black aster-
isks, Figure 4(m)). In contrast, cultured open-books showed massive
FIGURE 6
Development of Math1-positive axonal tracts ex vivo and in vivo. (a) Sequence of three images showing dI1 axons crossing the
floor plate (FP) after 0, 12, and 24 h of culture. After turning rostrally, postcrossing axons started to form the contralateral ventral funiculus (black
arrows). After around 12 h in culture, a Math1-positive ipsilateral population could be clearly seen in the ipsilateral ventral funiculus (black
asterisks). (b) Intact spinal cords dissected at HH25 (approximately 1 day after HH22), fixed and mounted similarly to the ex vivo culture were
imaged the same way. This revealed identical dI1 axonal tracts compared to those seen after 24 h of culture of intact spinal cords dissected at
HH22, with postcrossing axons forming the contralateral ventral funiculus (black arrows) and ipsilateral axons turning in the ipsilateral ventral
funiculus (black asterisks). Black and orange dashed lines represent FP boundaries and midline, respectively. (c) Low magnification overview of an
intact HH24.5 spinal cord, fixed, stained for RFP (Math1-positive neurons) and GFP (β-actin transfected cells) and counterstained with Hoechst
showing the contralateral ventral funiculus containing postcrossing dI1 axons (white arrows) and the ipsilateral ventral funiculus containing a
population of ipsilateral axons (white asterisks). Scale bars: 50 μm (a,b) and 100 μm (c)
2526
DUMOULIN ET AL.

apoptosis in the ventral spinal cord (arrowheads, Figure 4(o,p)) in the
region of the motor columns that might be caused in part by the com-
plete loss of ventral roots in this system (black arrowhead, Figure 4
(g)). A combination or all of these marked differences observed in
cultured open-books are likely to be responsible for the strong artifac-
tual behavior of dI1 axons at the contralateral FP border. In contrast,
our ex vivo method of culturing intact spinal cords offers a highly
stable intact system in which dI1 commissural axons are behaving as
expected based on what is known from in vivo studies with the
advantage that individual axons can be followed during midline cross-
ing and subsequent turning along the contralateral FP border.
3.3
|
Characterization of the timing of midline
crossing by dI1 commissural axons
The time it takes commissural axons to cross the FP has been esti-
mated but could not be measured exactly (Stoeckli, 2018; Zou, 2012).
However, timing is an issue, because axons have to change their
responsiveness to FP-derived guidance cues, like the Slits, Shh, or
Wnt proteins, by expressing appropriate receptors in a precisely regu-
lated manner (Bourikas et al., 2005; Domanitskaya et al., 2010; Long
et al., 2004; Lyuksyutova et al., 2003; Philipp et al., 2012; Wilson &
Stoeckli, 2013). With our method, we could track single dI1
FIGURE 7
Characterization of the timing of midline crossing by dI1 commissural axons. (a) Schematic depicting how the timing of midline
crossing for individual dI1 axons was measured for each segment of interest. (b) Graph showing the average time a growth cone spent in each
segment shown in (a) (Nembryos = 7; naxons = 298). There was no significant difference in the time taken by dI1 axons to cross the first versus the
second half of the floor plate (FP) (p ≥.05, paired two-tailed Wilcoxon test). (c) Temporal-color code projection of a 24-h time-lapse recording.
(d) Kymograph of the 24-h time-lapse recording in the region of interest within the FP shown in (c). Several axons crossing the FP at different
times can be visualized (black arrowheads). (e) Temporal-color code projection of 7.75-h time-lapse recording segment. (f) Kymograph of the
7.75-h time-lapse recording segment in the region of interest within the FP shown in (e). Within this time segment, only one axon crossed the FP
and could be visualized in the kymograph (black arrowhead). White and magenta dashed lines represent the FP boundaries and the midline,
respectively. (g) A virtual tracing tool (shown in green) was used to extract the velocity of the growth cones (black arrowheads) at each time point
during midline crossing at the single axon level. The same axon is shown in (e) and (g). Black dashed lines and the magenta dashed lines represent
the FP boundaries and midline, respectively. (h) The growth speed of the axon shown in (g) could be extracted and plotted against the position of
the growth cone in the FP. Dotted gray lines represent the time at which the axon crossed the midline or exited the FP. (i,j) The time of crossing
the FP (entry-exit) or of turning (exit-turn) for each axons measured in (b) was plotted against the time of FP entry and exit of the growth cone,
respectively. (i) The time axons took to cross the FP appeared to decrease over time although this was not significant. (j) The time axons took to
turn after exiting the FP decreased significantly over time. ipsi, ipsilateral; contra, contralateral; Ent, entry; Mid, midline; Ex, exit; r, rostral; c,
caudal. Scale bars: 25 μm
DUMOULIN ET AL.
2527

commissural axons in the FP at any time point and in different ROIs
(black arrowheads,Figure 3(g)). We were therefore able to ask, how
long dI1 axons needed for FP crossing and their subsequent rostral
turn (Figure 7(a)). On average, dI1 commissural axons took 5.6 ± 1.4 h
to cross the entire FP and 1.4 ± 1.0 h to turn and initiate the rostral
growth at the FP exit site. Thus, in total, they needed 6.9 ± 1.8 h from
entering the FP to the initiation of their rostral growth (mean ± SD,
Figure 7(b) and Table 1). There was no significant difference between
the average time of crossing the first versus the second half of the FP
(Figure 7(b), Table 1). This was supported by kymographic analysis of
a ROI within the FP from 24-h time-lapse recordings showing similar
growth patterns between the first and second half of the FP at the
single axon level (Figure 7(c), black arrowheads in Figure 7(d), Movie
4). Although the kymographic analysis was useful to screen for overall
growth pattern of single dI1 axons within the FP (Figure 7(e,f)), it was
not sensitive enough to detect more subtle changes in growth speed.
Hence, we used a virtual tracing tool to follow the movement of the
leading edge of each growth cone at each time point (Figure 7(g)).
With this tool, we could extract the local growth speed for each axon
at a specific time point (defined as the average speed during the previ-
ous 15 min). It turned out that the large majority of them had a fluctu-
ating growth pattern with random acceleration–deceleration pulses
that could be observed in early as well as late crossing axons (Figure 7
(h), Movie 5, Figure 8). Another interesting observation was made
when we compared the times of crossing the FP and the initiation of
rostral growth after turning. There was no significant difference in the
time of FP crossing of later versus earlier crossing axons (p = .0503;
Figure 7(i)). However, the time dI1 axons took to turn rostrally at the
exit site was significantly reduced over time (Figure 7(j)). The latter
observation suggests that commissural axons that already turned
anteriorly at the contralateral FP exit site might help the following
ones to turn more rapidly. Our method offers new opportunities for
further investigations of possible collaborations between axons at
choice points.
3.4
|
Characterization of the dI1 growth cone
morphology at choice points
Another aspect that we considered was growth cone morphology.
The growth cone plays a central role in axon guidance, as it explores
the environment for guidance cues and translates this information
into the directionality of growth (De Ramon Francàs et al., 2017;
Stoeckli, 2018). In agreement with published live imaging studies from
the visual system, where growth cone morphology was recorded at
the chiasm (Godement et al., 1994; Sretavan & Reichardt, 1993), we
found changes in growth cone morphology during midline crossing in
the spinal cord. We observed that dI1 growth cones in the FP
appeared to have a thin and elongated shape in the direction of
growth. At the FP exit site, they transiently enlarged (arrowheads,
Figure 9(d), Movie 2). We measured the average growth cone area in
each segment of interest and confirmed that growth cones at the exit
site of the FP were indeed significantly larger than the ones within
the FP or after the turn (Figure 9(a,b), Table 1). There was no signifi-
cant change in the average growth cone area between the first and
second half of the FP (Figure 9(b), Table 1). The changes of growth
cone shape were in line with previous reports on chicken and rat com-
missural
axons
in
vivo
(Bovolenta
&
Dodd,
1990;
Yaginuma
et al., 1991) and our data on Math1-positive axons in vivo (Figure 9(c),
Table 1, Figure 6(b)). The possibility to follow individual axons over
time allowed us to make novel observations of their behavior at the
FP exit site. One hundred percent of the observed growth cones
extended long filopodia in both rostral and caudal direction just before
turning (N(embryos) = 7, n(axons) = 305, Figure 9(d), Movies 6 and 7).
We observed 16 ± 8% of the growth cones to transiently split just
before turning rostrally, similar to dorsal root ganglia central afferents
in the mouse dorsal root entry zone before bifurcating (Dumoulin
et al., 2018) (mean ± SD, N(embryos) = 7, n(axons) = 305, Movie 8). All
these features are present in vivo, as similar growth cone morphol-
ogies were found in fixed HH24-25 spinal cords (Figure 9(e)).
TABLE 1
Detailed values shown in
Figures 7 and 9
Figure
Name
Mean
SD
Figure 7(b)
Ent-Mid
2.81
0.96
n(axons) = 298, N(embryos) = 7
Mid-Ex
2.74
0.95
n(axons) = 298, N(embryos) = 7
Ent-Ex
5.55
1.39
n(axons) = 298, N(embryos) = 7
Ex-Turn
1.39
1.03
n(axons) = 298, N(embryos) = 7
Ent-Turn
6.94
1.79
n(axons) = 298, N(embryos) = 7
Figure 9(b)
First half
46.1
12.2
n(growth cones) = 127, N(embryos) = 7
Second half
44.2
11
n(growth cones) = 127, N(embryos) = 7
Exit
105.5
25
n(growth cones) = 127, N(embryos) = 7
After turn
67.8
17.6
n(growth cones) = 127, N(embryos) = 7
Figure 9(c)
First half
41
12.6
n(growth cones) = 285, N(embryos) = 8
Second half
41.8
11.5
n(growth cones) = 153, N(embryos) = 8
Exit
116.9
25.7
n(growth cones) = 68, N(embryos) = 8
After turn
76.5
18.9
n(growth cones) = 102, N(embryos) = 8
2528
DUMOULIN ET AL.

Thus, ex vivo live imaging of cultured intact spinal cords using low
magnification time-lapse microscopy offers the opportunity to detect
morphological changes of growth cones at choice points and is ideal
for the analysis of many aspects of midline crossing in a relative large
cohort of axons. However, the limited resolution especially in 3D
might preclude the detection of more subtle changes in morphology
of growth cones while crossing the midline.
3.5
|
Higher magnification analysis of commissural
axons crossing the midline revealed dorso-ventral
activities of their growth cone
For this reason, we repeated time-lapse recordings of cultured intact
spinal cords using a higher magnification objective and advanced 3D
deconvolution technology. This allowed following Math1::tdTomato-
FIGURE 8
Virtual tracing of axons exiting the floor plate (FP) at different time points. Examples of local growth speed at different time points of
axons exiting the FP after 5.5 h (a), 8.75 h (b), 16 h (c), 18 h (d), 21.75 h (e), or 22.25 h (f) of culture plotted against the position of the growth cone in
the FP. Dotted lines represent the time at which the axon crossed the midline or exited the FP. All axons were growing with pulses of acceleration and
deceleration. There was no difference between early or late crossing axons
DUMOULIN ET AL.
2529

F-positive dI1 axons over time while entering, crossing and exiting the
FP (Movie 9). We observed that dI1 growth cones crossing the FP
were bulkier in the dorso-ventral axis (white arrowheads, Figure 10(a),
Movie 10) and were particularly dynamic in this axis showing rapid
extension of filopodial protrusions (white arrows in Figure 10(a) and
Movie 10). This aspect of dI1 growth cone behavior in the FP was
supported by visualization of tdTomato-F-expressing growth cones
and the basal lamina marker laminin as a ventral commissure reference
point of HH22-24.5 whole-mount spinal cords or cryosections (arrow-
heads, Figure 10(b–d), Movies 11 and 12). In line with their dorso-
ventral activity, we could observe that 100% of the observed dI1
growth cones in the commissure sent at least once a dynamic long
protrusion (up to 13 μm) into the FP while crossing it (black arrow,
Figure 10(e), black arrowheads, Movie 13, N(embryos) = 4, n
(axons) = 116). Protrusions entering the FP could also be detected for
dI1
growth cones
in
vivo
as
revealed by
immunostaining
of
HH22-24.5 whole-mount spinal cords or cryosections (white arrows,
Figure 10(f,g)). Next, we also had a closer look at the FP exit site,
where growth cones need to read longitudinal gradients to initiate the
rostral turn after exiting the FP (Pignata et al., 2019; Stoeckli, 2018).
Intriguingly, we detected that just before exiting the FP, dI1 growth
cones very often sent a long protrusion into the FP (arrow, Figure 10
FIGURE 9
Live imaging of intact spinal cords revealed dI1 growth cone morphologies at chosen time points. (a) Schematic depicting where
the growth cone area of individual dI1 axons was measured for (b) and (c). (b) Average growth cone areas were measured from 24-h time-lapse
recordings of dI1 axons crossing the midline (Nembryos = 7; ngrowth cones = 127). No significant difference in the area of growth cones was found
between the first and second half of the floor plate (FP). However, growth cones were significantly larger at the exit site but then again reduced
in size after having turned rostrally (paired Friedman test with Dunn's multiple-comparisons test). (c) Average growth cone areas were measured
in vivo from fixed HH23-25 spinal cords (Nembryos = 8; ngrowth cones = 285 (first half), 153 (second half), 68 (exit), and 102 (after turn). The
relationship between the average growth cone area and the position in the FP corroborated results using the ex vivo culture system shown in
(b) (unpaired Kruskal–Wallis test with Dunn's multiple-comparisons test). (d,e) Examples corroborating the similarities in growth cone morphology
ex vivo and in vivo in the FP (black arrowheads), at the exit site (green arrowheads) and after rostral turn (magenta arrowheads). At the exit site,
growth cones were spiky with always some filopodia pointing caudally just before rostral turn, a feature that was also observed in vivo (black
arrows). ipsi, ipsilateral; contra, contralateral; r, rostral; c, caudal. Error bars represent SD. p < .0001 (****), p < .01 (**), and p ≥.05 (ns) for all tests.
Scale bars: 10 μm
2530
DUMOULIN ET AL.

(h), Movies 14, 63% of 32 growth cones that could be followed at the
exit site, N(embryos) = 4). Live imaging clearly revealed that the activ-
ity and orientation of growth cones switched by about 90 after
exiting the FP, as they flattened in the dorso-ventral axis and enlarged
in the longitudinal axis ex vivo and in vivo (Figure 10(i,j), Movie 15).
Another unexpected observation we made was that 80 ± 2% of dI1
FIGURE 10
High magnification live imaging of dI1 commissural axons unraveled their orientation and activities at choice-points. (a) A
Math1::tdTomato-F-positive growth cone (white arrowheads) crossing the floor plate (FP) shown in the rostro-caudal and dorso-ventral axis.
White arrow shows the dorso-ventral orientation of the growth cone with some filopodia extended toward the apical FP. (b,c) Whole-mount
immunostaining of Math1::tdTomato-F-positive dI1 growth cones in the FP at HH24.5 showed their dorso-ventral orientation in vivo (white
arrowheads). The basal lamina was stained for laminin (white arrows). (d) A Math1::tdTomato-F-positive dI1 growth cone in the FP (white
arrowhead) at HH22 showed its dorso-ventral orientation in vivo (white arrowheads). The basal lamina was stained for laminin (white arrows) and
nuclei with Hoechst. White asterisks show nuclei from the FP cells. (e) Three consecutive snapshots from a time-lapse sequence showing the
dorso-ventral activity of a Math1::tdTomato-F-positive growth cone crossing the FP (black arrowheads) with a long protrusion growing toward
the FP soma level (black arrow). (f,g) A long protrusion growing toward the apical FP cell soma area (white arrows) could be also observed in dI1
growth cones crossing the FP in vivo (white arrowheads) after whole-mount staining of a HH24 spinal cord (f) or immunostaining on a HH22
spinal cord transverse section (g). (h) Example of two growth cones extracted from a time-lapse recording (black arrowheads) showing dorsal
activity with a long protrusion (black arrows) growing toward the FP soma area just before exiting the FP. (i) The same growth cones shown in
(h) after exiting the FP underwent a 90 change in their orientation. They now were thin in the dorso-ventral axis and enlarged in the rostro-
caudal axis (black arrowheads). (j) HH24.5 whole-mount immunostaining of Math1::tdTomato-F-positive dI1 growth cone at the FP exit site
showed that the orientation of postcrossing growth cones in vivo were the same as observed by live imaging (white arrowheads). (k) Example of a
Math1::tdTomato-F-positive dI1 growth cone (black arrowhead) transiently splitting (black arrow) while crossing the FP. One branch always
retracted (black asterisk) while the other one continued to grow straight to the contralateral side. (l) Split growth cones (white arrow) of Math1::
tdTomato-F-positive dI1 axons (white arrowheads) could be observed in vivo after whole-mount staining of HH24.5 spinal cords. GC, growth
cone; r, rostral; c, caudal; d, dorsal; v, ventral. Scale bars: 10 μm (a) and 5 μm (b–l)
DUMOULIN ET AL.
2531

growth cones transiently split while crossing the FP (mean ± SD, N
(embryos) = 4, n(axons) = 116, asterisks in Movie 13). The splitting
created two more or less equal branches (black arrows, Figure 10(k),
Movie 16), but only one persisted and grew straight to the contralat-
eral side, while the other one was retracted (black asterisks, Figure 10
(k), Movie 16). Also this behavior was supported by snapshots from
in vivo behavior of dI1 growth cones (arrows, Figure 10(l)). Taken
together, ex vivo live imaging combined with high magnification analy-
sis of growth cone dynamics allowed us to characterize the behavior
dI1 growth cones at choice points in more detail.
3.6
|
Live imaging unraveled the dynamics and
morphologies of FP cells during midline crossing
The orientation of dI1 growth cones as well as their behavior during
FP crossing suggested that they have to squeeze their way between
the basal feet of FP cells which are attached to the basal lamina
(Yaginuma et al., 1991; Yoshioka & Tanaka, 1989). Moreover, very lit-
tle was known about the morphology of FP cells during axonal midline
crossing and their potential active contribution in this process has
never been addressed (Campbell & Peterson, 1993; Yaginuma
FIGURE 11
Legend on next page.
2532
DUMOULIN ET AL.

et al., 1991; Yoshioka & Tanaka, 1989). Therefore, we examined the
behavior and morphology of FP cells during midline crossing in our
ex vivo system. We electroporated spinal cords at HH17-18 after
injection of a plasmid encoding EGFP-F under the FP-specific Hoxa1
enhancer for expression of the membrane-bound fluorescent protein
in FP cells (Li & Lufkin, 2000; Wilson & Stoeckli, 2011; Zisman
et al., 2007) (Figure 11(a–d)). With this we were able to see Hoxa1::
EGFP-F-positive bulky FP basal feet in the commissure in vivo (white
arrowheads, Figure 11(c)) as well as their thin morphology and orien-
tation (white arrows) that seemed to be tightly aligned with dI1
growth cones crossing the midline (white arrowheads, Figure 11(e)).
The morphology of medial FP basal feet with little extension in the
rostro-caudal axis but enlarged in the dorso-ventral axis could be
observed in real time using our ex vivo culture technique (Figure 11
(f), Movie 17). Interestingly, we could observe dynamic protrusions
sprouting from the basal feet in direction of axonal growth in the com-
missure (black arrows, Figure 11(f), Movie 17). Similar observations
were made for basal feet of lateral FP cells (black arrow, Figure 11(g)).
They produced dynamic protrusions toward the FP entry zone at high
frequency (black arrows, Figure 11(g), Movie 18). Importantly, we
could observe a similar morphology of medial FP basal feet at the
single-cell level in vivo (arrowheads, Figure 11(h), Movie 19). The dI1
commissural axons had the same orientation as the FP basal feet and
seemed to grow in between these feet and interact with them in vivo
(Movies 19 and 20). Moreover, we could observe similar protrusions
coming either from lateral FP basal feet (white arrows) going toward
precrossing dI1 axons arriving at the FP (white arrowheads, Figure 11
(i)), or from medial FP basal feet extending parallel to axons in the
commissure (white arrows, Figure 11(j) and Movie 21). The tight inter-
action between dI1 axons and FP basal feet during midline crossing
was unexpected (Movie 21). The observation that protrusions from
lateral FP basal feet (white arrowhead) were extending and contacting
dI1 growth cones before they entered the FP (white arrows)
suggested a much more active role of FP cells than anticipated
(Figure 11(k), Movie 22). Last but not least, we could confirm that FP
basal feet structures (yellow arrow) were present in between tran-
siently splitting dI1 growth cones (white arrowheads and arrows) in
the commissure (Figure 11(l), Movie 23). Taken together, these data
showed for the first time the detailed morphology of single FP cells,
their dynamics and tight interactions with axons during midline cross-
ing, and they emphasized the probable active role of FP cells in initiat-
ing contacts with growth cones before and during midline crossing.
3.7
|
Trajectory and behavior of dI1 axons can be
visualized in real time at choice points
Our ex vivo culture method not only offers great opportunities to
characterize behavior of growth cones and FP cells in a preserved sys-
tem, but it also opens new possibilities for tracking axonal behavior
after specific perturbations of either the neurons or their environ-
ment. As example, the Wnt receptor Fzd3 (Frizzled-3) was specifically
downregulated in Math1-positive dI1 neurons (Alther et al., 2016;
Wilson & Stoeckli, 2011) (Figure 12(a)). Fzd3 is required for the rostral
turn of postcrossing commissural axons at the contralateral FP border
in vivo (Alther et al., 2016; Lyuksyutova et al., 2003). We used our
ex vivo culture system to visualize Math1::EGFP-F-positive dI1 axons
expressing a microRNA for Fzd3 (miFzd3, Figure 12(b,c)). This allowed
us to follow in real time how dI1 growth cones were turning caudally
instead of rostrally at the contralateral FP border (black arrowheads,
Figure 12(b); Movies 24 and 25). Interestingly, many axons were
found to turn erroneously in caudal direction at the same position,
suggesting that axons were influenced by close contact with other
axons although a purely cell-autonomous effect of a loss of Fzd3 can-
not be ruled out with this experimental set up (black asterisk and black
arrows in Movie 24). In addition, some axons were found stalling at
FIGURE 11
Live imaging of floor plate cells during midline crossing shed light on their orientation and dynamics. (a) Schematic depicting
plasmids that were electroporated at HH17-18 to visualize floor plate (FP) cells (Hoxa1 plasmid) together with dI1 axons (Math1 plasmid).
(b) Immunostaining of HH22 spinal cord cryosections revealed the restricted expression of Hoxa1::EGFP-F in FP cells co-stained for Hnf3β.
(c) Higher magnification of the section shown in (b) revealing Hnf3β-positive FP cells expressing EGFP-F. Bulky FP basal feet could be observed in
the commissure (white arrowheads). (d) Immunostaining of HH22 spinal cord cryosections showing that EGFP-F expression driven by Hoxa1
enhancer was mostly absent in Nkx2.2-positive cells flanking the FP. (e) Whole-mount immunostaining of Math1::tdTomato-F-positive dI1 axons
and Hoxa1::EGFP-F-positive FP cells revealed an alignment between dI1 growth cones (white arrowheads) and basal feet of FP cells (white
arrows) in the commissure. (f) Example of a time-lapse recording of a single medial Hoxa1::EGFP-F-positive FP cell to reveal the geometry of its
basal foot that was thin along the rostro-caudal axis but enlarged in the dorso-ventral axis (black arrowheads). The basal foot was highly dynamic
with protrusions sprouting out in the directions of axonal growth in the commissure (black arrows). (g) Example of a time-lapse recording of lateral
Hoxa1::EGFP-F-positive FP cells showing a very high activity of their basal feet with highly dynamic protrusions growing toward the arriving
precrossing axons (black arrows). (h) Whole-mount immunostaining of a single medial Hoxa1::EGFP-F-positive FP cell in vivo at HH24.5 showing
similar shape (black arrowheads) as observed by live imaging. Note that this FP cells contained two feet (black arrowheads). (i) Immunostaining of a
HH22 spinal cord cryosection revealed that lateral Hoxa1::EGFP-F-positive FP cells also formed protrusions growing toward the precrossing axons
in vivo (white arrows) where Math1::tdTomato-F-positive axons enter the FP (white arrowheads). (j) Similar protrusions were observed in HH22
medial FP basal feet in the commissure in vivo using immunostaining of cryosections (white arrows). The picture shows a single plane extracted from
a Z-stack. (k) Snapshots extracted from a time-lapse sequence of a Math1::tdTomato-F-positive dI1 growth cone interacting (white arrowheads) with
protrusions from Hoxa1::EGFP-F-positive FP basal feet (white arrows) before entering the FP. (l) Single snapshot from a time-lapse recording
sequence showing maximum Z projection and single plane pictures of a transiently splitting (white arrow) Math1::tdTomato-F-positive dI1 growth
cone (white arrowhead) in the FP with basal feet structures in between the two split branches (yellow arrowhead). SC, spinal cord; r, rostral; c, caudal;
d, dorsal; v, ventral. Scale bars: 50 μm (b–d), 25 μm (e), and 10 μm (f–l)
DUMOULIN ET AL.
2533

the FP exit site without initiating any turn (black arrowhead, Figure 12
(c), Movie 25). Nonetheless, the growth cones remained highly
dynamic. The changes in morphology were accompanied with tran-
sient retraction and re-extension but without a clear change in direc-
tionality. Importantly, expressing a control microRNA (mi2Luc) did not
impact the guidance of dI1 axons at the contralateral FP border
(Figure 12(d), Movie 26). Taken together, our method can be used to
study the behavior of axons after perturbation of candidate genes
specifically either in the neurons or in their target in real time, provid-
ing information about the dynamic behavior of growth cones and/or
target cells that cannot be appreciated from snapshots taken from dif-
ferent preparations at selected time points.
4
|
DISCUSSION
The possibility to follow one axon over time, rather than deducing
behavior from snapshots of different axons, allowed us to extract
detailed information on the timing of midline crossing and the tight
interaction between FP cells and the growth cones in a higher verte-
brate model (Figure 13). Our ex vivo system offers significant
improvement over existing open-book culture systems, as it not only
allows for observation of growth cones within the midline area but
also during and after their turn into the longitudinal axis. In cultures of
open-book preparations, the deformation of the tissue, the lack of
meninges that might restrict diffusion of secreted guidance cues, as
seen for Shh, and the apoptosis in the ventral spinal cord could explain
the guidance artifacts at the contralateral FP border (Figures 3–5)
(Pignata et al., 2019). Our ex vivo culture system is highly reproducible
and generates a manageable amount of data compared to live imaging
using light sheet-based microscopy, for example (Liu et al., 2018).
The comparison of growth cones at the FP (this study) and at the
optic chiasm (Godement et al., 1994; Sretavan & Reichardt, 1993)
reveals both common and different behaviors. As seen at the chiasm
(Godement et al., 1994), growth cones exhibited a saltatory growth
behavior during FP crossing. However, in contrast to the chiasm, where
FIGURE 12
Live imaging after dI1 neuron-specific knockdown can be used to visualize mutant axons in intact spinal cord preparations.
(a) Schematics depicting the plasmid constructs used to knockdown Fzd3 in dI1 neurons. A plasmid expressing a microRNA against luciferase (mi2Luc)
was used as a control. (b) Time-lapse sequence showing a dI1 commissural axon turning caudally instead of rostrally at the contralateral floor plate
(FP) border after silencing Fzd3 (black arrowheads). (c) Time-lapse sequence showing a dI1 commissural axon stalling at the contralateral FP border after
silencing Fzd3 (black arrowheads). The growth cone kept remodeling but was not able to turn in either direction. (d) Time-lapse sequence showing dI1
axons expressing a microRNA against luciferase. These axons were not impacted and after exiting the FP they all turned rostrally (black arrowheads).
Dashed black line represents the FP exit site. r, rostral; c, caudal. Scale bars: 10 μm
2534
DUMOULIN ET AL.

axons would stall for several hours, axons did not pause during FP
crossing. Growth speed in the FP was slower (5–75 μm/h) compared to
that of retinal ganglion cell axons at the chiasm (60–100 μm/h). As
described for the chiasm, growth cone morphology changed according
to the dynamic behavior of the growth cone. During elongation of the
axon, after entering the FP and before reaching the contralateral side,
growth cones had a streamlined morphology. At the FP exit site,
growth cone morphology changed to a much more complex shape with
extended filopodia exploring the environment before the actual turn.
At the chiasm, crossing axons did not change their morphology signifi-
cantly, whereas those that changed their trajectory to turn along the
ipsilateral pathway displayed a dramatic shape change just before the
turn. Therefore, this resembles the behavior at the FP exit site, where a
new direction is adopted by turning into the longitudinal axis.
Our comparative analyses demonstrate that midline crossing of
dI1 axons in our ex vivo system was very similar to what happens
in vivo (Figures 3–6). Therefore, our ex vivo system can be used to
monitor and assess axonal behavior at choice points. We could detect
that dI1 growth cones took on average 5.6 h to cross the entire FP
and that they did so in a pulsed manner (black arrowheads, Figure 13).
We could also measure that they needed on average 1.4 h to initiate
their rostral growth, and that the first axons exiting the FP took longer
than the followers (Figure 13(a)). In total they needed almost 7 h from
entering the FP to making the decision to turn rostrally (blue
arrowhead, Figure 13(a)). This is enough time for growth cones to
change their responsiveness to specific guidance cues for crossing
and exiting the FP as well as for turning rostrally due to changes in
receptor expression regulated at the posttranslational, translational,
and
even
transcriptional
level
(Nawabi
et
al.,
2010;
Philipp
et al., 2012; Pignata et al., 2019; Preitner et al., 2016; Stoeckli, 2018;
Wilson & Stoeckli, 2013).
The growth cone is the decision center where axon guidance
instructions
are
transduced
to
the
cytoskeleton
(Vitriol
&
Zheng, 2012). With our newly developed ex vivo system, dynamic
changes in dI1 commissural growth cone morphology and behavior at
the midline can be observed in real time. Growth cones were thin and
elongated in the FP with their major extension in the dorso-ventral
axis (black arrowheads, Figure 13(a,c)). At the FP exit site, they
showed a 90 rotation to be enlarged and active in the longitudinal
axis (green arrowhead and black arrow, Figure 13(a), black arrowhead,
Figure 13(d)). The fact that dI1 growth cones sent a long filopodium
into the FP, toward the FP cell soma area, while crossing it and just
before exiting it, suggests that they might need to read signals from
this area in order to move on and exit the FP (orange arrows in
Figure 13(c,d)). The extension of long filopodia just before FP exit and
rostral turning suggests that actin polymerization might be required to
sense repulsive cues—for instance, SlitN and Shh, respectively—and
transduce the signal into the growth cone, as suggested for
FIGURE 13
Cartoon depicting the midline crossing characteristics of dI1 axons based on data extracted from our ex vivo culture system.
(a) On average, it took dI1 axons 5.6 h to cross the midline. Growth cones showed a random pulsed growth and had a thin shape in the growth
direction (black arrowheads). At the floor plate (FP) exit site, dI1 growth cones were first enlarged (green arrowhead), then extended filopodia
along the longitudinal axis (black arrow) right before turning rostrally (blue arrowhead). After arriving at the exit site of the FP, it took dI1 axons
on average about 1.4 h to turn rostrally. In fact, the first-exiting dI1 axons took longer to turn rostrally than the late exiting ones. (b–d) Live
imaging of intact spinal cords ex vivo using a high magnification objective shed light on dI1 growth cone orientation, FP morphology and
dynamics during midline crossing. (b) While dI1 growth cones (black arrowhead) approached the FP, basal feet of lateral FP cells sent protrusions
toward them and eventually interacted with them (black arrows). (c) When dI1 growth cones crossed the FP (black arrowhead), their dorso-
ventral orientation aligned perfectly with the orientation of basal feet of medial FP cells. While basal feet of FP cells sent protrusions in axonal
growth direction (black arrows), dI1 growth cones sent long filopodia in direction of the apical FP, toward the FP cell soma (orange arrow). (d) Just
before exiting the FP, dI1 growth cones showed dorso-ventral activity with a long protrusion growing toward the FP soma (orange arrow) area
followed by a 90 change in their orientation to become flattened in the dorso-ventral axis and enlarged in the longitudinal axis (black arrowhead).
Ent, entry; Mid, midline; Ex, exit; r, rostral; c, caudal; ipsi, ipsilateral; contra, contralateral
DUMOULIN ET AL.
2535

Slit-induced growth cone collapse in vitro (McConnell et al., 2016).
Further investigations using our ex vivo culture system will be
required to understand the role of cytoskeletal dynamics in axonal
navigation of the intermediate target.
Our method also suggested a probable active contribution of FP
cells to axon guidance that goes beyond providing axon guidance cues,
as we found the cells of the intermediate target to be very dynamic and
to extend protrusions in directions of the arriving axons, or to actively
engage with axons in the FP. Thus, it seems that the intermediate target
is much more than a passive by-stander and provider of attractive and
repulsive axon guidance and cell adhesion molecules. We characterized
the FP cell morphologies in detail in the medial as well as the lateral
FP. Basal feet appeared to be enlarged and oriented parallel to commis-
sural growth cones (Figure 13(c)). This was in line with previous reports
in the chicken and mouse embryos (Campbell & Peterson, 1993;
Ducuing et al., 2020; Yaginuma et al., 1991; Yoshioka & Tanaka, 1989).
The lateral FP basal feet sent protrusions (black arrows) toward dI1
growth cones approaching the FP and eventually interacted with them
(black arrowhead, Figure 13(b)). This intriguing observation led us to
speculate whether these protrusions might be cytonemes. Cytonemes
are long protrusions known to spread and deliver morphogens, such as
Wnts and Shh, to neighboring or more distant cells (González-Méndez
et al., 2019; Sanders et al., 2013; Stanganello & Scholpp, 2016). Given
the fact that Shh is involved in guiding precrossing commissural axons
toward the FP and that Shh and Wnts are both involved in guiding
postcrossing axons toward the brain at the contralateral FP border, it is
tempting to speculate that these protrusions might deliver such signals
to the growth cones at choice points (Avilés et al., 2013). Moreover, we
could appreciate how much the axons and their growth cones were
intermingled within the medial FP basal feet which also formed long
dynamic
protrusions
within
the
commissure
(black
arrowheads,
Figure 13(c)). In sum, the combination of our live imaging approach with
a FP-specific marker will give the opportunity to further characterize
the behavior of intermediate target cells with regard to axon guidance
at choice points.
Ultimately, our method will be useful to get more insights into
molecular mechanisms of axon guidance at a choice point, when com-
bined with in ovo RNAi for specific gene knockdowns either in the
neurons or in their environment, as exemplified with Fzd3 knockdown
experiments
(Figure
12)
(Andermatt
et
al.,
2014;
Baeriswyl
et al., 2020; Pekarik et al., 2003). Similarly, pharmacological blockers
will permit to screen for components required downstream of growth
cone receptors to transduce guidance signals. Usually such experi-
ments are conducted in vitro with cultured neurons growing axons in
a very artificial environment. Thus, our method offers the advantages
of an in vitro experiment in an intact complex “in vivo-like” environ-
ment. The use of specific reporters will also allow for the assessment
of dynamic changes of second messengers or the actin cytoskeleton
in growth cones, for example (Nichols & Smith, 2019; Nicol
et al., 2011). Moreover, the use of other sets of enhancers and pro-
moters might offer the possibility to study the dynamics of midline
crossing in other subtypes of commissural neurons in the spinal cord
and in the brain (Hadas et al., 2014; Kohl et al., 2012).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Dr Beat Kunz for excellent technical assistance.
This project was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interests.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Alexandre Dumoulin: Designed experiments, performed experiments,
evaluated data, and contributed to the writing of the manuscript.
Nikole R. Zuñiga: Generated the Hoxa1 plasmid. Esther T. Stoeckli:
Designed experiments, supervised the project, and contributed to the
writing of the manuscript.
PEER REVIEW
The peer review history for this article is available at https://publons.
com/publon/10.1002/cne.25107.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
ORCID
Alexandre Dumoulin
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2420-6877
Nikole R. Zuñiga
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4022-9649
Esther T. Stoeckli
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8485-0648
REFERENCES
Alther, T. A., Domanitskaya, E., & Stoeckli, E. T. (2016). Calsyntenin
1-mediated trafficking of axon guidance receptors regulates the switch
in axonal responsiveness at a choice point. Development (Cambridge),
143(6), 994–1004. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.127449
Andermatt, I., Wilson, N., & Stoeckli, E. T. (2014). In ovo electroporation of
miRNA-based-plasmids to investigate gene function in the developing
neural tube. Methods in Molecular Biology, 1101, 353–368. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-62703-721-1_17
Avilés, E. C., Wilson, N. H., & Stoeckli, E. T. (2013). Sonic hedgehog and
Wnt: Antagonists in morphogenesis but collaborators in axon guid-
ance. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience, 7, 86. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fncel.2013.00086
Baeriswyl, T., Dumoulin, T., Schaettin, M., Tsapara, G., Niederkofler, V.,
Helbling, D., Avilés, E., Frei, J. A., Wilson, N.H., Gesemann, M.,
Kunz, B., & Stoeckli, E. T. (2020). Endoglycan plays a role in axon guid-
ance and neuronal migration by negatively regulating cell-cell adhe-
sion. BioRxiv, 425207. https://doi.org/10.1101/425207
Boubakar,
L.,
Falk,
J.,
Ducuing,
H.,
Thoinet,
K.,
Reynaud,
F.,
Derrington, E., & Castellani, V. (2017). Molecular memory of morphol-
ogies by septins during neuron generation allows early polarity inheri-
tance. Neuron, 95(4), 834–851.e5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.
2017.07.027
Bourikas,
D.,
Pekarik,
V.,
Baeriswyl,
T.,
Grunditz,
Å.,
Sadhu,
R.,
Nardó, M., & Stoeckli, E. T. (2005). Sonic hedgehod guides commis-
sural axons along the longitudinal axis of the spinal cord. Nature Neuro-
science, 8(3), 297–304. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1396
Bovolenta, P., & Dodd, J. (1990). Guidance of commissural growth cones
at the floor plate in embryonic rat spinal cord. Development, 109(2),
435–447.
Burstyn-Cohen, T., Tzarfaty, V., Frumkin, A., Feinstein, Y., Stoeckli, E., &
Klar, A. (1999). F-spondin is required for accurate pathfinding of
2536
DUMOULIN ET AL.

